
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Friday, 7 May 2021

Parliament met at 10.35 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning’s sitting. I would like to again thank you for the work done during this week. I appeal to you that we have another marathon day today and also next week because our work has not been completed. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORTS THAT HAVE NOT BEEN REPORTED ON BY COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (COSASE) AND THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (LOCAL GOVERNMENT), AND ALSO CONTAINED IN THE VALUE FOR MONEY AUDIT REPORTS

The Speaker: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi is not here. Can we permit the First Reading of the Pensions Bill?

Bills
first reading

The parliamentary pensions (Amendment) Bill, 2021

 	10.39
Mr remigio achia (NRM, Pian County, Nabilatuk): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill, 2021” be read for the first time. I beg to move.

The Speaker: Do you have a Certificate of Financial Implications?

Mr Remigio: Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table a Certificate of Financial Implications. 

The Speaker: Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. As I indicated yesterday, the committees will expire by effluxion of time next week. Therefore, I do not expect that they are going to be able to report in 45 days. However, the business will be saved for the 11th Parliament. Thank you. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORTS THAT HAVE NOT BEEN REPORTED ON BY THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (COSASE) AND THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (LOCAL GOVERNMENT), AND ALSO CONTAINED IN THE VALUE FOR MONEY AUDIT REPORTS

10.40
mr NATHAN nandala-mafabi (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to adopt the recommendations of the Auditor-General’s reports for the financial years laid in the House and not covered up to June 2020 for local government, commissions and state enterprises value for money and forensic audits.

“WHEREAS the Auditor-General is mandated to –

    (i) Audit and report on public accounts of Uganda and all public offices including the courts, central government and local government administrations, universities and public institutions of like nature, and any public corporation or other bodies or other organisations established by an Act of Parliament,

    (ii) conduct financial and value for money audit in respect of any project involving public funds;

AND WHEREAS the Auditor-General has submitted these reports to Parliament up to the period ending 30 June 2020;

NOTING THAT the public accounts up to 30 June 2020 on central Government, universities, project accounts under central Government have been presented by the committee and adopted by the House;

AND FURTHER NOTING THAT there is backlog in local government accounts, public corporations and other bodies or organisations established by the Act of Parliament and cognizant of the Attorney-General’s opinion that the Auditor-General’s reports must be examined by Parliament even if the time of six months has passed as per Article 163(5);

AWARE THAT the Auditor-General has raised repetitive queries year in and year out on financial reports of Government;

FURTHER AWARE THAT the Auditor-General is the officer of Parliament who is entitled to carry out Value for Money (VFM) audits and forensic audits on his or her own, or on request of Parliament or the President or the Minister of Finance or any investigative Government bodies, among others;

WHEREAS the Auditor-General is supposed to rotate staff every three years as provided in the Accounting and Auditing International Standards, which he or she subscribes to;

COGNIZANT that under Article 90(l), committees work on behalf of Parliament to efficiently discharge their functions;

WHEREAS under Article 90(3)(a), committees may call any minister or any person holding public office and private individuals to submit memorandum or appear before them to give evidence;

AND WHEREAS as soon as the Auditor-General’s report is out, the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury (PS/ST) requests all the accounting officers to respond to issues raised in the report and provides a copy to Parliament, which is a memoranda as per Article 90(3)(a);

WHEREAS Parliament should have used this response to make a decision on the issues raised by the Auditor-General or inquire further;

COGNIZANT THAT Parliament can agree with Auditor-General’s observations and recommendations;

WHEREAS 80 per cent of the Government budget is for procurement of goods and services;

AWARE THAT Parliament is in the process of amending its rules to operationalize Article 163(5), while noting that to process their reports will need a lot of Parliamentary time;

Now, therefore, be it resolved by Parliament that –

    1. The Auditor-General’s observations and recommendations on reports up to 30 June 2020, which were not discussed and presented by the committees on local government accounts, public corporations or other bodies or organisations established by an Act of Parliament, be adopted. 

    2. The Auditor-General pays more attention to value for money audits and forensic audits in all accounts to avoid repetitive queries, which add little value. 

    3. The Auditor-General and the Internal Auditor-General intensify audits in government procurements and make quarterly reports to Parliament. 

    4. The Auditor-General rotates his staff in every entity every three years to avoid collusion, as per the International Accounting Standards.

    5. Parliament amends rules 171, 178 and 179 of the Rules of Procedure to operationalise Article 163 (5) by enabling the House to adopt all the pending reports of the Auditor-General that have not been considered by the Public Accounts Committees within six months, as stipulated by Article 163(5) of the 1995 Constitution. 
 
    6. The Auditor-General restructures his office and the staff to improve efficiency and service delivery to the people of Uganda.” 

Madam Speaker, I have attached the amendments that we want to propose. This motion was moved by hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi from Bugisu and is seconded by two Members – hon. Jonathan Odur who has given us his signature on phone and hon. Fredrick Angura, who is in the House. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: The motion is seconded. Can you justify it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yesterday was a turning point in my life. The Public Accounts Committee (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises - COSASE) presented their report that showed that there have been deductions of 10 per cent of National Social Security Fund (NSSF) contributions and for seven to ten years, nobody had identified this. I was taken aback; so, we got a whistle-blower and this made us do what we did yesterday. That hurt me and I could not sleep. 

From that, I have noticed that non-conclusion of the reports of the Auditor-General and other reports submitted to Parliament, like that of the Inspectorate of Government and the Human Rights Commission, is doing a disservice to the people of Uganda. Having noticed what we went through as the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) to come up with this report – there was a lot of time and commitment invested, which I would like to thank my members for. It shows that for us to be able to remove this backlog, you will need members that are committed and may never even go to their constituencies, to conclude those reports. 

It is in that regard that I am saying, together with my colleagues, that we adopt the reports of the Auditor-General, because the Auditor-General is an officer of Parliament and send these reports to the Ministry of Finance. Each of the Treasury memoranda will then come to Parliament and we can ask the Auditor-General to again audit them and Parliament will have an opportunity to look through to find out if what was raised has been done or not.

Madam Speaker, 80 per cent of our budget is procurements. We have noticed that one of the reasons we do not see value for money is because we have not placed attention on value for money audits. If the Auditor-General restructured his office and did more value for money audits, Madam Speaker you will go to your village and find roads, people will work and agriculture will function properly. 

However, with the current practice of doing financial audits, a receipt is presented and someone simply says, “I have seen” and that is where it ends. You do not know if the funds performed the function they were meant for and in the end, the people of Uganda are the losers. That is why we are saying that even the Auditor-General should intensify his work in value for money audits and forensic audits, which are his mandate. He does not need us to tell him. However, if we want one for any place, we can still ask. 

Madam Speaker, as a Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government), we noticed that there were staff of the Auditor-General’s office who have been in institutions for more than 20 years. That means they become part and parcel of those institutions they audit. The only thing you will get in this instance is a repetitive query - domestic arrears not budgeted for or the budget not fully funded. Why? It is because they have become part and parcel of the fixtures in those entities. 

Under International Auditing Standards, no auditor is supposed to stay in one entity for more than three years. You can remove them after one year but they are not allowed to stay in an entity for more than three years. For one to stay for more than three years, they become compromised and the value of the report they produce is compromised. The reason you saw that big firm, Enron, dying in America is because they had stayed in one tax payer’s place and had become compromised at the expense of the big company collapsing, which led to them being sanctioned by the laws of accounting and auditing. 

It is in that regard that I am asking my colleagues in the House to – 

One, adopt the reports of the Auditor-General for those areas, so that they can be worked on and to save parliamentary time. The next Parliament can then start from a fresh point of auditing the Treasury memoranda and acting on them; 

Two, remove repetitive audit queries that do not add value to us. The value would have been for us to save money but every year, we approve trillions of money but if you go down there, you may not find the value for that money. The person we send there to do it on our behalf is our officer, the Auditor-General, and we want him to concentrate on value for money and forensic audits to come up with these figures. 

I would like to ask Members to support this motion because it is going to improve the efficiency of Parliament. 

We are also answering Article 163(5), which says that when the Auditor-General presents his or her report in Parliament, it must be examined within six months and presented. In 2005, the Attorney-General gave an opinion. He said that even if the six months pass by Parliament must examine those accounts. When he did that, it created this issue of backlog. As much as the Attorney-General’s opinion is there, as Parliament we must follow Article 163(5) of our Constitution.

Madam Speaker, there is no sanction placed on members of our committees. If there were sanctions placed on members of the committee if they do not present the report – At an appropriate time, we should include sanctions in our rules for committee leadership and members. We are promoting inefficiency if we fail to do that. You will find that a committee has exhausted its budget but it has not done any work. Why do you exhaust a travel or fieldwork budget when no work is done? If we come back, those are the areas we should look at. We should also have value for money from our committees. 

Madam Speaker, when we are amending our rules, I will seek space to move an amendment on how to sanction our members because lack of sanctions has made our members reluctant to do their work. They know that nothing will happen even if they do not do anything. That is why I am saying that if we do it, we shall improve the efficiency of Parliament and subsequently improve service delivery to the public. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Can I now invite hon. Angura.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, hon. Jonathan Odur has also come.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see hon. Odur. Let us have hon. Angura as we wait for hon. Odur. 

10.55
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion. Before I raise the issues that I have, allow me to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the Chairperson of Public Accounts Committee (Central Government), and the members who worked with him, including myself, to clear the backlog of 2016/2017, 2017/2018, 2018/2019 and 2019/2020. I thought that it should be very important to recognise the chairperson.

As hon. Nandala-Mafabi has said, there is a very big challenge of backlog in the accountability committees. We found a backlog that was heavy for us, but because of burning the midnight candle, we were able to move and that is why we are now a bit comfortable.

Madam Speaker, as it has been mentioned, we have queries that we felt the Auditor-General should not be bringing to Parliament because they are repetitive. There is the situation of under absorption. Under absorption would be a query depending on the circumstances. There are circumstances where funds are released at the tail end of appropriation; funds are released in May or in June and you expect the entity to undertake procurement. Definitely, those funds would be returned. In such cases, that query becomes redundant, but it still comes here.

We have challenges of arrears arising from contractual obligations. The entities budget, for example, Shs 10 million per month, which is Shs 120,000 for rent, but when funds are appropriated, they give them Shs 100,000. Already, we have arrears that are going to accrue in relation to that.

Loans and grants and other funds from our donors and development partners that have an aspect of counterpart funding also present challenges. When Government does not provide counterpart funding, definitely procurement processes that are not aligned with ours here locally, where we have to consult with the development partners, will lead to non-absorption of funds and those queries come up.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request the Auditor-General to always apportion some of these queries. There are queries that should be directed to Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This is because in some cases, the Ministry of Finance might have failed to release funds. 

There are queries that should maybe come to Parliament. We approve these budgets knowing at times that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development may not be able to support the obligations. 

Therefore, such queries should be apportioned well and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should take the blame.

Madam Speaker, the Auditor-General is one of our own but there are also situations where staff of the Auditor-General, as far as the reports are concerned, cause us challenges, and we find ourselves disagreeing with our witnesses when the problem is ours. I will give an example. Recently, we interfaced with the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs. One of the queries that had been raised by the Auditor-General concerned the land at Magamaga Army Barracks. The Auditor-General raised a query that the size of the land is supposed to be 3.5 square miles. However, when the witnesses appeared, they came with all their maps and titles saying they only own 451.2 acres - well titled - and from the old times of armies that we have known before. So, we found ourselves not agreeing on who is giving the correct position.
 
It is also good that hon. Nandala-Mafabi said that we need some of these officers to be rotated regularly, in order to get new opinions. With this we will not continue disagreeing before the witnesses and having situations where we embarrass ourselves.

The Auditor-General should lay emphasis on value for money audits. I think we needed this yesterday. We have had discussions with them and maybe this motion will further cement those positions.

The backlog is much and where you do not have committed committee leaders and members, we will not conclude this backlog of reports that have been made and continue to appear in our records. This will not be good for us. Therefore, I would like to add my voice to what hon. Nandala-Mafabi has said, following the experience that we have had in this short time, aware that COVID-19 inconvenienced us and we also had campaigns. Yesterday, one of our colleagues said that the Committee on Public Accounts is bringing reports late. However, they did not take into consideration that COVID-19 and campaigns interfered with our work because most of us were involved. These two events equally took part of our time, much as we tried our best, and I think even other committees are trying their best. 

On that note, in the amendment of rules, which is currently going on – Looking at the schedule of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) and the entities they are supposed to handle, maybe you may not even blame them. That is why this motion has come, so that we adopt all the reports with the observations that have been made by the Auditor-General.

Madam Speaker, I would like to implore colleagues to support this motion for us to start on a clean slate in the next Parliament, and for us to audit the Treasury memoranda. It is also important to note the implementation of the resolutions that would have come up. This is because we adopt some of these things but they are repetitive - every year, they come up. Let us also enforce, where necessary, the implementation of such resolutions as adopted from here. Madam Speaker, I support the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I do not see hon. Jonathan Odur. 

Honourable members, in the last three or four days, during the discussions of the reports of the standing committees, it has been clear that there are so many reports to handle, and it is not possible for us to complete, if we are to scrutinise all of them. In addition, I think the Minister of State for Finance also in a way supported this proposal. Therefore, I would like to put the question that the House do adopt this motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this does not absolve us from doing our work. We shall still do our work but where we have not been able to achieve within the six months, that is when the reports will be adopted automatically. 

In this motion, there is a proposal to amend the rules. We expect the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to frame it in such a way that we fulfil our obligations under Article 163(5) of the Constitution but where it is not feasible, we proceed by way of laying. Thank you very much, hon. Nandala-Mafabi and members of the Public Accounts Committee.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you and all my colleagues very much. What we have done really does not absolve Parliament from doing its work. That is why we have put it clearly that Parliament will also look at Treasury memoranda to deal with the same issues. Also, Parliament is free to deal with the Auditor-General’s –(Interruption)

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The motion had a number of prayers. One of the prayers was on rotation of auditors. There was a prayer on how to deal with generic observations by the Auditor-General. Another prayer was on how to redirect the office of the Auditor-General to focus more on value for money audits. 

As we move towards adopting the reports within six months in order to deal with the backlog, how shall Parliament move towards ensuring that the concerns of hon. Nandala-Mafabi are dealt with? 

Otherwise, I would like to appreciate you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for bringing this motion. I was in the Public Accounts Committee in the Ninth Parliament and part of the Tenth Parliament. What was always of concern to me particularly was how to deal with the backlog, in view of the fact that the Auditor-General is a professional accountant and most of his reports can easily be cleared without Parliament necessarily spending a lot of time on them.  Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi

I would like to also thank the Speaker for accepting that in circumstances where committees of Parliament cannot consider the reports of the Auditor-General, we can expressly pass them and a Treasury memorandum be presented to Parliament. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, my young brother, hon. Musasizi. Madam Speaker, we would like to plead with the next Parliament that when we constitute these committees, we should look at professionalism. I know we have parties and the Speaker has authority on independents. However, if you do not do it, we shall have problems. A file with figures comes to a Member but all he does is pick the file and go out or leave it there. You cannot ask me to do environmental work in which I am not competent. 

We are pleading with the next leadership to look for professionalism. You need to be committed to spend the amount of time we did to produce those reports. This is why I have thanked my colleagues like hon. Angura and the team. I have thanked my staff; those young men and young ladies worked past midnight. It shows how tough it was. Madam Speaker, you are still around, please think about this House. Thank you. 

11.08
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for presenting this motion. 

We have observed over the years that the recommendations of the Auditor-General are never implemented during the years they are made. This is partly our mistake because by the time we approve the reports, it is about two or three years after the recommendations were made. 

I have observed that it is very important for us to build the capacity of the accounting officers because most of them are not even aware of the requirements of the law. Madam Speaker, there was a time you came with the idea of the Commission sponsoring a Bill to provide a legal framework for the professional association of corporate governance. Unfortunately, it is hon. Nandala-Mafabi who was opposed to it. Now, he has told me that he has repented for having delayed this process. 

It is very important that professionally, all the accounting officers must know the legal framework. You can imagine, yesterday, when we were discussing the departed Asians properties, we were told that the board does not sit for 10 years. Where do you report to? Who enforces the law, and which law? 

We must have corporate governance as a matter of urgency and provide it with a legal framework so that we hold all these boards accountable and the shareholders know whether their assets are being properly managed. I thought that was one aspect we should not ignore when we are appointing accounting officers. They must have the skill to do the work. 

Secondly, they must know the processes of budgeting. Most of the time, hon. Bahati is suffering, trying to get the economists even in the Ministry of Finance to understand what they are supposed to do. We wonder whether we have professionals in the various ministries to help these people do their work properly. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, on the matters raised about competence and qualifications, I am going to write to the different parties to alert them about the need to look carefully, when they are making placements. 

Let us hear from the Chairperson of the Budget Committee before we proceed to our main business of the day. 

11.11
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is very simple. The work being done by the accountability committees appears to be delinked from the work done by the Budget Committee and other committees of Parliament. They seem to be delinked yet we should be moving together. I am sure that they unearth a lot of interesting things especially on projects by the Government or various institutions of Government. That mismanagement should be reflected in the appropriation of funds. Unfortunately, we do not seem to be sitting on the same table on matters of this kind. 

I think going forward, we should find a way in which we can get together and share some of this information in time, so that as we do appropriation, we take into account the decisions made by the various PAC committees and their views on various institutions and projects. Otherwise, many of these projects are not performing but we do not get that information from PAC. We need to find a way to work together.

I would like to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi very much for moving this motion. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, let us go to item No.4.

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF THE REVISED EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2019/2020 AND THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2021/2022

11.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the House resolves itself into a committee of supply for consideration and approval of-

    1. The revised expenditure estimates for the fiscal year 2019/2020.
    2. The budgetary proposals for estimates of revenue and expenditure for the fiscal year 2021/2022.

I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded)

THE SPEAKER: The motion is seconded. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have no problem with the budget estimates for 2021/2022 because we are going to go for it. However, I would like to raise a procedural issue which the minister has to help me understand. 

You are revising the expenditure estimates for the fiscal year 2019/2020, which has been closed and the Auditor-General has issued a final report. When you revise, are you amending the Auditor-General’s report? We need to understand this. Also, under what law you are you moving this?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we had moved to capture the adjustments we made through a supplementary during the financial year. However, if you give me one minute, I can crosscheck on the financial year properly and then inform the House accordingly.

MS OGWAL:  Madam Speaker, the business on the Order Paper is very clear. It shows that today we are looking at the budget for the next financial year, 2021/2022. I am a member of the Budget Committee and we are ready. So, I am a bit surprised – maybe the chairperson has more to say - that the revised figures of 2019/2020 have now been clogged in. Maybe the chairperson of the Budget Committee can clarify on this. As far as we are concerned, the Budget Committee is ready with its report for the next financial year budget.

MR BAHATI: I beg to say that the motion concentrates on item No.2 - the budget estimates for the financial year 2021/2022 - as we consult with the Clerk on item No.1. So, the motion I have moved is for item No.2, Madam Speaker. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: You had already moved the motion. Let him consult, honourable members. I believe the Budget Committee has had the opportunity to look at the proposals. Can we receive the report?

11.18
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Budget Committee on the annual budget estimates for financial year 2021/2022. 

However, before I do that, allow me a minute to express my appreciation to this Parliament that helped me a great deal when I was almost dying; more specifically to you, Madam Speaker, and hon. Kasaija who ensured that funding was provided to save my life. I would also like to thank the Minister of State for Health, hon. Robinah Nabbanja, for whatever she did to make sure that I survive.

I thank you so much. I would not be here at this time, but they enabled me to move from Mulago Hospital to Nairobi Hospital, and as a result of that, I have remained alive. Thank you, so much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we consider you one of God’s miracles for 2021. We are really happy that you are up and are doing your work.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you so much. 

In accordance with Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, section 13(4) of the Public Finance Management (PFM) Act 2015 as amended, rule 147(2) and rule 170(3) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Budget Committee has a mandate to – 

    i) examine, discuss and review budget estimates and make appropriate recommendations to Parliament;
 
    ii) consider sectoral committee reports on the budget estimates referred to the committee by Parliament, for reconciliation and harmonisation. 

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, as required by the Constitution, laid the budget estimates before Parliament on 1 April 2021. Furthermore, on 22 April 2021, the same minister laid before Parliament a corrigenda to the draft budget estimates, indicating a budget increment of Shs 3,482,150,000,000 which revised the budget from Shs 41,296,063,000,000 to Shs 44,778,780,000,000. The Budget Committee has consulted, discussed and reviewed the proposed budget estimates for financial year 2021/2022 and now wishes to report to the House as follows:

We consulted various authorities and they are listed on page 2, from (a) up to (t). So, we did extensive consultation within a limited time.

We did assess the legal compliance of the annual budget. We did compliance in relation to submission of information and we have a recommendation. In fact, we are reiterating what we said earlier that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides all the required information as per the requirements of the law. In other words, he tried but was not fully compliant with the provisions of the law with regard to providing information.

The second assessment is to do with consistency with the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility. The committee established that the current charter comes to an end in this financial year, therefore the budget for the financial year 2021/2022 cannot be assessed against the current Charter for Fiscal Responsibility.

However, the committee notes that at no time, during the current charter period, was the objective to reduce the fiscal deficit to no greater than three per cent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) achieved. In addition, the projected fiscal deficit of 6.26 per cent of GDP in the financial year 2021/2022 is much higher than the East African Community (EAC) monetary convergence criteria of three percent of GDP.

We want to recommend that the Government will have to adopt austerity measures that include reduction in Government spending on non-productive areas and increase in domestic revenue mobilisation efforts in order to slow down the fast rising public debt accumulation and debt service burden as a result of financing the fiscal deficit. This is because we realised that discretionary expenditure is increasingly being squeezed. 

The third assessment is with regard to the consistency of the budget with the Budget Framework Paper. According to section 13(6) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the annual budget shall be consistent with the Budget Framework Paper, among others. 

We established that there is a notable decrease in the resource envelope by Shs 879.4 billion in comparison to the resource envelope as per the approved National Budget Framework Paper. This reduction is largely attributed to a projected decrease in external borrowing. The resource envelope is presented in table 2 and the variations between the National Budget Framework Paper and budget estimates are presented. As you can see, the changes are both positive and negative, suggesting that there are inconsistencies between those provisions in terms of tax revenue, domestic revenue, grants, domestic borrowing and external borrowing.

In table 3, we present a comparison between the National Development Plan III (NDP III), the National Budget Framework Paper and annual budget estimates. Again, you realise, if you look at those percentages in the columns, there are variations between the National Budget Framework Paper and the draft estimates in terms of the share of resources. Under human capital development, for instance, in the Budget Framework Paper, the share for that programme is 15.43 per cent while in the draft budget estimates, it is 16.97 per cent. The variations are there all the way through, although we do not realise very huge variations between what we approved in the National Budget Framework Paper and the budget estimates.

We also looked at compliance with gender and equity responsiveness. Section 13(11)(e) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 requires the minister responsible for finance to present to Parliament a Certificate of Gender and Equity Responsiveness in consultation with the Equal Opportunities Commission, indicating the following: 

    (i) Certifying that the budget is gender and equity responsive; and 

    (ii) Specifying the measures taken to equalise opportunities for men, women, persons with disabilities and other marginalised groups. 

Observations:

    1. Some Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) did not submit their ministerial policy statements to the Commission by the 15th of March 2020, as required by the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. 

    2. Parliament in the past recommended that an accounting officer for a vote that fails to submit its ministerial policy statement to the Equal Opportunities Commission for gender and equity assessment, and for a vote whose score is below 50 per cent, should be tasked to make a detailed explanation to the House and their appropriation be withheld until necessary scores are attained. 

    3. Whereas the gender and equity compliance requirement is by law, there are no sanctions for non-compliance. This may explain the lack of effort by some institutions to improve on the compliance levels, and this constrains efforts towards achieving Sustainable Development Goal 5, which is on gender equality, and Goal 10 on reduced inequalities.

Recommendations:

    a) The ministers responsible for overseeing the institutions that failed the gender and equity assessment be directed to provide a statement to Parliament on what measures they resolve to undertake to ensure that gender and equity concerns are addressed in their respective budgets of financial year 2021/2022.

    b) The measures for equalisation of opportunities should be clear, specific, measurable, and time-bound, in issuance of the gender and equity responsiveness certificate.

Consistency with the National Development Plan III

Madam Speaker and Members, Section 13(6) of the PFM Act, 2015, requires that the annual budget is consistent with the National Development Plan, among others.

Honourable members, table 4 provides details of NDP III budget allocations by programme the NDP III targets to achieve against proposed allocations as per the proposed annual budget estimates for financial year 2021/2022.

Using resource allocations to proxy prioritisation, it is evident from table 4 that the governance and security, human capital development, and integrated transport infrastructure and services programmes are prioritised as per the proposed annual budget estimates for the financial year 2021/2022. However, the NDP III prioritises governance and security, human capital development, and regional development respectively. So, there is some disparity there. 

Notably, there exist inconsistencies in the share of the budget allocations in regard to productive sectors; for instance, the mineral development, manufacturing, and tourism programmes are proposed to receive a meagre 0.2 per cent, 0.2 per cent and 0.6 per cent respectively. However, the NDP III proposes 1.4 per cent, 1.3 per cent and 1.7 per cent share of the budget respectively for the same programmes. All that is evident in table 4.

Madam Speaker, I now turn to the financing of NDP III core projects for financial year 2021/2022, on page 11. The committee established that a total of 69 core projects were identified for the period of the NDP III. Of these, 16 were ongoing projects that reflect the need to complete unfinished work during the NDP II period, while 51 are new NDP III project ideas that are at different levels of preparedness. 

The committee established that only 29 projects, out of the 37 projects planned for financial year 2021/2022, as per the NDP III, have received budget allocations and these are highlighted in table 5, annex 7. 

I will go now to economic and budget performance.

Economic Performance

Madam Speaker, the economy is projected to grow at 3.1 per cent in the current financial year from 2.9 per cent in financial year 20l9/2020. This growth is on account of easing of lockdown measures, Government policy interventions to support economic recovery and continued global economy recovery. 

The Bank of Uganda’s Composite Index for Economic Activity (CIEA) points to a continued moderate recovery of economic activity, albeit at a slower pace. The road to domestic economic recovery remains bumpy due to effects of COVID-19.

In financial year 202l/2022, economic growth is projected at 4.3 per cent, supported by increased production and productivity in agriculture and manufacturing, a rebound in private sector activity and continued public infrastructure investments. The ongoing vaccination against COVID-19 and further easing of lockdown measures will further stimulate economic activity in the country. 

Uganda has requested the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for a three-year arrangement, under the Extended Credit Facility (ECF), covering the period of 2021-2023, in an amount of SDR 722 million. The ECF will help to address the short-term impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. They will ensure a robust sustainable medium-term recovery through steadfast implementation of Uganda economic reform programmes by providing balance of payments and budget assistance, leveraging donor resources and enhancing the efficacy of the monitoring for reform implementation.

Public Debt Performance

The public debt stock was $17.96 billion as at end of December 2020, up from $13.3 billion as at end of December 2019, a growth of 35 per cent over a period of 12 months. This level of debt stock is equivalent to 47.2 per cent of GDP in nominal terms, and 41.1 per cent of GDP in present value terms. External debt formed 65 per cent of the debt stock as at end of December 2020 while domestic debt formed 35 per cent of the debt stock at $6.3 billion.

Recommendations

    1. In order to reduce the pace of debt accumulation, especially in relation to budget support, Government should halt creation of administrative units and expedite the merger of institutions, to eliminate duplications and wasteful expenditures, thereby reducing the need to borrow for budget support. 

    2. Borrowing should be limited to development projects that have undergone proper project appraisal to ascertain that the projects have good economic rates of return, so that budget support borrowing is limited to exclusive periods of economic shocks where countercyclical fiscal policy is required to boost economic recoveries. 

    3.  Government should urgently strengthen regulation of the mining industry so as to maximise the benefits from mineral exports, given the earnings from gold exports, which have made gold become the number one source of foreign exchange earnings in the past two years.

The trend of external by creditor and type is presented in table 6 of the report. As you can see, by June 2020, the percentage share of concessional loans was 61 per cent, 19 per cent in form of semi-concessional loans, and non-concessional loans took 20 per cent. What is important to note is the growth in non-concessional loans from 0.7 per cent in June 2017 and now at 20 per cent. The overall picture is presented in the same schedule. 

I now want to take you to page 20 of the report to look at the highlights of votes with high unspent balances. A total of Shs 951 billion was unspent by 15 programmes at the end of December 2020. Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), Uganda Police Force, and Electoral Commission had programmes that accounted for the biggest unspent balances. The reasons advanced for poor absorption were mainly COVID-19 related and the lengthy procurement process. 

Table No.11 of the report summarises the details and the percentages of budget releases not spent. They are all presented in that schedule. You could also look at the Ministry of Local Government, with 83 per cent of unspent budget releases; also, the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) Secretariat, but that one can be understood because they spend according to seasons. The Ministry of Education and Sports stands at 68 per cent of unspent resources. 

Regarding the half-year performance of NDPII core projects, I want to note that only Shs 323 billion out Shs 1,721.19 billion of the approved budget was spent, representing only 18.8 per cent absorption performance. 

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that in order to improve the efficacy of project execution, the following measures should be considered:

    1. Improve project selection, design, appraisal and analysis before the project is approved and sanctioned for funding.

    2.  Continue to ring-fence counterpart funding for projects to enable MDAs undertake preparatory activities like land acquisition, among others. 

    3. Strengthen the Chief Government Valuer’s office to address the inefficiencies attributed to compensation matters.

    4. Ensure accounting officers monitor contracts/projects. Officers who have experienced unsatisfactory project/programme implementation should not be reappointed in accordance with the PFM Act, 2015.

Table 13, annex 7, highlights the implementation status of the NDPIII core projects as of December 2020.

The COVID-19 related expenditures in the first half of the financial year 2020/2021 included:

1.	Public health response measures, for which Shs 170.03 billion was released to enhance health systems through –

a) increasing direct health expenditures for both COVID-19 interventions and capacity strengthening; and 
    b) support to scientists and innovators engaged in scientific research for COVID-19 interventions. 

So, we provided Shs 170 billion for both. 

2. 	Under economic recovery interventions, Shs 2,223.10 billion was released for -

    a) provision of agricultural inputs and extension services to boost production, which was allocated Shs 221 billion; 

    b)  labour-intensive work for vulnerable able-bodied persons affected by COVID-19 was allocated Shs 130 billion; 

    c) seed capital for entrepreneurial special interest groups under the Youth Fund, Women Fund, and talent support scheme (Emyooga) was allocated Shs 416 billion;

    d) provision of affordable credits for small, medium and large-scale enterprises through the Uganda Development Bank (UDB), Shs 558 billion; Uganda Development Corporation (UDC) for public private partnership investments to facilitate 16 import substitution and export promotion projects, Shs 138 billion; SACCOs and the Microfinance Support Centre, Shs 77 billion; and payment of domestic arrears, Shs 673 billion.
 
3. 	For social protection interventions, we provided Shs 64.77 billion. That amount has been released for the provision of relief food and increased coverage for the elderly under the Social Assistance Grant for the Elderly (SAGE).

On page 23 of the report, we presented the annual budget estimates for financial year 2021/2022. 

The Economic and Budget Strategy for Financial Year 2021/2022

The economic strategy and Government spending priorities for the fiscal year 2021/2022 will be centred on – 

    (i) policy interventions required to sustain recovery from the socio-economic setbacks caused by the COVID-19 pandemic as well as harness the opportunities that come along; and

    (ii) the NPDIII strategic objectives. It should be noted that the theme for the budget in the financial year 2021/2022 will remain “Industrialisation for Inclusive Growth, Employment and Wealth Creation.”

The economic and budget strategies are focused on three broad interlinked growth agenda, which are central to developing and harnessing the factors of production. These are:

    i) Accelerating the pace of industrialisation, research and innovation to enhance value addition to agriculture and mineral commodities.

    ii) Building an integrated and self-sustaining economy by enhancing the capacity for import substitution and export markets access; and

    iii) Strengthening the private sector by improving enterprise competitiveness, partly through increased efficiency and effectiveness of public sector investments.

The committee notes the following in regard to the economic and budget strategy:

1. 	Scaling up of agriculture production and agro-industrialisation: Given the dominance of agriculture as a source of livelihood, agro-industrialisation offers an opportunity for inclusive and equitable growth. However, the sector is still characterised by 68.9 per cent of households still dependent on subsistence agriculture dominated by small-holder farmers; low value addition, for instance over 95 per cent of coffee is exported as raw unprocessed beans; limited access to agricultural financial services and critical inputs, among others. 

	In order to address these concerns, the committee recommends that the following interventions should be prioritised: water for production, and access to agriculture insurance scheme.

2. 	Harness mineral exploitation, beneficiation and processing: Mineral exploitation, beneficiation and processing are critical for the industrialisation process in Uganda. As of 2018, over US$ 3.392 billion was being spent annually on importation of mineral-based products, which can be produced from locally available minerals. The sector is still underdeveloped and characterised by the following: 

    i) Eighty (80) per cent of the subsector is dominated by small/informal miners using obsolete methods of mining;
    ii) There are inadequate human resources especially in the areas of mines inspection and monitoring;
    iii) Inadequate infrastructure (energy, railway, roads, etc.) to support the sector;
    iv) Inadequate skilled human resource like geologists, geoscientists, processing engineers;
    v) Limited access to appropriate and clean technology;
    vi) Unexplored and unquantified mineral resources; and,
    vii) High costs for exploration and quantification. 

In order to streamline the operations of the mineral sector, the committee recommends the following should be prioritised:

    a) All non-performing licences be cancelled and reclaimed by Government.

    b) The Government should allocate adequate financial and human resources for due diligence in the mining industry to ensure that only technically and financially competent applicants are considered for mineral licences.

    c) The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and other relevant agencies should ensure proper enforcement of exploration licences through consistent monitoring and forfeiture for non-compliance by licence holders.

    d) The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should address all the weaknesses in the assessment and collection of royalties from the mining industry.

    e) The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should urgently recruit and deploy enough mine site inspectors to track volumes of mineral production.

    f) Government should expedite the review of the Mining Act, 2003 to provide for the regulation of the exploitation of development of minerals and subsequent collection of the resultant revenues.

    3. Harness the tourism dividend: We all know how well Uganda is endowed. This has been articulated on so many occasions. So, we need to invest in that area. 

    4. Strengthen private sector capacity to drive growth and create jobs: The committee notes that there is a crucial need to continue to strengthen the private sector to increase its competitiveness. In this regard, the committee recommends the following:

    a) Scale up the provision of affordable long term financing by development finance institutions like Uganda Development Bank  or other Government banks like Post Bank and Pride Microfinance);

    b) Promote Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) through well-developed industrial parks. We do not have the required industrial parks to promote foreign and local direct investment.

    c) Increase the value of public contracts and sub-contracts that are awarded to local firms;

    d) Support small and medium enterprises (SMEs) to access export markets and affordable credit. 

Many more recommendations are made on page 26. I now turn to the resource envelope, which is summarised in table 14. 

The projected resource envelope for the financial year 2021/2022 is estimated at Shs 44.778 trillion, which is a decrease by 1.6 per cent or by Shs 714.9 billion compared to the approved resource envelope for the financial year 2020/2021. In other words, the resource envelope is coming down for the first time. This decrease is mainly attributed to a projected decrease of Shs 2.426 trillion in external financing for project support. (Refer to table 14 for details.) 

It should be observed that Shs 200 billion will be drawn from the Petroleum Fund to specifically finance oil road infrastructure during the financial year 2021/2022. Domestic and external financing will constitute 76.7 per cent and 23.3 per cent of the total resource envelope respectively.
 
In table 14, we summarise those details. You can see that domestic revenue will be Shs 22.6 trillion. There is a breakdown between tax revenue and non-tax revenue and appropriation-in-aid both by central and local government. The Petroleum Fund is also presented there; and a drawdown of Government deposits, which is at zero.

In terms of grants, those are also reducing, at Shs 1.441 trillion broken down between budget support and project support. Domestic borrowing is at Shs 11.4 trillion, external borrowing at Shs 9.01 trillion. Overall, we have a figure of Shs 44.778 trillion as our resource envelope.

We turn to the overview of resource allocation by programme. We now pursue programme based budgeting and we have 18 programmes. As you will note, human capital development takes the lion’s share with 16.9 per cent followed by governance and security at 15.5 per cent of the budget. Integrated transport follows in at number three at 11.2 per cent. The rest are as reflected in that table. 

What is important to note are the programmes that largely relate to production that have consistently been underfunded. 

The committee observes the following in regard to the resource envelope: 

    i)  The resource allocation has been structured along the programme approach, as I have mentioned.  

    i)  The greatest share of resources is towards debt related payments (including domestic arrears) at 38 per cent, governance and security at 15.5 per cent, capital development at 16.9 per cent and integrated transport infrastructure and services at 11 per cent.

    ii) The least financially prioritised programmes include community mobilization and mindset change at 0.13 per cent, manufacturing at 0.12 per cent, mineral development at 0.12 per cent, digital transformation at 0.3 per cent and sustainable development of petroleum resources at 0.2 per cent. 


    ii) Tax revenue as a ratio to GDP is projected at 12.7 per cent in the financial year 2021/2022, depicting a low tax effort. This tax revenue to GDP ratio is still below the sub-Saharan average of 20 per cent (IMF, 2012) and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries’ average of 34.3 per cent as of 2015.

    iii) In addition, total domestic revenue, inclusive of local government revenue, in the financial year 2020/2021 is projected at 55.3 per cent of the total resource envelope, up from 48.5 per cent in the financial year 2020/2021.

The committee recommends that there is need for Government to strengthen the mobilisation and collection of tax revenues, which have stagnated below 13 per cent of GDP for many years. 

The committee is aware that Government has developed a Domestic Revenue Mobilisation Strategy that would ensure that revenue mobilisation efforts are strengthened. The committee recommends that Government fully implements the Domestic Revenue Mobilization Strategy.

Budgets of Public Corporations and State Enterprises

In compliance with section 13(11)(f) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development laid before Parliament the proposed budgets for public corporations and state enterprises for the financial year 2021/2022.

The committee observed that only 26 out of the 65 public corporations and state enterprises submitted their budgets on the Programme Budgeting System (PBS). Therefore, 40 public corporations and state enterprises did not comply with the law. The 26 public corporations and state enterprises are projected to collect a total revenue of Shs 2.2 billion. 

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that all public corporations and state enterprises should comply with the law and have their budgets presented and appropriated as stipulated by section 29 (3) of the PFM Act, 2015.

Fiscal Decentralisation

Honourable members, in the financial year 2021/2022, the total proposed budget allocation to local governments is Shs 4.6 trillion, reflecting a 10.5 per cent increment against the financial year 2020/2021 approved budget.

The proposed allocation to non-wage expenditure category is Shs 1.4 trillion, reflecting a 49.2 per cent increment, while proposed allocation to donor development category is Shs 137.98 billion. 

The committee established that Government transfers to local governments as a share of the national budget was at its peak in the financial year 2004/2005, when it performed at 26 per cent, and thereafter experienced a declining trend to 20 per cent in the financial year 2010/20l1 and has stagnated at about 13 per cent, despite the increase in the number of administrative units. This stagnation is largely on account of failure by Government to apply the prescribed formulae under Article 193 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

Consequently, the allocations have not enabled local governments to finance their local discretionary priority needs or cater for the general price levels and the incremental costs of running services. 

New administrative units and cities that were established in the financial year 2019/2020 to financial year 2020/202l imply  higher expenses with limited growth in revenues (currently at 10 per cent largely driven by central Government transfers). Going forward, given the current trends, local governments’ financial sustainability will be compromised, unless deliberate efforts are undertaken to significantly raise local government revenues while instituting efficiency spending measures to keep growth in expenses in check.

Parish Development Model

Honourable members, the Parish Development Model (PDM) is a strategy for organising and delivering public and private sector interventions for wealth creation and employment generation at the parish level, as the lowest economic planning unit. It is a universal programme covering all the 10,594 parishes of the country. It is expected that the Parish Development Model will be implemented in two phases, beginning this financial year with the preliminary interventions as agreed with this Parliament.

Rationale: Despite the general success registered by development programmes overtime, 21.4 per cent (or 8 million people) are living below the national poverty line and 68 per cent of Ugandan households rely on subsistence agriculture as their main source of livelihood.

The success of development initiatives has been inhibited by low coverage of these programmes that have been localised to a few areas at a given time. The Parish Development Model should mark a major milestone in Uganda's development journey in three main ways:

    (a) It accelerates implementation of area-based commodity development planning which is vital for realising the quantity and quality of agricultural production required for agro-industrialisation and export development;

    (b) It extends the whole-of-government approach for development to the parish level in a consolidated manner, as opposed to working in silos; and

    (c) It localises Vision 2040 and the National Development Plan for effective measurement and management of development interventions.

The Parish Development Model is a delivery strategy for transitioning households out of the subsistence economy.

The Parish Model was extensively discussed during the plenary and in the Committee on Budget. During these discussions, the committee observed the following about the Government strategy for implementation of the Parish Development Model: 

    1. The goal of the Parish Development Model is socioeconomic transformation for wealth creation at the parish level. Under this goal, Government aims to graduate the 39 per cent of households in the subsistence economy into agents of wealth creation in the monetised economy.

    2. The intended outcomes of the Parish Development Model are to increase commercial production of 18 priority commodities at the parish level and to increase household incomes in the process.

    3. The Parish Development Model consists of seven pillars (as in table 18), which include: 

    i) Pillar 1 - production, processing and marketing (value chain development);
    ii) Pillar 2 - infrastructure and economic services;
    iii) Pillar 3 - financial inclusion;
    iv) Pillar 4 -  social services;
    v) Pillar 5 -  community information systems;
    vi) Pillar 6 -  government and administration; and
    vii) Pillar 7 - mindset change.

What I have to mention is that the implementation of this model requires parish-level staff, institutions and systems including parish chiefs, parish development committees, and community data to be in place. Originally, this model was to be financed from a pool of funds sourced from an amalgamation of existing wealth funds but Parliament took a decision reversing that action. 

The committee recommends as follows:

1. 	Parliament approves the reinstatement of existing wealth funds as proposed by the committee. Those changes have been reflected in the figures;

2. 	A phased approach to the implementation of the Parish Development Model. In financial year 2021/2022, the implementation of this model should start with preliminary activities for the establishment of the necessary support structures and systems. Key among these activities are the recruitment of parish chiefs, - we do not have them - establishment and training of parish development committees,  set-up of the community information system, and mobilisation of the masses at national and local government level; 

3. 	Preliminary activities in financial year 2021/2022 should also include the gathering and using of baseline information to establish parish institutions to support all the seven pillars of the model, and the development of value chains for the 18 priority commodities, including establishing markets for commodities; 

4. 	Parliament should adopt the implementation of the Parish Development Model in the coming financial year, taking into account the above adjustments.

Way forward

The Government economic forecast suggests that the real economy is projected to rebound to seven per cent by 2025/2026. However, key challenges and risks to growth remain, and these include:

    i) Refinancing risks due to a high composition of short-term instruments in the financing mix;

    ii) Downgrade risks in the credit rating. If there is a deterioration in debt sustainability, it can lead to being downgraded by international credit rating agencies, which would affect access to development credit;

    iii)  High cost of private sector credit, because we are over borrowing from the domestic market; and

    iv) An increase in budgetary allocations to debt service and thereby, affecting provision of Government services;

Safeguarding debt sustainability should be prioritised. In this regard, there is need for continued domestic revenue mobilisation and sound project implementation, especially to realise the envisaged growth dividend from infrastructure investment. Government should target the projected debt trajectory to provide a buffer relative to the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility’s debt ceiling in case of adverse shocks. 

There is also an urgent need to accelerate structural reforms aimed at facilitating private sector activity, particularly local Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs), to develop capacity to drive the industrialisation effort, increase export, create jobs and increase local content. 

These reforms should include further improving the business environment by increasing the access to affordable credit and reducing the cost of doing business through increased access to affordable energy and a reliable transport infrastructure that links the country to regional partner states, in order to widen our market opportunities.

To harness the potential of human resources to adequately drive Uganda’s development agenda, there is need to continue building up the skills base with the relevant education requirements for employment, employability and sustainable growth. Expand the pool of entrepreneurs, business leaders, managers and professionals who will be able to contribute to solving problems in their establishments, create new products and services and help their enterprises to grow; and streamline national education and training systems in light of the national, regional and global human resource needs and trends. 

Subsequently, there is need for sequencing projects, with priority given to those generating a bigger growth dividend. Government will also continue to enhance project execution by fully implementing their forms under the Public Investment Management Strategy (PIMS), for timely realisation of their benefits and subsequently, their impact on the economy. 

Increase resource mobilisation for the implementation of national development programmes by effective operationalisation of the domestic revenue mobilisation strategy aimed at increasing domestic revenue by 0.5 percentage points of GDP each year.

Madam Speaker, in part two of the report, we present various items, including the adjustments that we have proposed to the annual budget estimates for financial year 2020/2021. 

In tables A and B, which begin on pages 36 and 42 respectively, we present resources identified for reallocation (budget suppressions) and resources reallocated towards areas of priority (votes receiving the reallocated funds) respectively. These areas of priority were informed by a review of parliamentary sectoral committee reports on the ministerial policy statements for financial year 2020/2021, deliberations by the Budget Committee, and other relevant documents –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Chairperson of the Budget Committee for giving way. I would like to raise a procedural issue. 

The budget you are talking about, for financial year 2020/2021, is already passed. If there is something to be done here, you need to bring a supplementary. You cannot put it in this report. If you want to adjust a budget and there is a supplementary needed, we request the chairperson to advise the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to deal with that.

Therefore, is it procedurally right that we now bring adjustments to the budget estimates for financial year 2020/2021, which is running? Two, under what law would this be put? I thank you.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I am sorry for the error in the heading. It is an adjustment to the annual budget estimates for financial year 2021/2022; I am sorry for that error. That particular budget has not been approved yet. Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for raising the matter.

Madam Speaker, Table A has resources that the various committees have identified for reallocation. Chief among these are arrears/court awards amounting to Shs 20 billion. Under the programme on governance and security, and more specifically on Treasury bills interest, we have suppressed Shs 294 billion. This is because the committee noted that same domestic borrowing has been maintained within a reduced Central Bank Rate (CBR).

The justification for increasing interest charges could not be established by the committee. 

As was noted, our budget is coming down. Domestic financing is also coming down. If I may give more details, domestic financing for the current financial year is at Shs 3,054,000,000,000 while in the next financial year, domestic financing is projected to reduce to Shs 2,942,600,000,000. You can see the trend in domestic financing is going down but they are proposing to raise interest rates. There is no relationship there. As domestic financing is reducing, interest charges should also be reducing. However, we observe that interest charges were increasing from Shs 597 billion to Shs 857 billion. It is that increase of Shs 294 billion that was targeted by the committee for reduction. 

Again, under others, we reduce that figure by Shs 20 billion, which was on bank charges. We noted, after an interaction with the Ministry of Finance, that temporary borrowing has not been properly managed, consequently Bank of Uganda charges more bank charges including interest from the Treasury. We note that with increased efficiency in the operations of the Treasury, we should be able to save some money there. We, therefore, have Shs 20 billion added into our resource envelope. 

There were proposals relating to the Electoral Commission - the detailed explanations are given in the report - but these are small amounts. 

On page 38, you can see a suppression of Shs 253.3 billion. That money was being returned from the various MDAs under the Parish Development Model. That money will be reallocated accordingly. 

We see reallocations under science and technology; and also, in the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, particularly targeting resources that were originally given to Uganda Air Cargo. 

On page 39, we continue to see some movements under the Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory (DGAL) but these are within the same vote. 

Under Mulago Specialised Women and Neonatal Hospital, we see reallocations under the provision of resources for transport. Under Mulago National Referral Hospital, a provision of Shs 1 billion is being moved because the Burns Unit is not actually at Mulago but is at Kiruddu Hospital. So, we shall be moving those resources to Kiruddu Hospital.

Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, under the IFMS recurrent costs, we noted that we had approved recently, through a supplementary, Shs 25 billion. So, we removed some Shs 14 billion to finance other critical sectors of the economy. 

We also noted that under the same ministry, they had made a provision of Shs 46 billion for consultancy services. That budget had increased from Shs 17 billion. So, we removed Shs 18 billion, because we are at a time when we should reduce consumptive expenditure. 

There are some adjustments that are within Ministry of Water and Environment. Also, in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, there is some movement of resources. 

I think I have mentioned the major highlights in those movements. On page 42, we can see that a total of Shs 750.25 billion is going to be redistributed as reflected under table B. In table B, under resource allocations, the Law Development Centre is receiving Shs 2.5 and Shs 2 billion for the justification as has been indicated. We go on to more resource allocations as reflected on page 43. 

Madam Speaker, I do not think that I should present all these details since Members have all these documents. What is important to mention is that within the referral hospitals, we are making a provision to procure CT scan machines because we noted that due to lack of imaging equipment, people are moving from Mbale coming to Kampala just to do a scan. To address that problem, we have made a provision for procurement of CT scan machines in all the regional referral hospitals across the country, including Kiruddu Hospital, Kawempe Hospital and all regional referrals in Mbale, Soroti, Gulu and so on. 

That summarises my presentation on this schedule. The details have all been declared up to page 64 of the report.

Madam Speaker, the figures recommended for supply are presented in table 19. This arises out of the above adjustments as shown in tables A and B. Based on those adjustments, we recommend the following figures for supply and appropriation as expenditure for financial year 2021/2022 - Table 19 is a consolidation of schedules A, B and C. Schedule A is on recurrent budget estimates for appropriation for financial year 2021/2022 and Schedule B is on development budget estimates for appropriation for financial year 2021/2022. Schedule C is on statutory expenditure. 

In this table, the recurrent expenditure proposed for supply and appropriation for financial year 2021/2022 is as follows:

    i) Central Government - Shs 8,883,598,844,000. 
    ii) Referral hospitals - Shs 178,272,327,000.
    iii) Foreign missions - Shs 190,231,999,000.
    iv) Local governments - Shs 3,408,765,462,000.

Overall, the total recurrent expenditure proposed for supply is Shs 12,660,868,633,000.

On page 65, we continue with that table, where we present the development expenditure proposed for supply for the financial year 2021/2022 as follows:

    i) Central Government - Shs 13,823,217,958,000 

    ii) Referral hospitals - Shs 30,953,723,000, foreign missions we are proposing for supply Shs 32,923,850,000.

For local Governments, we propose a supply of development expenditure amounting to Shs 1,072,832,199,000. So, the total development expenditure proposed for 2021/2022 is Shs 14,959,927,730,000.

The total appropriation adding recurrent expenditure and development expenditure, we are proposing Shs 27,620,796,363,000 and statutory expenditure of Shs 17,157,992,325,000. So, the grand total of appropriation and statutory expenditure, which is the overall budget is Shs 44,778,788,688,000.

Schedule (a) as I indicated are the figures for appropriation under recurrent expenditure. And on page 74, we have a total of 12.6 that corresponds with the figure that we have presented in the summary.

On page 75, we have development expenditure; Schedule (b) development budget estimates for appropriation for financial year 2021/2022 and it goes on up to page 83.

Schedule (c) is on page 84 where we present the statutory charges on the Consolidated Fund, for the Financial Year 2021/2022 and we start with the office of the President; where we declare the amount paid to the President and the Vice President, respectively. The figures are indicated there. Then Justice court awards, we have presented figures. Treasury services and all these give us a total of Shs 16,379,117,135,000 to which is added pension and gratuity for non-statutory Vote, and the figure there is Shs 778,875,190,000.

So, we have a grand total of statutory amounting to Shs 17,157,992,325,000. The rest are annexes to the report. Information assessment and compliance on the Public Finance Management Act - Details on annex 7 presents the NDP III core projects, to be financed in the Financial Year 2021/2022.

Annex 8 - the financial performance for some of the core projects in the financial year 2020/2021. I think that is it. I beg to move. 

We have a minority report and it will be presented by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, together with Mama Cecilia Ogwal.

Madam Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table, the report and minutes of the Committee on Budget on the Annual Budget Estimates, for Financial Year 2021/2020.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much, honourable chairperson and members of the Budget Committee for that work, especially, since you had very little time in which to handle it; taking into account that the tenure of the 10th Parliament was substantially interfered with, by the conclusion of the term of office. Our work should have gone on until the end of the month. Let me invite the movers of the minority report to present.

12.30
MR MUHAMMAD KIVUMBI    (DP, Butambala    County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. I beg to move a minority report, pursuant to Rule 202 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

I present a dissenting opinion from the position of the majority on the following areas; inadequate allocation to contingency fund, in adequate frugality in budgeting, escalating domestic borrowing, debt servicing burden, inadequate agricultural sector development. Absence of local Government development plans, parish development model, deviation from the charter of fiscal responsibility. 

    1. Inadequate allocation to the contingency fund 

As noted in the majority report, the Contingency Fund is a constitutional obligation, which should be met. As you are aware and the majority report has noted that Shs 2,227 billion under the law, should be provided under the Contingency Fund.

Madam Speaker, the experience of COVID-19 has taught us squarely that, we need the Contingency Fund. Had we had it, there would never been those levels of panic but year in year out, we consistently fail to provide for this fund.

The ministry provided only Shs 62 billion of the required Shs 2,227.49 billion, leaving a shortfall of Shs 164 billion. It should have been prudent during the reallocation that the majority committee found it worthy to meet this constitutional obligation, so that we do not move on an illegality. Therefore, we recommend that the Contingency fund be provided. 


    2. Inadequate frugality in budgeting 

Although the majority report called for austerity measures, it falls short of detailing them. It is noted that Government considered the budget suppression strategy; contained in the minority report of this on-going year, 2020/2021.

There are various percentages of suppression that were undertaken, amongst the proposed consumptive items as indicated in table 1. However, there were no suppressions made to fuel lubricants and oil.

To the contrary, it is projected to increase by two per cent from Shs 240 billion to Shs 244 billion, an increment of Shs 3.721 billion. This is surprising, given the fact that there are suppressions in transport equipment and travel inland, amounting to a total decrease of Shs 47.5 billion.

Madam Speaker, when you look at Table 1 below and we look at travel inland, the budget for travel inland has reduced by Shs 13 billion. That is item No.7. The budget for transport equipment that they are going to acquire has also reduced by a total of Shs 33 billion. 

However, what defies logic is that you are going to travel less inland, you are going to buy fewer vehicles and equipment but you are going to spend more money on fuel. That defies logic and we think Government is not learning any lessons.

Given the challenging times of the COVID-19 pandemic, it should have been logical to allocate more resources realised from suppression to items such as medical supplies and agricultural supplies. There is urgent need for vaccine and reduction in household income; the latter lowers the purchasing power for food, particularly among the urban households; hence the need to boost local food production to contain food inflation. 

To the contrary, allocations to medicine supplies and to agricultural supplies are projected to decrease by 12 per cent and 59 per cent, respectively.

In Table 2, I have noted that last year, approved budget for medical supplies was Shs 970,374,178,000. This year, it is projected to reduce to Shs 849,260,838,000. So, a total of Shs 121 billion, which is equivalent to 12 per cent, has been deducted from medical supplies, at a time when we need vaccines and other requirements.

For agricultural supplies, the budget was Shs 284 billion. It is going to reduce to Shs 115 billion, a total reduction of Shs 169 billion, which is 59 per cent of reduction. These are the keys to keeping people healthy and having food to eat is a key component of having a healthy human resource.

It has been derived that the beneficiaries of the suppressions are majorly debt management items. These have increased by 17 per cent from Shs 12.699 trillion to Shs 15 trillion. As a result, from the onset, 34 per cent of the budget in Financial Year 2021/2021 will be locked away from service delivery. 

Madam Speaker, this is very critical, that from the onset, we are going to lock away 30 per cent of our total revenue collection in debt servicing, in paying interest, amortisation and managing our debt. 

With the increased allocations to debt management, one would have expected a reduction in debt burden. Contrarily, this is not the case.

Table 3 is increasing allocation to debt management. Here, we elaborate how we are going to manage our debt. Loan interest is budgeted to be Shs 1,054,536,553,000; an absolute additional change of 21 per cent, which amounts to Shs 185 billion. That is interest.

Commitment charges are going to reduce from Shs 52 billion to Shs 20 billion this year - this is commendable - which is an increase of 61 per cent. 

Debt management fees are going rise from Shs 113 billion to Shs 132 billion, a total increase of 28 per cent.

Payment on Treasury bill interest is going to rise from Shs 597 billion to Shs 857 billion, a total increase of Shs 259 billion, which is 43 per cent.

Bond interest is Shs 2,361,885,916 and is going to rise to Shs 2,763,749,759,000, which is a total increase of Shs 400 billion, which is 17 per cent.

External debt repayment budgeting, which is amortisation, is going to rise from Shs 1,228,943,808,000 to Shs 1,903,015,501,000, which is an increase of Shs 674 billion, which is 55 per cent.

Treasury Bills redemption, which is projected to increase from Shs 5,291,270,998,000 to Shs 6,483,239,054,000, an increase of Shs 1.9 trillion, which is 23 per cent.

Treasury Bonds redemption budgeting, which is going to reduce from Shs 2.190 trillion to Shs 1.901 trillion which is a reduction of 13 per cent.

Therefore, we recommend that for consistency with the proposed budget suppression approach, advanced in the minority report of the annual Budget estimates for Financial Year 2020/2021, there is room for realising more funds.

Government is urged to implement the proposed cuts and proceed towards the following critical areas, as had earlier been mentioned:

Domestic borrowing

Domestic borrowing is increasing astronomically, contrary to the budget strategy, contained in the proposed National Budget Framework Paper. It sought to reduce domestic borrowing.

Domestic borrowing is projected to rise from Shs 11.022 trillion to Shs 11.489 trillion, an increment of Shs 467.60 billion. This is an indication of the prevailing hurdles in accessing foreign loans. The trend is largely attributed to inadequate oversight by Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, we will later on recommend that Parliament has got to be more assertive in supervising the ministry of finance.

Unlike foreign loans, which cannot be committed before Parliament’s approval, there is a practice of attaining domestic debt, without prior approval of Parliament; rather assuming that it was already approved through a motion of passing the annual budget. 

In effect, this violates Article 59(3)(a) of the Constitution and section 36(5) of the Public Finance Management Act. Furthermore, domestic borrowing is holding finances of provident funds and gradually holding commercial banks captive from private sector players. 

Actually, the Auditor-General noted with concern that there has been no redemption of domestic debt at all, in the period of Financial Year 20l7/2018 to Financial Year 20l9/2020; rather 75 per cent of the domestic borrowing was towards debt rollover or debt recycling. 

Subsequent effect is that interest rates for loans borrowed to invest in various ventures are almost equivalent to the profits. Therefore, we borrow the same money, as much as we pay for profits – hence, several businesses are collapsing, for they can only sustain lenders but not the borrowers. In the alternative, companies source their credit from international finances to offset the risk of Government crowding them out. However, this largely benefits companies with multinational outlook other than those with national outlook. The latter are the majority yet less known on the international capital markets. 

This partially explains the dominance of multinational corporations through subsidiaries in the telecommunication, banking and manufacturing. The escalating domestic debt is a political issue and security threat to the country. Failure by Government to contain it raises a risk of writing down bank deposits and retirement crisis. 

Recommendation

In line with Article 59(3) (a) of the Constitution and Section 36(5) of the Public Finance Management Act, domestic borrowing should be enforced by a standalone resolution of Parliament.

Debt Servicing Burden 

As earlier mentioned, 34 per cent of the budget in the Financial Year 2021/2022 is projected towards loan servicing (domestic refinancing - Shs 8.54 trillion and amortisation - Shs 6.8 trillion). Singularly, allocations to domestic refinancing alone are higher than allocations made to any of the budget programmes. 

More still, most of the debt is towards infrastructural developments that have extremely low absorption rate. For instance, in the Financial Year 2020/2021, NDP core projects were only able to absorb Shs 323 billion out of Shs 1.721 trillion of the approved budget. This is scandalous. Out of the budget we approved in this Parliament, agencies were only able to absorb Shs 323 billion out of Shs 1.7 trillion. This is carried in the Auditor-General’s report. 

This translates to absorption rate of 19 per cent. It is not justifiable for citizens to bear debt burden for non-progressive projects. This amounts to wastage. The Auditor-General was concerned that in the Financial Year 2019/2020, commitment fees worth Shs 9.241 billion were spent on undisbursed funds of only three loans that were assessed. What if he was to go on and assess all of them, what could have been the level of wastage? They blame Parliament for not doing its work; but we provided funds and they failed to implement them, and yet the citizens are paying a huge debt. 

Recommendation

    1. Parliament should not approve loans for ministries, departments and agencies that have absorption rates that are lower than 60 per cent at the time of request. 

    2. Cap the infrastructure development portfolio until ongoing projects have registered at least 60 per cent of absorption. We continue to roll up new projects and yet the old ones are not moving. 

Inadequate Agricultural Sector Development

The main report proposes prioritisation of water for production and agricultural insurance schemes irrespective of the huge budget cuts in the Agricultural Sector. Allocutions were cut by 64 per cent from Shs 1.3 trillion in the Financial Year 2020/2021 to Shs 799 billion in the Financial Year 2021/2022.

Besides, the interventions championed by Government will largely excel if access to land is guaranteed. About 20 per cent of citizens have secure land ownership in form of land titles. Hence, majority lack the ownership and access to land to undertake productive agriculture. 

The deficiencies in land ownership are largely responsible for subsistence production and low access to credit that would influence investments into produce handling and value addition. 

We, therefore, recommend that the allocations to the agricultural sector be maintained at levels of the last financial year, with prioritisation geared towards establishing districts farm institutes and regional silos. 

The allocations towards the land funds should be transformed into a revolving fund. This would ensure sustainability of the fund and serve more beneficiaries. 

Absence of Local Government Plans

While the main report is concerned with inadequate financing of local Governments, it is silent on the absence of the local Government development plans. Majority of the municipalities, cities and districts do not have development plans. Only 19 out of the 32 municipalities, representing 59 per cent; four out of nine cities, representing 44 per cent and 18 out of the 135 districts, representing 13 per cent, have development plans. With the huge gaps in planning, it is not surprising that the decentralisation policy is underperforming.

One then wonders what parameters were used by Government to propose allocations to local Governments. Absence of development plans automatically point to non-alignment to the National Development Plan. This is a violation of section 13(6) of the Public Finance Management Act.

Recommendations

Before approval of the budget, in line with section 78 of the Public Finance Management Act, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Local Government should offer explanation to this Parliament how local governments that lack development plans intend to deliver services. Accounting Officers for local governments who have failed to produce strategic plans should not be approved to manage public funds.

Parish Development Model

The Government proposed amalgamation of wealth funds amounting to Shs 453 billion into the Parish Development Model. Critical is the fact that a large portion of the funds amounting to Shs 444 billion were to be used as a parish revolving fund. It was later indicated that the allocation was to reduce to Shs 200 billion. Thanks to your work here, Madam Speaker, for ensuring two days of debate that forced Government to see logic in what Parliament was saying.

Government is increasingly reducing national development challenges to financial access. The greatest challenge for the 68 per cent of the Ugandan population is post-harvest handling and market access. A truck of sugarcane in Busoga, at present, goes for Shs 100,000. In Kayunga, the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget told us that tonnes of sugarcane have been burnt. 

So, the problems in the local areas are not necessarily lack of the small money. It is how to market. This has been noted in the recent past with excess production of sugar cane, maize, milk and poultry products among others. How does the revolving fund that now seeks to allocate only Shs 18 million per parish address the bottlenecks? 

The minister for finance indicated, in his statement, that success of the model is hinged on strategic planning at the parish, district and national levels. This is a fallacy given the fact that majority of the Local Governments as earlier noted, which already have access to public funds, lack development plans. 
It is further alleged that the market will be provided by small and medium enterprises and cooperatives. The former are struggling due to the effect of the COVID-I9 pandemic with no Government support while majority of the latter are limping.

Furthermore, a project similarly structured as the proposed parish development model was found wanting by Parliament after operating for five years. The project was initiated in July 2015 with the total project value of Shs 248.150 billion and closes in the year 2022. It is operating in only nine districts (Gulu, Omoro, Nwoya, Amuru, Adjumani, Pader, Agago, Kitgum and Lamwo), 100 parishes, 25 subcounties and 491 villages. 

The project components include livelihood, market linkages and infrastructure as well as programme management and coordination. However, oversight by the Committee on Public Service and Local Government revealed that the project is almost invisible in the communities and requires a forensic audit. 

Such a project ought to be considered as a pilot and basis of drawing lessons before initiating and allocating funds to the proposed Parish Development Model.

We have reconsidered our recommendation and more or less associate ourselves with the majority report but still emphasise that before we go into implementation, what is required is to do adequate research, studies and proper planning.

Deviation from the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility

Although majority of the committee note that there are worrying variations to the objectives of Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, they are silent on the legal implications of the variations. 

Irrespective of the fact that the Charter is expiring, there are variations that ought to be addressed. Section (7) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 stipulates that the minister responsible for finance may deviate from the Charter with approval of Parliament and publish a report in the Gazette as well as website of the ministry. 

It was realised that the fiscal deficit for the Financial Year 2020/2021 is projected at 7.7 per cent and not 6.26 per cent as indicated in the majority report. This is greater than the target of three per cent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). It is also projected that net present value of public debt has exceeded 50 per cent of the GDP. 

It ought to be noted that when the fiscal deficit and East African Community (EAC) monetary convergence criteria targets were exceeded, no Parliamentary approval was sought for the deviation nor a report published hence, a violation of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. 

The implications of the violation include decline in credit rating and access to loans. There is also uncertainty as to when the set objectives would be met again and whether they ought to be carried forward. 

Recommendation

Before approval of this Budget, in line with section 78 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the minister responsible for finance should offer an explanation to Parliament why the ministry failed to seek approval to deviate from the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility.

With that, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Kivumbi on behalf of the minority team of hon. Ogwal and hon. Kivumbi. Honourable members, you have listened to both reports but maybe I should invite the minister of finance to respond to some issues first.

12.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Budget Committee and hon. Kivumbi for the reports and issues that have been raised. We discussed some of them in the committee and offered an explanation. 

I would like to make three clarifications on both reports that have been presented to this House before the debate starts. The first is the status of public debt for the Republic of Uganda as per now and in the medium term.

I have uploaded a simple statement but it has been stated that in September 2020, our debt was at $ 17.96 billion. Out of this, our external debt was 30.7 per cent and 16.5 per cent for domestic debt. We had reached 47.2 per cent to GDP.

Our composition of domestic debt is 75.8 per cent. Shs 22.966 billion is in treasury bonds. The composition of external debt is that as at December 2019, we represented 35.9 per cent; an increase equivalent to $ 3.08 billion.

We get these loans from multi-nationals like the World Bank, International Monetary Fund (IMF) and also bi-laterals from Exim Banks of different countries. 

As at December 2020, 49.1 per cent was from the major multi-nationals and 29 per cent from the bi-laterals. We had 7.6 per cent from commercial banks. We are always cautious to make sure that we do not go commercial because it is very expensive.

The composition of the currency we borrow in as of December 2020 was: 

    i) 35.0 per cent was in Uganda shillings,
    ii) 30.6 per cent US dollars, 
    iii) 19.3 per cent for Euros,
    iv) 15.1 per cent for others. 

The currency in which we borrow is very important because at the end of the day, we pay back in the same currency. That speaks to the need to increase our exports. 

If you compare with other countries on page 4, Uganda is at 40 per cent but was at 41 per cent in December 2020. Kenya was at 69 per cent, Tanzania 38 per cent, Rwanda 60 per cent and Burundi 69 per cent, Ethiopia 55 per cent, South Africa 77 per cent, United Kingdom 85 per cent and United States of America 98 per cent to GDP.

The bigger portion of our debt is going to Energy and Mineral Development on page 5 for distribution of electricity, which we are generating as well as Works and Transport to finish the infrastructure, especially roads. 

Of recent, because of COVID-19, we have seen an increase in accountability; that is loans that come to support our budget, which is now coming to 29 per cent. 

Madam Speaker, the key projects that are pushing the increase in the debt portfolio, which must be implemented to spur the growth of our economy, to support industrialisation agenda, create wealth and jobs for Ugandans, include, but are not limited to the Karuma Hydropower, which took almost Shs two or three billion, Isimba, the Oil Roads 1, 2 and 3 and other roads, expansion of Entebbe International Airport, Kampala-Jinja Express Project, Metre and Standard Gauge Railway, development of Kampala Industrial Park, the National Oil Palm Project, the development of water and sanitation, various transmission and electricity distribution projects, construction of tertiary and vocational institutions and also health centres, construction of hospitals and various irrigation schemes and valley dams mainly in water-stressed areas.

Madam Speaker, the completion of these projects and pipeline projects will increase the competitiveness and the GDP of this country and improve the economy. For example, the completion of Isimba and Karuma Hydropower Stations on page 6 introduces 883 megawatts to the national grid. This will attract industries and also reduce the cost of doing business. 

The expansion of Entebbe Airport will enable handling of 6.1 million passengers by 2023. Investment in infrastructure in the oil and gas sector will prepare the country to become an oil producing and exporting country. The crude oil pipeline alone is expected to create 5000 jobs during construction and also create revenue for 1.6 trillion over 25 years. The standard metre railway will reduce the cost of doing business.
  
Madam Speaker, given the composition and our effort of revenue collection, the choice that we are making is that; should we continue to use the little resources we have and we are collecting domestically to finance these big projects and take us 50 to 70 years to complete? Or should we borrow now, complete them and then grow the economy; by providing jobs to support the economy? That is the choice we are making. 

The challenges, as have been outlined by hon. Kivumbi and the chairperson of the Committee on Budget include: 

There are historical challenges of slow disbursement of debt associated with funds, procedures and conditions. Working with the Committee on National Economy, we have seen Parliament also add value to the process of approving loans and addressing these challenges, which have mainly been procurement procedures; for example the Karuma loan took two and a half years to procure an important project like that. We have also seen land compensations and management issues and preparedness of projects and we are addressing this. 

The most important point that I would like to make through this paper is on page 7; the debt sustainability situation of the country. The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic greatly impacted on the Ugandan economy through disruption of trade, which saw a decline in both imports and exports. 

The Government response to mitigate the spread, including domestic lockdown, led to a slump in domestic economic activities and consequently, shortfalls in revenue. The revenue shortfall coupled with additional expenditure requirements to support Government’s economic and health response to COVID-19 necessitated high and anticipated borrowing, as highlighted earlier. 

In the coming years, public debt is projected to increase mainly on account one will need to implement the NDP III Programmes and also implement the NRM Manifesto and all the projects that have been agreed upon in those two documents. 

The necessity to finance key infrastructure projects such as the Standard Gauge Railway and the Metre Gauge Railway. These two alone are going to take approximately Shs 8 billion. It means that we are adding close to 6 per cent of GDP of our debt situation. 

There is also need to finance the refinery so that we can get oil out of our way. 

Low revenue out of analysing low economic activity due to slow down of COVID-19; because of this, I would like to inform this House and the country such that our debt to GDP, which has been a measure that we are using and it as agreed upon by the East African Community; 2021, as the chairperson mentioned is going to end by June at 49.1 per cent. The next financial year, it will increase slightly and go above our threshold and it will come to 51.9 per cent. 

In 2020/2023, it will be 51.2 per cent. In 2023/2024, it will now come down to 49.9 per cent because we will have implemented most of the infrastructure projects. In 2024/2025, it will come down to 48.7 per cent. It will be 47 per cent in 2025/2026.

Madam Speaker, this is our projection for our debt situation. It will increase slightly in the next financial year, come up a bit and then come down because we will have finished implementing the infrastructure projects. We cannot do otherwise because we must implement our projected. The debt is projected to decline after an account of increase of domestic revenue, as the Government implements domestic revenue mobilisation strategy. 

The major vulnerabilities to debt situation relate to slow growth of exports due to disruption of economic activities and they need to increase revenue. 

In conclusion, Government is rolling out the domestic revenue mobilisation strategy to enhance domestic revenue efforts to collect enough revenue to finance our budget and to also pay back the loan. We shall continue to address issues of low absorption capacity, as identified both in the majority and minority report. The Committee on National Economy is playing an important role here. 

We also pray that Parliament, through the sessional oversight committees continues to play their role, as the Executive does its work. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to affirm that our debt remains sustainable and borrowed money is being used to invest in projects that will grow the economy, create jobs and make Uganda financially independent. 

In the majority report, you have noticed that in the reallocations, the chairperson of the Committee on Budget has made some reallocations. Yesterday, we had a very fruitful meeting, which you chaired and we agreed to disagree on two points; the chairperson and members of the committee have made a reduction of our interest payment of Shs 290 billion. We think the money to pay interest is very important and we do not reallocate it to any other area because, as a country, we have never defaulted on our debt payment. 

The public is buying bonds. It will be unfortunate that when the time comes for them to be paid their interest, the Government will say that it cannot pay it. We have never defaulted and we do not intend to default on payment of our loan, not even by delaying by one day or defaulting by one shilling. We do not want to do that. If you reduce this, it will create a situation that we think is not going to help us. Therefore, we still insist that, in appropriation, as we supply, we should reverse this figure because constitutionally, it is not right and creates a big challenge to us, as we implement. 

Second is the issue of NAADs, which the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries will comment on, but where there was a reduction. I want to say this has issues to do with arrears that have already been contracted. I take note that it had already been merged but as Parliament, we agreed that these resources should go back to where they were coming from under the Parish Development Model. The committee has made some adjustment, which we think should be resolved.

However, I would like to thank the committee for accepting that we implement the Parish Development Model in a phased manner and in a way that we agreed both here in the House and in the committee. We agreed that the resources for the youth, for people of northern Uganda and for Luweero go back and be implemented the way we agreed; in a phased manner. Therefore, we shall implement the Parish Development Model in a phased manner with the first quarter looking at the preliminary activities and probably, in the second quarter, starting in earnest.

Madam Speaker, with those few comments on the minority and majority reports, we think that we are ready now to debate this issue and appropriate as you will be guiding. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I understand Agriculture wanted to say something.

1.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I thank the Chairperson of the Budget Committee for the good report, and also the minority report, for key issues raised. 

I am trying to challenge the logic of reallocation and seek support of members:

    1. Northern Uganda economic recovery needs to be sustained. Cutting Shs 20 billion from there, I do not see the logic. On agricultural inputs, Shs 56 billion were voted and specifically for three items:

    a) There are some regions with low cash crop that want to upgrade to high value cash crops and we need money to purchase seedlings. Transferring money to walking tractors when people have no seedlings and planting materials is not logical; and

    b) We have arrears for people who supplied agricultural inputs and we need to clear this backlog. These things were discussed in the committee. A total of Shs 10 billion to be taken away from NAADS, I think was unjustified.

    c) Defense budget has been cut by Shs 127 billion and Shs 26 billion subventions for NEC. 

First, we have backlog of arrears for veterans. If you cut this money and say it remains in Defense, it would be understandable but taking away Shs 127 billion is really unfair.

Madam Speaker, I have a right to speak because I appeared before the committee and these matters were not raised. Taking away Shs 27 billion from NEC industries -this is the only industry we have in Uganda for import substitution. Therefore, cutting away Shs 27 billion is actually closing NEC –(Interjection)– which order?

I thought I would raise these concerns and seek the support of members that the money stays where it was.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, the minister mentioned the Shs 127 billion moved from Ministry of Defense and Veteran Affairs. I want him to reflect on the report. What has only been moved is Shs 38 billion, which originally was money this Parliament appropriated to Uganda Air Cargo and the Committee on Defense and Internal Affairs found it necessary to extract this money from the Ministry of Defense and Veteran Affairs to other priorities. However, we do not have Shs 127 billion. What we have here is Shs 38 billion.

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, the information I am giving my chairperson is that it seems the minister – I think wonders never cease to exist because what the minister is giving – I do not know where he got it from because they are not in our documents. For instance, the minister is talking about money removed from NAADS to some contractors. Right from page 36 to where the reallocation money is taken, NAADs does not appear anywhere. Where does the minister get information, which is not accurate, yet, he is a member of this House? He should apologise because it is not here. 

The information the minister is giving must have been picked from somewhere but not from this document because all of them are inaccurate and should be expunged from our records.
 
MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the people of Uganda and this Parliament, are very concerned about the high figures on consumption areas of our expenditure and the budget. 

The minister ought to know that you can touch the lives of the people of Uganda when you increase funding to agriculture but you can see how much agricultural expenditure has been reduced. We cannot claim to be representing the people of Uganda, where about 80 per cent depend on agriculture and yet, we are reducing it by 59 per cent.

Madam Speaker, I think the minister is not right. I would like the minister of finance to explain this. In these notes, he told us that over the years, they have been reducing on the consumptive expenditure up to Shs 300 billion. I would like to know; on what item, from which ministry and from which agency because those have been our thorns in the flesh in the budgetary processes.

I would like to appeal to the Government side that this budget has been very restrained. In fact, from the debate we had last week, Parliament rejected the concept of the Parish Development Model but we have said let us have small amount of money and see how it will work in the next one year. If the infrastructure is in place, then we can always come back and argue for proper funding as it has been requested. 

I am surprised instead of the minister coming to appreciate what the Budget Committee has done and to be so favourable, instead he is complaining. Maybe, the little you have got from NEC, we can even remove it because NEC is not adding any value to the life of an ordinary Ugandan.


THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us deal with the issue of the figures at appropriation. Now, let us listen to the principles. You have heard the main and minority reports. You have heard the minister. 

1.23
MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am concerned about a few issues in the budget. 

One is where the MDAs did not budget as per programme based. These MDAs are not named and yet, they are going ahead to pass their budget. I do not know what we are basing on; including the local government.

We are nurturing impunity in this country. If it is a requirement that MDAs submit their work plans, why do we go ahead to pass their budget, when they do not have work plans as required, including the local governments? Let us not nurture impunity in this country. They keep doing the same thing every year. 

The other issue of concern is the allocation to community mobilisation and mindset change. We all agree that a big number of Ugandans are still living below the poverty line and we have 68 per cent of Ugandans in subsistence agriculture. We have ignored the function of community mobilisation and now, we are passing the parish development model to transfer lots of money to people who have not been prepared. 

We rush through the budget because we are rushing to beat deadlines – but deadlines to benefit who? Ugandans look at us and think we are their problem. I request Members that the reallocations that we got from other departments – I agree with them but my problem is where the money has been taken. 

Let us invest in social mobilisation so that we prepare these adults who have failed to come out to earn incomes. We had the president moving around the whole country asking people how many bed sheets they have and how they work for only their stomachs. The majority of Ugandans were putting up their hands. Here we are, planning for them. How do we expect them to transform, when they are not driven towards transformation? I request that we get money for social mobilisation. 

Let the Community Development Officers (CDOs) be facilitated. They should prepare the community very well and then; the money can go. Otherwise, we are pushing money to people who are not prepared and we do not facilitate the technical people. Where are the social experts of this country in the ministry of planning?

Hon. Bahati, next time you come here to give us the population status of Uganda and you will tell us how Ugandans cannot wash their hands, how they are suffering from diseases that are preventable; but what have we done to ensure that we facilitate the departments that are supposed to avert that? 

I request this House to consider the facilitation of social mobilisation and mindset change so that the community can be prepared for the Parish Development Model.  I beg to submit. 

1.28
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the chairperson of the committee and his members. I would also like to thank hon. Kivumbi for the minority report. 

I would like to make a few observations. Firstly, is a very touchy issue, which I have raised in this House before. The chairperson talked of creation of administrative units to be suspended. I thought the chairperson should have said that those administrative units that have had problems should be concluded. When you say suspended, you are putting us in a very difficult situation as people of Tororo and this is threatening to raise more concerns. We agree that even if the division of Tororo does not come now, it should be planned, even if it comes in one or two years. Let us have it as one of our priorities. 

Another issue of concern is under absorption. I agree with the chairperson that under absorption is a cancer that we have and it has to be cured. 

I would like to propose to the ministry of finance, on loans and resources we get from development partners and even what we provide here - there is a very big problem concerning feasibility studies and acquisition of right of way. Why can’t we do that within our minimal resources, before we attract the development partners to come and support us? Most of the electricity and road projects are delayed because of the counterpart funding, which we are not able to provide in time and this leads to interest, once we have already signed for these resources. Let us plan for that. Do it within our resources, then we attract the funding when we know we can proceed. 

The Parish Development Model would be a good model. I agree that there has been a lot of debate on this. I would, however, want to interest Members on preparedness. We have what we call the parish development committees, who are very instrumental in mobilising our communities. 

The CDOs are there and they work. However, we must also reflect about what has been happening before. We have some good CDOs and some that have been using their family members to benefit from the Government programmes that have been going on. In this case, we need the two teams to work together. 

We have disbursed resources to various groups, who have bought cows. However, when you look at the budget for the animals that are bought and the size of the animal bought - a cow is the size of a big goat and yet, Shs 2 million, has been spent to buy that. We can harmonise on that, when we support the parish development committees to work hand in hand with the CDOs to sensitise the community, prepare them well and then we roll out the Parish Development Model. 

It is interesting to note that there was a pilot project of the Parish Development Model that was handled in Kaberamaido. I do not know whether we have got what happened there. What the challenges were, the benefits that the people of Kaberamaido experienced that piloted the parish model. It would be good for us to know how successful it was. 

We have just had a motion on the Floor of Parliament as the third item, when we started. This motion was in relation to Public Accounts Committee reports that were laid yesterday and also the COSASE reports. Interesting to note, in public accounts, we had a very serious concern, where medical facilities, specifically the referral hospitals and the health ministry that kept getting qualified reports all the time.

As per the report yesterday, you heard that National Medical Stores has been the biggest problem, as the health units get qualified reports.

I have seen an allocation of Shs 590 billion of these referral hospitals going to National Medical Stores and in our report which was adopted; we said that every vote holder must take care of their vote.

Before we resolve on the pending issues that are making these health units get qualified reports, we are already sending money there.

I would like to request that these resources be held in the finance ministry, pending harmonisation. We would have wanted to hear whether there is a memorandum of understanding between the vote holders; that is the referral hospitals, National Medical Stores and the finance ministry; as regards to how the vote holders are going to be in charge of their own votes; resources to manage the appropriation and see how the qualified reports retired to become unqualified.

Madam Speaker, I thought that was very important. We should take care of those interests. Most important is, the issue of division of Tororo. 

There was a request from Ministry of Local Government to finance for certificate of financial implication, and we were told that the certificate was not granted.

Our request is let us have this matter resolved, even if we conclude it we have the district divided in 2024/2025. We do not mind, it will reduce the tension that is continuing to build up.I beg to submit.

1.34
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Our worry is that the chairperson and vice chairperson are now outside caucusing - we are worried.

THE SPEAKER: Can either the chairperson or vice chairperson return to the Chamber?

MR KIBALYA: Both have been taken out by the minister and we cannot see them.

THE SPEAKER: The Vice-Chairperson is here.  You can proceed.

MR KIBALYA: That is very good. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I need to join colleagues as we appreciate the budget; more especially in the area where the budget has suggested that we are going to buy CT scans for referral hospitals. That is what we have always prayed for.

I am glad the minister is here.  As we pass the budget like this, let us see those CT scans in these referral hospitals. I know very soon; at the end of this year, we shall come back here and those CT scans will not be in those referral hospitals. Given the experience we have had -but it is good we provided for that and we pray it comes to pass.

The other area of concern what we saw in the report. It brings out a lot about the mineral sector in this country. This country is gifted with minerals spread everywhere but the gains from these minerals are not clear; maybe another day we will hear fromthe minister for minerals. The minister was here some time back, saying that the mafias have become a problem.

May be, the ministry of finance should one day give us a report about the gains from minerals because it seems there are specific individuals who have monopoly over them and they are the ones who receive the gains from them. However, there is a lot that we can gain from those minerals. Possibly, as the report hinted, we may have something tangible and we are happy that we shall move on. 

My other concern is on the parish model. The other day we left when the minister was going to look for money; since the chairperson of the Budget Committee said that they had nowhere to pick the money from.

Though the report did not tell us exactly where the money was got from and the minister came here to give an additional statement, and we are waiting for him to tell us that; we did not pick money from Busoga and possibly tell us where the money was picked.

The minister could possibly tell us that, “we did not pick from Luwero but the money that was supposed to plant palm trees around Kampala is what we have used”. As the minister is closing, I hoping that he will tell us something about that issue of the source of money.

My observation about the national housing on page 52 - As far as the report is concerned, they have earmarked some Shs 30 billion to build low cost housing units for the low income earners.

A few days ago, we were in Naguru and Nakawa estates, which were demolished. We are now here allocating money to the same mafias that are grabbing the land of Nakawa and Naguru. They are alleging that they are going to build low-cost housing units for these people. It is in the ministry of lands that all sorts of scandals are seen. I am worried whether we shall have the low-cost structures in place.
 
Lastly, I was going through the report and I did not see money for Busoga University; Marine University of Namasagali, as they were promised. Maybe as they are finalising with the budgeting process - because that money is not there. 

There are some projects near Isimba Dam, which we built in the last financial year, like Rwanyama. The structure is there and they had promised to equip it in this budget of CEDUP, but it is not provided for; it is just put aside as a non-funded priority. 

Maybe when we go to the Committee of Supply, we need to give consideration, because this is a structure that was set up; unless we want animals rats to play from there, but we need to have equipment put in that area.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, just for the record, I hope that the National Housing and Construction Company will construct houses outside Kampala; because it seems it is around Kampala and not in Gulu, nor Soroti and Kasese.

1.39
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the Committee on Budget, for the report. First, I would like to thank them for what they appropriated for us, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs especially on the development expenditure. We appreciate the Shs 32 billion that was allocated to the missions.

We have been grappling with a lot of challenges - our missions were diplomatic embarrassment in most of the places where we have had structures that are quite dilapidated. A case in point is our Ugandan House in Nairobi.

I appreciate the committee for the allocation and in other places, we were at the verge of losing quite very strategic plots but now that we have got this, we appreciate the committee for the allocation.

We have also had missions where we were hiring premises; either official residences or chanceries. Now, this development expenditure that has been allocated for missions abroad is going to address that. We would like to appreciate them.

Allow me associate myself with the report of the minority team; especially on the inadequate allocation to the Contingency Fund. I come from Katakwi District, which has challenges of flooding and drought; almost year in year and year out. Once we have a Contingency Fund that is adequate, it should be able to respond to such challenges.
Last year, we had an emergency of COVID-19. We all know that we were not ready for it but we had it as an emergency. For us to have just Shs 60 billion in contingency, we are not planning for such emergencies.

I want to concur with the minority report that we need to up, in terms of our contingency, so that we manage emergencies whenever they arise.

On the issue of reduction of medical supplies, again, this is a very big challenge for the country. Honestly, we always hear stories of lack of medical supplies, equipment, lack of medical equipment, medicines running out within two to three days after they have been supplied to these district hospitals. I want to believe –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MS AKURUT: I want to believe it is because we allocate little in the budget, in terms of the supplies and medicines to these district and regional referral hospitals.

Finally, Madam Speaker, on the issue of supplies to agriculture; we know 68 per cent of our local communities depend on agriculture and we are saying this agriculture is still rudimentary. We thought that once we have supplies in agriculture – I think we were talking about tractors – there will be mechanisation of agriculture. 

I thought that should be our focus now, for us to get our people out of poverty and reducing the number of those who depend on rudimentary or subsistence agriculture into mechanised agriculture.

As I conclude, I beg that we really up the budget, in terms of agricultural supplies like pesticides, so that our communities are helped, since they depend on agriculture. I beg to submit. Thank you.

1.43
MR DONOZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is to first appreciate the work of the committee. The Committee on Budget has helped this country to design its priorities.

When you look at the money being allocated to health facilities; hon. Bahati, we cannot have a sick community. The moment we have a sick society, then we cannot have a productive workforce. Therefore, I appreciate the work of the committee in identifying resources that should actually be reallocated to the areas where they are needed most.

When you look at the Treasury operations and with the submission of the honourable minister, I thought that the interest accrues out of the principal. If the principal is reducing, then why should the interest be increasing? This is obvious in economics.

Regarding NAADS – as the minister of agriculture stated – I think there was misinformation. I have perused thoroughly through the Budget but I have not seen where either NAADS or the National Enterprise Corporation has been affected.

Madam Speaker, regarding funding for NAADs, in future, once we operationalise the Parish Development Model, this is actually where we should take the money. We should take the money to the local Governments, such that we can have close supervision and monitoring.

Regarding NEC that the honourable minister was talking about; as a Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, I remember we provided funding to recapitalise Uganda Air Cargo to resume its operations. We gave them the money they wanted. 

On realising that money, we had to suppress other entities of the sector. We had to suppress NIRA, Ministry of Internal Affairs and Uganda Police, on the promise that we shall take the money back. 

The funding was a one-off; we have taken money back to those areas, including money that we had deducted for contractual staff for National Identification and Registration Authority. We have taken it back.

So, Madam Speaker, I think it was done by the Committee of –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR KAHONDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It was done by the sectoral committee. We scrutinised it, visited the entity and I have a letter from the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, where he had wanted the Shs 10 billion, which we provided. I do not think the minister of agriculture is right to say that the money was for NEC.

When the ministry realised that the committee had identified where they had hidden the money and upon realising that it was for Uganda Air Cargo and a one-off, they shifted it to National Enterprises Corporation, hid it and created a new activity.

Madam Speaker, I have a general observation here. It is not only under the Ministry of Defence but it is a practice all over, wherever money is provided by Parliament as a one-off. When there is an activity - like when we have just concluded elections - the entity tends to hide that budget within the available budget. This practice should stop. 

Regarding the health sector, still on nurses, it could have been an oversight and we need to look for this money. Yesterday, there was a letter circulating from the president of Uganda Nurses and Midwives Association, calling them to go on strike; that the President had promised them just Shs 10,000 as lunch allowance but it has never been provided. 

This is an area where the ministry should actually prioritise, in order to facilitate these people to perform effectively. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.48
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee and Government for this combined report. There are matters we need to take seriously, as legislators. We tend to speak one thing and yet our actions are different. The actions of Government are in the Budget allocation.

We are talking about how the 2021/2022 Budget is underpinned by recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic and the NDP III. However, the contents here are different.

We are talking about scaling up on agriculture, where 68 per cent of our population is involved. However, looking on the other side, to say that we are building an integrated and self-sustaining economy is not honest.

How come we are still exporting 95 per cent of our coffee as raw beans and yet from the start, right from 1986, we have been singing this song; singing, singing, singing. Where is the money? You cannot just continue talking about it. 

We are looking from the wrong side of the telescope, honourable minister. We are on different pages. Where is the money to transform the lives of our people? I can, for instance, talk about the governance and security. That is why you have allocated 17 per cent of our budget. It is put in governance and security, yet the critical areas like minerals have 0.1 per cent. In manufacturing, it is 0.2 per cent; petroleum is 0.7 per cent. How are we going to transform this economy and touch the lives of our people?

Madam Speaker, I find that as long as we do not allocate resources where they belong, we shall continue getting it wrong. I sit on the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, where we appropriated Shs 3.5 trillion in the last financial year. 

However, by the time we came back from the COVID-19 lockdown, it had shot up to Shs 5 trillion. You are now making a proposal for Shs 7 trillion. Are you being fair to us? 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I was looking at the committee’s proposal to allocate Shs 590,235,388,000 to National Medical Stores. This money is being given straight to NMS as an entity and yet it should be given to the vote holders for them to make orders with NMS. That is why we have problems of expired drugs. We have problems of items being supplied that are not needed in our health facilities because money is not being put to the users. Someone in Entebbe and Kampala plans – you cannot plan for the entire country.

This has been a big problem with our Committee on Public Accounts –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude in half a minute. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If we are talking about the health of our people, there is no way you can have the General Manager who is operating as NMS in entirety - a single man agency cannot manage the entire country.

Now that we are going down, it is important that the Committee on Budget reconsiders this because this is part of the recommendations that we made.

Lastly, Lt Col (Rtd) Rwamirama is always known as a clear minister. I was surprised when he started telling lies that he interfaced with the committee about the reallocation of money from NEC. He did not. I am surprised he has even chosen to run away. (Laughter)

So, it is not true that we touched money from NEC. This was the money from the Uganda Air Cargo, and it was a one-off, which we supplied. They are now clinging on it, but in any case, -(Interruption)– I will take the information. 

THE SPEAKER: I told you to close, but now you are taking information. 

MR MACHO: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, Minister Rwamirama is not here, but I would like to inform my colleague and Parliament in particular that I think the minister did not know where he was. During his submission, everything he said is not in the Budget Framework Paper at all. When we were here fighting on behalf of the women for the Women Empowerment Fund, all the ministers were not here. They had left only hon. Bahati, “the Minister of Loans”. (Laughter)

I was shocked that Minister Rwamirama came and began talking, in front of the cameras and the whole country, on what he does not know. Mr Prime Minister, you have a problem. Thank you. (Laughter)

MR SSEKIKUBO: I wanted to conclude, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: No, please. You have taken more than seven minutes. (Laughter) Let us have hon. Asamo. After her, we will invite hon. Lucy Akello who is on zoom. 

1.55
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to thank the Committee on Budget and also the authors of the minority report for supporting the issue of the women enterprise fund. I also thank Government for accepting that that money remains with the women. I know that we would have asked for more like Oliver Twist. If Government wants to reach more people, maybe it could have added us more money. 

I pray that they use the Women Enterprise Fund as a model to reach the parish. It is because this is something that exists already. Money is being paid; they do not need to invent new ideas because the Women Fund is already giving a good direction. 

Secondly, the issue of the CT Scan is welcome. I looked at the budget, and I saw Soroti Hospital is going get Shs 200 million. The other time when we were thanking the doctors from Soroti Regional Referral Hospital, we talked about the condition of that hospital. You will buy a CT Scan and take it to a very – I do not know what type of building it is going to be put in. I need clarification.

At the end of the day, this scan is supposed to be taken care of in a very good environment. When I look at this hospital, I am wondering what type of environment the CT Scan is going to be put in. After one year, we shall be told that it got spoiled. That is wastage. 

The other thing that I want to talk about is the issue of gender and equity compliance. This is an issue of our legal framework. We have about 18 entities who have not fulfilled gender and equity compliance and yet we are going to give them money. Most of them are missions abroad. I think we should teach people a lesson this time by not allocating money to their votes. I want to see some of them saying they have put gender and equity compliance. It is because issues of persons with disabilities and women are just a sentence. 

I do not know whether we are fair in fulfilling this Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance. People should be able to tell us exactly what they are going to do for those various categories of people who are supposed to benefit from equity issues. 

Let this House, for once, deny the 18 entities the money because when we allocate money to their votes, they will again come next year with the same. Some of the institutions do very well, and then again, they go down. 

So, I beg that as we go to supplying money to votes, the Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance is critically handled. The report has already talked about 18 entities. Therefore, this should be handled well. 

I want to conclude by talking about the issues of the interests on loans. My only challenge is that we approve loans and they begin earning interests when they are not performing – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Akello and hon. Wamanga-Wamai. Hon. Lucy Akello is on zoom. Can someone access her? Okay, let us have hon. Wamanga Wamai as we sort out the issues of hon. Lucy Akello. 

1.59
MR WAMANGA WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I speak on the budget, I request for a minute or so to say a few words as the Tenth Parliament is coming to an end. 

I thank you, as the Speaker of Parliament, under whom I have worked for the last 12 years as a Member of Parliament from Mbale Municipality. I want to extend my sincere thanks to you for the guidance and assistance while I was in the Parliament of Uganda. 

I want to also extend my sincere thanks to my colleagues, Members of Parliament; the ones I worked very closely with on different committees and in Parliament generally. Thank you for the friendship and assistance extended to me.

In the same vein, I thank different departments of Parliament. You were very kind and helpful. 

I want to speak about the budget, I feel sad that hon. Bahati is not here. He may not know what, Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) countries are, and how the UN came up and asked financial institutions to forgive highly indebted poor countries from paying back the loans. 

We keep borrowing money. I was a member of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and we used to get loan requests and yet these loans are not utilised, yet they are earning interests. So, I keep wondering why we keep borrowing, when these loans are going to be paid by our grandchildren. 

The Auditor-General is an advisor to Government. Every year in and out, he comes out very clearly in advising Government on borrowing and wasteful expenditure. This country keeps renting. I keep wondering why; why ministries rent when the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development could give them money to build. Money is just being wasted. They have been borrowing money to pay rent for the last 35 years or so.

On missions abroad, Uganda is a member of the UN and there are five permanent members of the UN where we have our missions. We are not going to leave those countries yet we are renting there. I keep wondering, why should we keep renting instead of getting money to buy property like some other countries have done? Even poor countries have bought property in those missions.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs brings in a proposal to buy property and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development turns it down. What a sad story.

Madam Speaker, when you see children – (Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Half a minute to conclude, please.

Mr WAMANGA-wamai: Thank you. You will see in the papers people asking for money to take a child with a hole on the heart for an operation or one with a flat foot. Why doesn’t Government come up and assist these children? Why don’t we put money in the Ministry of Health to buy equipment to help Ugandans? 

We have had fires in schools gutting property of the children and killing them. I remember that girl, Namaganda in Budo who gave her life to save others. They could not even put up a monument in appreciation of her. We have lost very many children. Makerere got gutted, Gayaza, Budo, Rakai and so on. Government does not put money in the Ministry of Internal Affairs to buy fire engines so that they can save people when property comes under fire.

Uganda is an agricultural country and this is an area where we should have put money. Revive the co-operatives although the ones that are there are not doing very well. I come from a coffee growing area but when you look at the coffee that is being exported, it leaves a lot to be desired.

Therefore, as I leave, I want to wish those who are coming in the 11th Parliament well. Look at the issues that concern our people. Thank you. 

1.04
Mr Robert centenary (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to make my last contribution towards the national budget in my tenure of office. I would like to address myself to the Contingency Fund. 

Section 26 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 is very clear about how much money is supposed to be allocated to the fund. When I look at the Shs 62 billion that has been allocated, amidst the challenges that we have in this country: locusts, COVID-19 and floods - specifically in Kasese, we have 446 households - Hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I would like to draw your attention to this; 446 households are in a camp for the last one year after being displaced by the River Nyamwamba. Nothing has been done to ensure that those people live a decent life. Actually, little has been done - apart from the tarpaulins that were provided by the Office of the Prime Minister.

I know that there has been some budget suppression of Shs 285 billion. May I request that some of this money be allocated to settle those people who are encamped. Also, there is Kilembe Mines Hospital, which was washed away. The people of Kasese need to be restored to their normal life. We do not have a hospital and we are only budgeting for Shs 62 billion; who are we budgeting for?

Secondly, there is the issue of declining allocation to the medical sector of 12 per cent. Honestly speaking, with a new wave of the pandemic, wouldn’t it be prudent that we allocate sufficient resources to the medical sector so that we are able to mitigate and also avert the challenges that may come and are related to health? Right now, the country is still grappling with what to do about these pandemics that are changing form and coming back every now and then.

Thirdly, there is domestic borrowing. Having increased it to Shs 11.89 trillion, I think it crowds out companies, especially our banks that are stressed because they do not have any other local sources. I am talking about the local banks specifically because the multi-nationals can have subsidised sources of money. 

The Shs 11.89 trillion creates a competitive environment between our local –(Member timed out.)

2.08
Mr jonathan odur (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by inviting the House to recall that the National Development Plan (NDP) III that was brought to this House was never properly debated. At that time, there was a lot of pressure to pass the Budget and we were supposed to get time and reflect on it. All the issues we are raising here and also in the report of the committee are because some components of NDP III were not thoroughly discussed.

I will cite an example; how do you propose that an arm of Government the Legislature or the Judiciary, supposedly an independent arm of Government, becomes a sub-programme under the Ministry for Presidency? I would like to suggest that if we get time, NDP III should be recalled and members properly debate and align it.

If you look at the Budget strategy that has been proposed, on one hand, there is the private sector development and on the other, we are going to borrow domestically about Shs 11 trillion. This effect has always been felt by the private sector. Once Government starts competing with private sector to borrow, the interest rate goes up. How do you expect the private sector to survive when you, the big bull in the kraal, are also borrowing? This has to be addressed because it is not consistent with what has been proposed.

This Parliament passed and approved new administrative units. It needs about Shs 52 billion to operationalise them. Elections took place in the sub-counties and town councils and there are political leaders in place waiting. When you look through, we have not provided for them. I wonder how Parliament will be viewed.

I would like to suggest that we at least find money to operationalise these units. If Government thinks that we made a mistake, let them bring a motion to recall the districts, cities, sub-counties and town councils and even perhaps other counties so that we have a lean administrative structure that we can deal with.

Nevertheless, there is this white horse called “Local Government” that has been captured by the spirit of decentralisation. How do you decentralise and you do not give them money? Over time, there has been reduction of money going to Local Government and these are the service delivery points. Now we are at 13 per cent.

If we want local governments to perform, we should be able to give them more money because they are more visible and closer to our people.

I would like to touch the principle on compensation in Vote 007. For the last 10 years, Government has been appropriating money to verify war claimants in Lango, Teso and Acholi. I again see here 1.4 for verification. When are you going to pay? These people lost their animals and are waiting.

I should inform the House that there are two categories to be paid. First, there was a court award that has never been appealed. Government did not appeal once the High Court awarded. Secondly, there are people who are claiming. When is Government going to pay this?

Lastly, we should appropriate money. Look at Lira Regional Referral Hospital, Soroti Regional Referral Hospital and Hoima each with just Shs 200 million for development. If you compare with the rest of the regional referral hospitals that are in billions yet we were here thanking the team from Soroti that they have done good work - 

Therefore, I invite you that once we come to appropriation, these recommendations must be taken care of. We should not be taken for granted that we just debate here and it is not reflected when it comes to appropriation. Thank you.

2.15
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the job well done. However, I would like to begin with agriculture. There are 69 per cent of Ugandans living on subsistence agriculture. What does that mean in terms of population? It means 27.2 million people in Uganda are living under subsistence agriculture. If you are to look at the money allocated for agriculture, I do not know whether it will help the 27 million Ugandans. We must think twice and see how we can strengthen the agricultural sector. 

We are living in a COVID-19 environment and we are passing this budget during a COVID era. I do not want us to fear to take risks. My view here is that we must increase the money of the health sector. There must be medicine and equipment. As we talk now, India had relaxed, just like we have done so in Uganda. They were even exporting vaccines at the time but what is happening now is very serious. That is why we must increase the funding for the health sector so that we are able to save lives because we do not know when this coronavirus is going to end. 

Concerning Soroti, all the buildings and wards are dilapidated. The only thing that is not condemned is the medical staff. As we talk now, the buildings, including where the operations take place, the theatre, are dilapidated. Look at the money they have put aside; Shs 200 million. I presume this money is for a CT scan. 

We have talked about giving billions to Kiruddu Hospital –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Conclude.

MR ABALA: Kiruddu Hospital is already developed. Look at Soroti, Lira, Mubende and Hoima which is given Shs 200 million and yet Kiruddu is being allocated Shs 3.5 billion. What are we talking about? Is that regional development? We need to think about this. 

There is a situation whereby 40 agencies did not submit their budgets and 100 also did not submit. This is an embarrassment and an abuse to the laws and the rules that govern the issue of budgeting in this country. They are employed and are earning their salaries. For us here, we are going to approve. In my opinion, we should not approve their budget when we go to supply. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

2.18 
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This financial year, I was at pain when I heard that we sat here and took time - our committee on budget made proposals here and thereafter we heard that Operation Wealth Creation officials sat somewhere and changed the budget. I pray that this time round, what we agree on here, as Parliament, is taken seriously. That is what Government should operate on. Just in case they find that there is necessity, they should come here and talk to the House and ensure that we are respected because we take time here to do our work.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the work they have done but there are very serious recommendations that we need your guidance on. For example, on page 9, they say that the minister responsible for overseeing institutions that fail on gender and equity should be direct to provide a statement to Parliament on what measures they resolve to undertake. 

We need your guidance, Madam Speaker. Are they doing it now before we pass their budget? Or are they doing it after we have passed their budget? We have been grappling with this problem. Ministries, departments and agencies do not support their budgets and do not comply with the law. We need to find a solution. 

On page 20, the committee made statements about agencies that were released money but had higher percentages of unspent balances. Where I find a challenge is that the committee makes no comment about that. They just bypassed it. We need to hear from the chairperson of the Budget Committee. What recommendation has he taken on these agencies, where money was sent and they never spent it? The NAADS Secretariat is one of them with 64 per cent; the Ministry of Education has 68 per cent and the Ministry of Local Government. They have budget lines where they got money and never acted upon it. 

I would like to make a small comment on the Parish Model by insisting that it is a good model to talk about but it should not be a programme. It must be a policy of the Government to implement its programmes at the parish. It should never be a programme where they are looking for money. All their agencies should send their services at the parish level. 

As I conclude, I would like to say that the minority report was highly spot-on on the inadequate funding in the agricultural sector. We may pretend that security is more important than agriculture. For over the years, we have pretended like that but as long as you have poor people that can never take their children to school, that will never treat their people, we are doing a self-defeating approach to the economy. Until a time we choose to put money to the sector that we all depend on, we are just playing around ourselves. 

Madam Speaker, you very well know that there was a commitment on coffee and we are supposed to export 20 million bags by 2025. Over the last two years, they have taken away money from the coffee sector and that is the major agricultural sector for some of the regions here. 

When we say “a funding to the agricultural sector”, we need to reach a point where we can be like countries like Brazil that intentionally provide credit for agriculture at low interest rates, which is not like that of the commercial borrowers. Brazil has gone to that level where they provide specific money for the agricultural sector at low credit of 0.5 or 0.3 per cent. The people participating in the agricultural sector can get the money quickly and be able to pay their loans. 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude. 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: I will conclude by saying that as we make this budget, we should look at those agricultural sector lines; let us put more money there. Thank you very much.

2.22
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I feel sorry for my friend, Hon. Bright Rwamirama. It is out of embarrassment that Hon. Rwamirama left this House. However, I do not blame him. I think the technical people and Hon. Bahati should stop putting people in a situation that embarrasses them because it is the document that Hon. Bahati was reading, whose copy I got it too, which has those wrong figures. 

I think we should demand that Hon. Bahati withdraws the statement he made on the Floor of this House because it is totally wrong and uncoordinated. These figures are not in the Budget Committee’s report or neither are they in the minority committee’s report. I wonder why he allowed his colleague to read these figures that led to the embarrassment of the whole House.

Madam Speaker, I think Hon. Bahati should own up and apologise to this House because this is the document, which you were reading, from which Hon. Rwamirama was quoting. How can you bring a document with wrong figures and embarrass your colleague?

Were you setting him up? –(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, my friend, Hon. Okupa is putting documents on me that I am not aware of. I have not given Hon. Rwamirama any document to read to this House. The documents that I have read are from my ministry. The one Hon. Rwamirama read, is from him. How can he now say that I am the one who has set up? Is he in order to attribute documents, which I do not know?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, can you confirm that the source of those documents is Hon. Bahati?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, Hon. Bahati and his ministry team handed over to me this letter and it titled: “Responses by honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the issues raised by the Budget Committee of the Parliament of Uganda, on the Budget for the financial year 2021/2022.” It is him and his officials that gave it to me. I cannot blackmail you. I cannot be mad. This document is from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

MR BAHATI: I have said if I am to submit a document to Parliament, it must be under my signature or the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and I must lay it on the Table. That is why we have advised Members of Parliament not to go behind us and get information when we are here. If I have information to give to the House, I lay it. Any document I have not laid on the Floor of this House, do not attribute it to me.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, this document which was handed over to me by Hon. Bahati and the Director Budget at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I cannot tell a lie, this is the document. I can even go ahead and name the Director of Budget. Let him disown this document; he is the one who passed this document to me and you were in this House. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you leave that issue of the document.

MR OKUPA: I think we should not allow this to be read on the Floor of the House. What he read is exactly what is on that document.

Madam Speaker, looking at the committee’s report, I am just disappointed. Hoima, Lira, and Soroti referral hospitals have only been allocated Shs 200 million as development expenditure yet other hospitals have been given billions of shillings. The other day we were praising Soroti Hospital staff here and the district has even offered 19 acres of land. We need money to build that hospital.

However, it is surprising to learn that as we give these hospitals these meagre resources, State House is being allocated Shs 12.3 billion for development expenditure and recurrent expenditure Shs 392 billion. President’s Office is getting Development expenditure of Shs 15.4 billion and recurrent of Shs 115 billion. Are we building a new State House? I thought we would want to save the lives of Ugandans. How can Soroti, Lira and Hoima regional referral hospitals be given these meagre resources as development expenditure?

Madam Speaker, I think when we get this, we must be able to reallocate some money and provide for these regional hospitals. 

The other issue is about the cities. When you see the disparity in the allocation of the monies to the cities - I would have expected Jinja City, which was the second largest town, to be given a lot of money but it has been given only Shs 19 billion yet Mbarara City has Shs 31 billion. 

Arua city was given Shs 12 billion, Fort Portal City, Shs 12 billion, and Soroti City, Shs 13 billion as usual and it is the last; it is always given the lowest. Honourable Minister of Finance, why are you marginalising Soroti? You are giving Mbarara City Shs 31 billion and Soroti City only Shs 13 billion, Fort Portal City Shs 12 billion, Lira, Shs 17 billion and Jinja City only Shs 19 billion. I thought Jinja was the second biggest city. How? Mbale City is being given Shs 21 billion. What is the criteria of allocating this money to the cities? 

The money allocated to the National Housing and Construction Company, Madam Speaker, from the Committee on Physical Infrastructure – in fact, they were requesting to be given more than Shs 100 billion. We run a risk of losing two running projects: one in Naalya and Namungoona. They have been abandoned because there is no money to complete them. The construction companies have taken National Housing and Construction Company to court because they have failed to pay. 

First of all, I want to applaud the committee because it has been able to give them Shs 30 million. Madam Speaker, the question that you raised about the national character, we brought it to them, and they said once we complete this, we are ready to roll out to other cities. They want to start with the cities and that is how they are going to roll out.

The other issue, which has not been resolved, and which I want the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to take note, is the issue of Libyans. When are we resolving this matter? There was a proposal that Government repossess the National Housing and Construction Company but the Attorney-General, as usual, is dragging his feet to conclude this matter. They are warring parties and we do not know whom to deal with.

The recommendation talks about cancelling that arrangement; we can pay them the money when they settle down.

The issue of Treasury Bills, I think Hon. Kahonda put it here. The honourable Minister of Finance should really tell us; if the principle is coming down, how can interest be going up? I think this is just foolery unless I am being taught new principles of economics now. Otherwise, I want to agree with Budget Committee that we cut that money because since the principle has come down even the interest rates must come down. It is again in this document, from which Hon. Rwamirama was reading that shows the principle has gone up, which is nowhere in the document. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.30
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to make a few comments on the national debt. I want to thank the colleagues for the contributions they have made. 

The national debt is spiralling as we can all notice and what is disheartening me is that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is comforting himself in the fact that our neighbours are doing so badly. If you want to excel, I think it is not right to compare yourself to poor performers.  The fact that our neighbours are doing very badly, it does not give us the right to over consume and go beyond the threshold of our national debt. 

I think this House should develop a system of demanding for a schedule of the performance of the national debt. I know sometimes they give it before we approve a budget. It is usually given sometime around mid-time. By the time we get to approving a national budget for a year, probably, the situation has changed. 

It makes me feel like we have worked so hard to reach the threshold and we are also working hard to surpass it. Therefore, I would like to hear the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development talk about how they intend to bring this down. Otherwise, with the poor performance of loans and the continued increase of the national debt, we are not saying or doing anything to bring it down. We are continually going up with our consumption. I would like to hear the minister of finance giving us a plan on how he intends to bring this down and giving us a schedule of how these loans are reaching their expiry debts before we continue approving loans. 

We are reaching a point of no return. It is already said that upon every head of a Ugandan, there is a debt of Shs 1.5 million. I do not want to think that my grandchildren are going to come and pay debts, which we are accruing because of our own indiscipline.

I recall that this Parliament opted for the zoning approach of this country, but when I look at the budgets, year in, year out, I do not see anything to the effect of implementing that kind of decision that was made in this House. Do we make decisions for the sake of it? 

We are complaining about some parts of the country being underfunded while others are being funded very highly. We are not seeing how to implement what we decided upon in this House. Can the minister tell us: did we throw out that proposal by this House? What are we doing in the place of that? Thank you. 

2.34
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. I would also like to appreciate the committee. The most difficult task we always have in this House is to balance the budget. On a day like this one, people knock heads because everyone wants to gain. It is not easy. 

Hon. Bahati, the Minister of State for Planning, I would like to appreciate you. It is not easy to be where you are. We are at a time where this pandemic has taught every country a lesson. 

I would like to start with the issue of health. My proposal is that we double the figures and make sure that health is given 24 per cent of this year’s budget; not just the 12 per cent that we are talking about. Let us not take things lightly. The roads can stay for now. We can simply attend to the bridges so that everyone is able to cross to the other side of the country but we stay the rest. 

I am concerned about the issue of Soroti. The hospital in Soroti has done a tremendous job. Last time, we paid tribute to Dr Epodoi and the team. Today, the twin who survived has been discharged by God’s grace. It is good news for us. 

This kind of budgeting now shows one thing: that we normally speak here for the sake of speaking. I have seen people raising voices here but raising those voices in vain. After making this noise, where does it end? This issue perturbs me (Interjections) Yes, it becomes noise, when no action is following it. 

I have the issue of inequality. It is evident in this entire budgeting process. What are the formulae being applied in determining who gets what? Issues of regional balance – even when we talk about road networks, who gets how many kilometres? Our road from Kumi to Serere, via Ngora, up to date, has not been budgeted for. Yet some places have kept on getting a budget for tarmac. We all pay the loans. What happens? I think we have a big problem.

To reverse a little and go to the issue of revenue collection, just to follow up on the observation made by the committee on the issue of domestic debt. 

On sustainability, we are already at the bar. If the limit is 20 per cent yet we are talking of 19.9 per cent, that is behaving like petrol stations. They write the price of fuel and instead of saying Shs 4000, they put Shs 3,999. They remove one digit so that it looks like there is a change. We have already hit the bar and so, I do not know what we shall do.

I beg that this country accepts one thing. The most important thing right now is to budget for health. The second one is to attend to the productivity of our people. Let us try to create demand. Can we attend to post-harvest handling for agriculture? Can we create markets for these agricultural products? If we did that, we shall survive the effects of the pandemic. 

Finally, the issue of the money that you always send to this development bank - there are sectors which have remained suffering like entertainment, which is not operating up to now. They have never been attended to. If we do not balance the country and allow those people to recover, we shall sink together in one big boat. Thank you. 

2.39
MR FRANCIS MUKULA (Independent, Agule County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for the job well done and remind you that this is my last submission. I am going on sabbatical leave and it is intentional. 

I am an advocate of corruption eradication and this is mainly why I withdrew to study the country for these five years (Laughter). Nevertheless, you have my support and we are many out there. You have been a good mama and so, you must go through. We are definitely going to do something out there (Applause). 

Whether you are reallocating resources, or you have planned for Shs 100 trillion or not, without fixing this disease called “corruption” and putting energies into eradication of corruption, we are wasting time. 

In Uganda today, facts be told, corruption has become culture. Culture is the way people live in terms of dressing, taking malwa and others. To rub it out is not easy. The question is: what do we do, to this disease? 

This budget that we are discussing today, is like a pot, which has micro holes. Why do I say that “micro holes?” The mind-set of the implementers of this budget is that a person sleeps and says, “What percentage am I getting from this cash?” That is the issue now.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR MUKULA: We need to do two things: increase funding for the systems implementers or systems controllers, and also maybe, we get some budget line for pastors, reverends; we co-operate in some ministries, to try to talk to our people. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Mukula.

2.42
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County,Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the work of the committee in putting together the report of this budget, and I would like to submit from a point of appreciation; specifically to the allocation made to the regional referral hospitals, to acquire the CT scans.

It is so rampant these days that most of the people are referred for scans, but there are no scan machines in the hospitals. This is a step forward that we need to appreciate.

However, travelling to the regional referral hospitals is a bit of a problem for most of our people, and I would like to say that there should be a step to enhance this initiative, so that we provide the CT scans at the general hospitals. 

As leaders, most of the times the people come to us and say, “I have been told to go for a scan but I do not have the money”. This speaks that we need to acquire these machines for the general hospitals as well.

I will seek clarification from the committee, because a general search on the internet provides that a CT scan costs between $ 2 to 3 million, but the provision on the report is giving $350,000. We would like to know which type of machines you are acquiring. I hope they are not going to be substandard.

When you look at the search and on the internet, still you have a refurbished CT machine costing $65,000. So, here, I thought that we will be looking at planning to acquire these machines for the general hospitals, as well.

Madam Speaker, my second issue is about this Contingency Fund provision.  This fund to me is directive; a creature of the statute; but here, it is like a discretion of the finance minister to see what it provides. I thought that this is a statutory creature; specifically by Section 26 of the Public Finance Management Act. You cannot provide Shs 62 billion, when the law provides that there should be over Shs 200 billion for this particular item of the budget.

I think there is need to shift these contingency issues to settle the problems of Uganda. Remember, the provisions of monies we gave and the monies that were raised from the public towards support to Covid-19, but they have never been accounted for.

These monies went into wasteful expenditure; foodstuffs which were bought were substandard, and some of it was disposed because it was rotten.

I happened to see in one store where food was picked and thrown away, because it could not be supplied to the people. However, if there is a strict accountability regime, this money would be provided for under the law. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.47
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to make some contribution towards the line of support to northern Uganda, especially on the Peace Recovery and Development Plan. 

This is a plan that was supported to ensure that northern Uganda has an affirmative action to get on board with the rest of the country.

Over Shs 95 billion was appropriated for this cause, but when we struggled and insisted that this money be given back to where it should be; we are amazed that this money has been given back with a very heavy subtraction.

We need the Shs 20 billion that was removed from the Peace, Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP) to be reinstated, because we cannot have plans that should be implemented and on-going to just be thrown out.

It is logical that in any society when you do affirmative action - because it giving advantage to the disadvantaged; just like saying that let the children eat, but if you begin as an adult to share with the children with your big fingers, what will the children have? We are just recovering. We request that the Shs 20 billion that was subtracted with very simple arithmetic be taken back. 

Added to that, Madam Speaker, I raised a matter of national importance two weeks ago; on issues pertaining the Uganda Printers and Publishing Corporation in Entebbe, and you directed that the presidency minister comes and reports to this House after two weeks. The two weeks have elapsed and the minister has not showed up, and yet the UPPC is just in a coma. This is a Government printer that was established in 1902 - they are limping and nothing is being given to support them.

All ministries go and print their work outside; in the other commercial areas. I request that there should be a revisit to ensure that our printer is given a state of the art.

We have also learnt that many Government documents are getting lost in some of the printeries around. We need UPPC to be supported in this budget at least for the first time. For all this period they are suffering. I beg to move.

2.50
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI	(FDC,	Budadiri County, West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, thank you. I would like to ask the finance minister; I hope he has a pen to record. This is the budget we have been passing in the last three years, and this is what we have been getting. In 2018/2019, you had budgeted Shs 35.05 trillion, but you managed to raise Shs 31.2 billion, and you got a deficit of Shs 4 trillion. When it came to releases, you actually spent Shs 30.6 trillion and you took back Shs 0.6 trillion but never returned it to the entities which had not performed.

On the one of 2019/2020, you came with Shs 42.7 trillion. You got Shs 37 trillion, got a deficit of Shs 5.7 trillion and when it came to actual releases, you released Shs 35 trillion and there was a deficit of Shs 2 trillion, even on the releases. That means Shs 2 trillion was swept back. 

What am I trying to drive at? You are bringing very big figures, yet you know that you will not make it. You are telling accounting officers that under Section 15 of the PFMA, you have approved their work plans and they then come to Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I want to emphasise this; the chairman of the Committee on Budget talked about it. It says, “After approval of the annual budget by Parliament, the Secretary to Treasury shall issue the annual cash flow plan of Government, based on the procurement plans, work plans and recruitment plans, approved by Parliament.”

It says: “An accounting officer shall commit the budget of a vote, based on the annual cash flow plan issued under this section.”

Madam Speaker, I am raising this because we have approved a work plan, recruitment plan and procurement plan. The minister does not come back to amend those work plans because he has given less money. We are continuing to add money and blaming non-performance, yet the first person who is causing non-performance –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You will need this thing to deal with that. Madam Speaker, on page 27 of the committee report, grants is missing. You are only talking about borrowing domestically. So, what happens to the grants? Are we going to do off-budget? I request the committee to help me.

On minerals, there is a clear report which says that minerals are being taken out of this country in form of samples. People come and claim that they are carrying trailers of soil to go and test samples, yet they are taking minerals in those trailers.

Why? The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has refused to provide money for weighbridges, to make sure that inspectors of mining are not there. It is believed that if we invest more money in weighbridges and inspectors, the mining sector is going to be one of the main performing sectors with more NTR to fund your Budget.

Honourable colleagues, I would propose that at an appropriate time, we should put more money in minerals, so that we collect more money in that sector. 

For the entities which have not submitted budgets, it means the accounting officer has failed. If the accounting officer has failed, there is nothing we have to wait for. The entity is not the one which failed. There is no way you can say Parliament has failed; it is an individual in Parliament, who was meant to do an activity, who has failed and that is the person you should deal with.

Madam Speaker, I want – at an appropriate time – us to retire these accounting officers, in the interest of the people of Uganda. I am looking forward to seeing sanctions taken against such officers who are non-performers.

Finally, investment in the health sector is very important. At an appropriate time, we are going to move this Budget to take care of the health sector. If we have no medicine in the hospitals where we all go, we will be doing a disservice to ourselves. 

To go and dig, to go to school, to go and drink, to go and dance, to come to Parliament –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please close.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.56
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also support the committee and thank them for the good work. 

Madam Speaker, I will speak on three issues, starting with the issue of the cities. When you look at the figures that have been allocated - I have just been consulting with Arua City and it seems somebody just sat in the Ministry of Finance and decided to give whatever figures he wishes for the cities.

The disparities here are glaring. Some of the municipalities actually have more funds allocated to them for development, leaving cities. I thought that the intention of this Parliament, together with Government, to create these regional cities was to take services closer to the people.

Now, you give Arua Shs 12 billion and then give Mbarara Shs 31 billion. Do you want people from West Nile to migrate and go to Mbarara –(Laughter)– and yet you had created Arua City for them to remain there, so that they can get employment opportunities there?

Madam Speaker, I think that as we reach appropriation stage, some of these issues have to be rationalised, so that we start from the word go. This is the first budget for these cities and they need to start at par. This business of creating disparities right from the start, so that others “abalala bakone”, then “abalala bakole ki?” This will not be entertained.

Hon. Bahati, take note. When we reach appropriation stage, we have to rationalise these figures, the way the person who put them rationalised them in the Ministry of Finance.

The second issue regards universities. It was again this Parliament which created these universities. I am happy that almost all the 15 cities now actually have a public university –(Interjections)– Yes, we shall come there. There is at least something that these universities are now doing but the monies that they require to make an impact have not been given to them.

Muni University has always been in the corridors of Parliament here, lobbying for what –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR ATIKU: Muni University has always been in the corridors of Parliament here, lobbying for what Government should have done in their full right if they meant by establishing these universities in these regions. Once we reach appropriation stage, the issue of funding for universities needs to be looked into.

Last but not least, Madam Speaker, is the issue of affirmative action for northern Uganda. There was an attempt actually for dissolving some of the affirmative funding to northern Uganda, especially to the Ministry in charge of Northern Uganda.

If it were not for us responding quickly, I think we would not be talking about the ministry in charge of Northern Uganda; yet we know very well that this ministry was established in the Office of the Prime Minister to bring the people of those regions that suffered under the LRA war at par with the rest of the country. However, it has taken more than 20 years yet we have never been at par.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR ATIKU: So, Madam Speaker, the issue of the Shs 20 billion that has been removed from OPM must be returned. That money still has a purpose. If we are to remove affirmative action from the region, we need to evaluate the impact of the programmes that have been put for the region, before we transition to normal funding.

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.01
MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am concerned about the budget release, which is not spent by most of the MDAs. Looking at the report from the Committee on Budget, in Financial Year 2020/2021, there are quite a lot of MDAs which did not spend their money. For example, NAADs did not spend 64 per cent of their money; Local Government did not spend 83 per cent of their money; UNRA did not spend 10.4 per cent of their money; Ministry of Education and Sports did not spend 68 per cent of their money and many other sectors.

I do not know why we release a lot of money to these MDAs and they fail to spend it. I would like to ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development why the local governments, ministries and agencies failed to spend this money. We are now in the budgeting period and we want to add them the money they are requesting for. They are telling us that they are meeting challenges every day. However, these people are not spending their money.

I do not know what challenges these people face. Probably, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should, first of all, do a detailed research on why these MDAs fail to spend money. This is taxpayers’ money. 

When I consulted our people of Kole, they said one of the reasons why they are not spending their money is the late release by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We would like to know why funds are released late, and as a result, our people fail to spend this money yet we have lack of water, poor education and lack of health services.

Let the finance minister tell us the appropriate measures they are going to take so that this money, which is released, is spent appropriately.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I am seeing other areas like Uganda AIDS Commission being given very little appropriation. We know that HIV is still existing. Coronavirus should not take us off the prevalence of HIV/AIDS. We have young people who are really suffering with HIV and people are still dying of it. More money should be allocated to Uganda AIDS Commission. Last time, we passed regulations of HIV Trust Fund. I would like to bring it to the attention of this Parliament that no money has been allocated to the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund to cater for –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Just conclude please. 

MS ALYEK: Let me wind up, Madam Speaker. We want the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund so that we are able to have our domestic financing for our HIV/AIDS. Should the donors withdraw, Uganda will go into what – I do not know how to call it, but we shall see the prevalence increasing and many people dying because they will not have access to services. 

Another thing that I would like to touch briefly is the Department of Ethics and Integrity. It has just been allocated Shs 650 million. Ethics and integrity is very important. I must assure this House that this is the department which should check morals in this country. It should check morals in planning, budgeting and even implementation of programmes. They are also the people who are supposed to check corruption in this country.

I think we are not seeing this sector performing because they have ever been given very little money. We want morals instilled; let them be allocated something reasonable so that they are active on the ground and we see how these other things I have talked about can be checked. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Where is Hon. Ruth Katushabe? Then I will invite Hon. Godfrey Onzima. 

3.05
MS RUTH KATUSHABE (NRM, Bukomansimbi North County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I thank the Committee on Budget for the good job. I thank them for considering the rural water. However, the allocation is still minimal especially for rehabilitation of broken boreholes and drilling of water sources. I also thank the committee for the allocation of funds for national water for the newly created town councils. 

I want to draw the attention of this House to the health centres IV. There are some health centres that were to be upgraded to health centres IV, Kitanda Health Centre III in Bigasa Sub-county in my constituency. The Ministry of Health came and inspected it and they said they cannot upgrade that health centre because it did not have a theatre. I request this House to allocate funds for such health centres so that we decongest the referral hospitals. 

I also add my voice to those who said that we should put more funds to post-harvest handling issues and also value addition to increase the prices of our products. Thank you. 

3.08
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I just want to raise one issue. Kayunga Hospital and Yumbe Hospital were given money to be upgraded and also expanded.

Before this budgeting process, Yumbe District Local Government received a lot of communication from the Ministry of Public Service and Ministry of Health to upgrade the district hospital to a regional referral hospital status. This was because the size of the hospital and the new structure of the civil servants of 534 were so big. The bedding capacity of the hospital also increased to 250 for the ordinary wards, and 26 beds for the private wards.

The ministries communicated that Yumbe Hospital was uplifted into a referral hospital. As we talk now, however, there is a new communication that has been sent to the district that they should budget for the hospital at a district hospital status, and yet the number of the people who are supposed to be employed has been increased. The number of beds – in other words, the costs are beyond the capacity of the district!

When I consulted the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget and also the Chairperson of the Committee on Health, they told me that Yumbe Hospital was considered. I have not seen it in their reports. 

As I talk now, Kayunga Hospital has been taken and considered for upgrade, but Yumbe Hospital has been left out. So, I wanted to get clarification from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the criteria they used to consider Kayunga Hospital for upgrade and for Yumbe Hospital should remain as a district hospital. 

It is because, as we talk now, the size of the hospital and even the number of the people who are supposed to be employed there is beyond the planned capacity. 

Honourable minister, when my technical team called me, after they had tried to find clarification from the Ministry of Health, they said they were told that they should talk to their politicians. So, if resources are supposed to be allocated just because a politician has talked about it, and the allocation is not based on the facts on the ground, I do not know whether it will help. At the end of the day, they will look at the faces of politicians and say, “For this one, give and for the other one, don’t give”. I do not think that would be the best way of allocating our resources.

Even when the President went there during the campaigns, he opened – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude. 

MR GODFREY ONZIMA: When the President went to visit Yumbe as a district purposely to commission this hospital during the campaigns, it was commissioned as a regional referral hospital, taking into consideration the catchment area from Adjumani to Maracha. However, it has been left out. We need clarification on this particular matter. Thank you. 

3.11
Mr keefa kiwanuka (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two things at the back of my mind. The first one is that after a long journey that we have travelled together, I have not heard any other communication but that Parliament is being prorogued today.  

The second issue is the budget. On prorogation of Parliament, at the back of my mind, I remember that bus I used to take when I was young from Kiboga to Kampala very early in the morning, at 5.00 a.m. Sometimes, we would miss it and if we did, we had to come back the next day. Travelling on that bus, people would alight at different points.

We have all travelled together on that bus and we are alighting at different points. Some colleagues are alighting today and others are continuing. To all of us, I say –

The Speaker: Honourable members, the prorogation will be formally on the Order Paper.

Mr kiwanuka: Thank you. Probably I will not have the opportunity to say something about this. I would like to say that it has been a pleasure travelling with you all. May our success be a source of greater inspiration. May our failure be a source of greater dynamo to rededicate our efforts.

I would like to also thank the Budget Committee and Parliament as a whole. Unfortunately, we are often presented with something, which is like a fait accompli. It is very difficult twisting it around to get something which is in the best interests of the people we represent.

As National Resistance Movement (NRM) Members of Parliament, we often get castigated; “Why have you passed a budget, which has not prioritised health, water or any other production area?” 

I would like to thank colleagues in sectoral committees, the Budget Committee and the whole august House for having looked at this and tried to do some reallocations. They have found money to invest in the priority sectors, which had not been prioritised by the authorities that be. 

I am particularly pleased that we have found money for the health sector and water sector, which have suffered devastating cuts. They have suffered a cut of over Shs 700 billion. Sometimes you wonder; what is the priority of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development?

My humble prayer is that this money be released. It is one thing for the money to be passed and another for it to be released. It is my humble prayer that these humble allocations that have been found can be released. The agencies on the other hand should do what is expected of them so that they can implement what they are expected to do.

I am alarmed by the increasing budget, which we are struggling to fund. Because of that, we have two allocating authorities; Parliament appropriating and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development also doing its own allocation allegedly because of the money that it would have raised. This is increasingly becoming a big challenge. 

The other challenge we have is that because we have a budget, which we cannot sustain, we are increasing taxes thereby increasing the burden on Ugandans. On the other hand, we are increasingly taking recourse to loans, which are also becoming a problem.

Honourable minister, you should find reason to explain why you have to always come in and explain that our borrowing is still sustainable. Of course, you have to explain because there are concerns about it –

The Speaker: Please conclude.

Mr kiwanuka: Let me conclude by appealing for austerity measures. I am pleased that this has been picked up by the Budget Committee. We need austerity measures so that we can bring whatever envelope we have into what can be reasonably managed. Thank you. 

3.17
Mr Johnson ssenyonga (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to thank the Budget Committee for the work well done. However, as my colleagues have said, there are some gaps where we feel that the chairperson or the ministry should come out and speak on.

At first, they had budgeted for road equipment for those districts that do not have them. In the final one, they do not appear. For a district to hire or get road equipment from a neighbouring district is very difficult. Sometimes, it does not make sense as to why we created the new district when the service delivery remains almost the same. Therefore, when it comes to road equipment, the unfunded districts should be considered.

When you look at the Budget, you see a lump sum of domestic debt. We are going to pay it but it is not clearly indicated what one goes for what. You are aware that we have very many other internal debts including suppliers and Buganda Kingdom. I do not know whether that is also included in the domestic debt.

Finally, by way of fighting unemployment where the majority are the youth and this is a challenge to this country - skilling Uganda as a way forward and a dream of His Excellency the President should be emphasised. However, when you look at the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, which is concerned, there is little money allocated to skilling Uganda. If there is any chance, as we are going to the next step, they should be considered for more funding. Thank you. 

3.19
Ms robina rwakoojo (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Budget Committee for the report. I am particularly thankful for what has been given to the Judiciary because they have been having case backlog and it has been bogging down its work.

They have also been trying to construct courts upcountry in a bid to bring judicial services nearer to the people who have been walking long distances. I am grateful that we shall see this beginning.

We are also going to have the Court of Appeal having sessions in the various regions because right now, it is centred here. That will also make justice come nearer to the people.

I would like to also thank Government for the finances that have been given towards eradication of ticks because it has been a menace. I am hopeful that the various diseases that have come up like Foot and Mouth Disease will be dealt with and the veterinary officers at the local level will be put to use. I hope we shall have sensitisation before that is done.  

I am also thankful for the water and health sectors being able to receive money and for the retention of the UWEP Fund. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the Minister of Justice is not here. However, I just want to urge the Government to support the Office of the Directorate of Public Prosecutions because there are insufficient prosecutors in the country. We are improving the Judiciary side but I think we sometimes forget that the Judiciary requires the state prosecutors to be able to manage the cases. I hope the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and the Committee on Budget will consider the needs of the Directorate of the DPP because it is hindering access to justice.

Can I now invite the Minister of Northern Uganda? 

3.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR NORTHERN UGANDA (Ms Grace Kwiyucwiny): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My colleagues, I would like to thank you very much for highlighting the budget for northern Uganda. I would also like to thank the Committee on Budget because I was very worried about the discussions, as they went on. 

However, I would like to thank you that you have been able to reinstate the PRDP Fund. We had just concluded PRDP 3 and we had extensively discussed a successor programme with the communities, the elders and the youths so that they look forward to a higher level. This is going to change a lot of lives. 

As you are aware, the PRDP Fund has been focusing on livelihood and small community projects. I would like to reiterate the fact that the minority report has highlighted post-harvest and marketing because that is where we want to go. We would like to go higher and attract productivity; industries and agro-processing. As we cry out for employment opportunities, you can be sure that it is only factories and industries that can promote a high level of employment. 

I would really like to thank you for also recognising the level of poverty, as you discussed this budget because Northern Uganda has 900,000 households living below the poverty level. 

I am supporting this as well because we discussed the Parish Model, which we think is going to draw a lot of participation and involvement of the local people and promote accountability and impact. Many friends have stated that the Government does things and there is no impact but when we go down to the Parish Model, it is going to generate interest and ownership. I think its impact will be paramount so I have really stood up to say, “Thank you to Parliament and the committee.” 

I request that the outstanding debts to Northern Uganda reflected in incomplete structures of classrooms, of cultural leaders’ houses, storage facilities –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: One more minute to conclude. 

MS KWIYUCWINY: The incomplete infrastructure of Northern Uganda could still be addressed by the budget that goes under the presidential pledges; this budget has been cut over the last three years. It is always reducing to the extent that it is only now 2.9 billion from Shs 28 billion. So, some of you will not see Northern Uganda in your districts because it is impossible to just use the Shs 2.9 billion to reach Elgon, Bukedi, which also form part of Northern Uganda. 

I appeal to you that if this is reinstated, it can help us reach and address the incomplete images we are looking at in Northern Uganda. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, several movers have made a contribution -  

3.26
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the Committee on Budget for the work well done and taking back the UWEP Fund as well as the PDRP, which is an equalisation fund. 

Some of us did not have a lot of time to scrutinise this budget, especially but I would like to say that Gulu City is one of the biggest cities. Some cities are allocated Shs 33 billion while Gulu City is allocated Shs 19 billion, and yet there are a lot of problems in the city. Maybe we will have to be educated and follow up this budget. 

The minority report came up to point at the gaps. For example, there is a fund that we do give for disaster preparedness. It is important for us to plan. My prayer is that you take what the Opposition has pointed out in the minority report in totality. 

I have a lot of complaints here but because I have not been closely following the budget – you see even Gulu Regional Referral Hospital has a lot of issues including the shortage of nurses, the dilapidated buildings and the capital development fund for finishing up the accommodation for the nurses. They do not have accommodation and the budget is very small. 

I would like to thank you for the CT scan but we still have a lot of problems, which we will continue pointing at. Nevertheless, we thank the Committee on Budget for the hard work that they did within a very short time and came up with this budget. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the hard work you have done this week; sitting both morning and afternoon from Monday to Friday. (Applause) We will always pray for God to bless you abundantly for being committed to the service of the people of Uganda. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do resolve into a Committee of Supply. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2021/2022 

Central Government

Votes 001 to 024, 109 to 129, 132 to 134, 136 to 162, 301 to 310, 312 to 321

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 2,883,598,844,000 be provided for under Votes 001 to 024, 109 to 129, 132 to 134, 136 to 162, 301 to 310, 312 to 321 – Central Government as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2021/2022.

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 2,883,598,844,000 be provided for under Votes 001 to 024, 109 to 129, 132 to 134, 136 to 162, 301 to 310, 312 to 321 – Central Government as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2021/2022. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Referral Hospitals
 
Recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2021/2022 

Votes 163 to 180

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 178,272,327,000 be provided for under Votes 163 to 180 – Referral Hospitals as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2021/2022.

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 178,272,327,000 be provided for under Votes 163 to 180 – Referral Hospitals as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2021/2022.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Foreign Missions

Recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2021/2022

Votes 201 to 238.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 190, 231, 999,000 be provided for Votes 201 to 238 – Foreign Missions as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2021/2022.

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 190, 231, 999,000 be provided for Votes 201 to 238 – Foreign Missions as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2021/2022.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Local Governments

Recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2021/2022 

Votes 501 to 515, 517 to 636, 752, 757, 762, 764, 770, 772 797, 851 to 860

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 3,408,765,462,000 be provided for under Votes 501 to 515, 517 to 636, 752, 757, 762, 764, 770, 772, 797, 851 to 860 – Local Governments as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2021/2022. 

I, now put the question that a total sum of Shs 3,408,765,462,000 be provided for under Votes 501 to 515, 517 to 636, 752, 757, 762, 764, 770, 772, 797, 851 to 860 – Local Governments as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2021/2022.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Total Recurrent

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that a total sum of 12,660,868,633,000 be provided for as total recurrent expenditure for the various votes for Financial Year 2021/2022.

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 12,660,868,633,000 be provided as total recurrent expenditure for the various votes for Financial Year 2021/2022.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development Expenditure 

Central Government for Financial Year 2021/2022

Votes 001 to 024, 101 to 129, 139 to 134, 136 to 162, 301 to 310, 312 to 321.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 13, 823,217,958,000 be provided for under Votes 001 to 024, 101 to 129, 139 to 134, 136 to 162, 301 to 310, 312 to 321 – Central Government as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2021/2022.

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 13, 823,217,958,000 be provided for under Votes 001 to 024, 101 to 129, 139 to 134, 136 to 162, 301 to 310, 312 to 321 – Central Government as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2021/2022.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development Expenditure 

Referral Hospitals for the Financial Year 2021/2022 

Votes 163 to 180.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 30,953,723,000 be provided for under Votes 163 to 180 – Referral Hospitals as development expenditure for Financial Year 2021/2022.

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 30,953,723,000  be provided for under Votes 163 to 180 – Referral Hospitals as development expenditure for Financial Year 2021/2022.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development expenditure for Foreign Missions for the Financial Year 2021/2022

Votes 201 to 221 and 223 to 238.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 32,923,850,000 be provided for under Votes 201 to 221, 223 to 238 – Foreign Missions as development expenditure for Financial Year 2021/2022
 
I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 32,923,850,000 be provided for under Votes 201 to 221, 223 to 238 – Foreign Missions as development expenditure Financial Year 2021/2022.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development Expenditure for Local Government for the Financial Year 2021/2022

Votes 501 to 515, 517 to 636, 752, 757, 762, 764, 770, 772 to 797, 851 to 860

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This was the point where I had requested that we would have to rationalise the figures for the cities. I remember very well all these cities started together and this is the first time they are getting a budget line. 

Therefore, it is my prayer that with colleagues, we rationalise these figures:

First, because there was no clear formula that was used to give Mbarara City Shs 31 billion for development, Arua Shs 12 billion for development. It would, therefore, be in order to be treated equally at the beginning of this development initiative. Can we have these figures rationalised before we pass this motion? Thank you. 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The point of procedure I am raising is in regard to the process we go through to come to this stage. The policy statements were laid before this House and referred to the relevant sectoral committees. In this case, the subject matter falls under the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. 

The committee reported back, laid the report before the House and the report was referred to the Budget Committee for further harmonisation and scrutiny. Now we are back here with all the figures, having gone through all these processes. I have a feeling that the point the honourable colleague is going to raise is likely to destabilise all the figures we have come up with in the schedule. Therefore, is it procedurally right for the Member to come at this stage? He had an opportunity to come to the committee but he opted to come to the House. Is he procedurally right? Thank you.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Under rule 152, once a Vote number is called, an honourable member is free to propose that the amount be reallocated. It is within our rules during the Committee of Supply. Is the chairperson of the finance committee in order to come and misguide the House that at this stage, a Member of Parliament is not allowed to make any proposal on a budget item?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I want to supply this information to hon. Atiku and Members; that as we allocate these resources, there are some factors that we consider. 

One of the factors is non-tax revenue of a local government. If you indicate a higher figure and you have capacity to collect more money, that will be reflected in your allocation. 

The second is the World Bank programme, where we are doing the roads in different cities and municipalities. It also depends on the performance of a certain municipality. If you performed well, the resources will also be recorded accordingly. 

In other words, you find that Mbarara is going to receive more money for USMID because of the approved programme for USMID than Arua and that gives you the difference. Mbarara is getting more money than Arua because it has indicated that it has capacity to collect more. 

These figures of non-tax revenue come from –(Interjections)– I am giving you actual information. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we need time to understand and appreciate the reasons for this, which I suggest that we handle in the new budget cycle, which is going to start in October.

I put the question that the sum of Shs 1,072,832,199,000 be provided for under Votes 501, 515, 517-636, 752, 757, 762, 764, 770, 772, 797 and Votes 851-860 local governments as development expenditure for Financial Year 2021/2022.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Total Development Expenditure for the Financial Year 2021/2022

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now propose the question that total sum of Shs 14,959,927,730,000 be provided for as total development expenditure for the various votes for Financial Year 2021/2022. 

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 14,959,927,730,000 be provided as total development expenditure for the various votes for Financial Year 2021/2022. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Statutory Expenditure for the Financial Year 2021/2022

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 17,157,992,325,000 be provided for as statutory expenditure for Financial Year 2021/2022. 

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 17,157,992,325,000 be provided for as statutory expenditure for Financial Year 2021/2022.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Grand Total Expenditure for the Financial Year 2021/2022

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose the question that total sum of Shs 44,778,788,688,000 be provided for as the grand total of recurrent, development and statutory expenditure for the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

I now put the question that total sum of Shs 44,778,788,688,000 be provided for as the grand total of recurrent, development and statutory expenditure for the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga presiding.)

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the budgetary proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Fiscal Year 2021/2022 and passed them with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall suspend the House for one hour and come back for appropriation. 

3.49
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I think this will be the last budget in the 10th Parliament. I would like to take this opportunity to applaud our chairperson, hon. Amos Lugoloobi, for having steered the Budget Committee very well. (Applause)

He needs to have the spirit of reconciliation and to work in harmony. At the beginning, when the Opposition was coming up with the minority report, he thought that we were being hostile. Increasingly, he started learning that actually our being firm and determined to change the process of budgeting has actually made the Committee on Budget very important in our Parliament. 

I personally would like to thank him - and I attended the thanksgiving ceremony when he came out of hospital. We were all very happy that the Lord gave him back to us and I believe that if he is back to Parliament, I know he is likely to be made Minister of Finance. However, we will definitely miss him in the Committee on Budget.

Madam Speaker, that is all I wanted to say; to appreciate our committee. We have got a very sharp guy here, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, who has also been very consistent. I am praying that he will be the next Leader of the Opposition –(Laughter)– if he does, then I will have to find somebody else to escort me in the process. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this Budget. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much, honourable members. On that note, I also would like to thank all the Members of the Committee on Budget; both the majority and the minority side because each has added value.

I would like to assure the Members that the issues coming from the Opposition have assisted us and the Government to make some policy changes. All of us have worked together, from different directions but aiming at improving service delivery to Ugandans. So, I really want to thank you. Actually, hon. Kivumbi always writes a minority report –(Laughter)– but that is okay.

Can the Clerk reflect the entire details of the Committee on Budget in the Hansard for our records?

(Report on Committee on Budget in Annex 1.)

House is suspended to 5.00 p.m. 

(House rose at 3.53 p.m. and was suspended to 5.00 p.m.)

(On resumption at 5.24 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you back to the afternoon’s sitting, so that we can complete our business for today. Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2021

5.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2021” be read the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded, honourable members? (Members rose_) Yes, seconded. Justification?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the Bill is aimed at availing resources to transform the lives of our ordinary Ugandans; the people we represent here. 

It has the Parish Development Model that will directly put money in the pockets of the 3.2 million households which live in a subsistence economy. It will continue to strengthen the security and maintain peace and expand infrastructure and generate more energy, which is a catalyst for industrialisation. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Does our committee have a report?

5.26
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, I beg to present a report of the Committee on Budget on the Appropriation Bill, 2021.

Madam Speaker, on 1 April 2021, the Appropriation Bill, 202l was read for the first time and subsequently referred to the Committee on Budget for consideration. In accordance with Rule 170(3)(c), the committee considered the Bill and reports as follows:

Methodology 

The committee held consultative meetings with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; and examined the Bill to ascertain the consistency and accuracy of the estimates, as indicated in the schedule to the Appropriation Bill, against the resolution by Parliament on the same. 

The object of the Bill is to provide for: 

    a) The authorisation of public expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of a sum of twenty-seven trillion, six hundred and twenty billion, seven hundred ninety six million, three hundred sixty three thousand shillings (Shs 27,620,796,363,000) only and; 

    b) Withdrawal of funds from the Petroleum Fund into the Consolidated Fund a sum of Shs 200 billion only, to meet expenditure for the Financial Year 2021/2022 and to appropriate the supplies granted. 

We are moving under the following legal framework. Article l56(1) provides, “The heads of expenditure contained in the estimates, other than expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund by the Constitution or any Act of Parliament, shall be included in a Bill to be known as an Appropriation Bill, which shall be introduced into Parliament, to provide for the issue from the Consolidated Fund of the sums necessary to meet that expenditure and the appropriation of those sums, for the purposes specified in the Bill.”

Additionally, under section l4(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, “Parliament shall, by the 3lst day of May of each year, consider and approve the annual budget and work plan of Government for the next financial year, the Appropriation Bill and any other Bills that may be necessary to implement the annual budget.” 

Section 58 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, provides that:

“Withdrawals from the Petroleum Fund shall only be made under authority granted by an Appropriation Act and a warrant of the Auditor-General:

    (a) To the Consolidated Fund to support the annual budget and; 

    (b) To the Petroleum Revenue Investment Reserve, for investments to be undertaken, in accordance with section 63.” 

Section 59(3) of the PFMA 2015 provides that petroleum revenue shall be used for the financing of infrastructure and development projects of Government and not the recurrent expenditure of Government. 

Observations of the committee 

Madam Speaker, Parliament, on 7 May 2021, considered and approved the estimates of revenues and expenditure of Government for the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

Subsequently, in accordance with Rule 170(3) of the Rules of Procedure, the committee has examined each vote, together with its corresponding figures indicated in the Schedule to the Bill and finds that there are several inconsistencies with the approved estimates. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the figures, as allocated per vote in the schedule to the Bill, should be replaced with the figures per vote, as supplied by Parliament and contained in the resolution of Parliament, dated 7 May 2021. The resolution of Parliament is hereto attached. 

The committee recommends that the Appropriation Bill, 2021 be passed into law, subject to the proposed amendments.

Madam Speaker, we shall move the amendments when we go to the Committee Stage. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson of the Committee on Budget, for your report. If there are no comments, can I put the question? Honorable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the Appropriation Bill be read for a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE APPROPRIATIONS BILL, 2021

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, do you have an amendment?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, I propose an amendment to clause 2, regarding the issue of money out of the Consolidated Fund.

I propose to substitute for the entire clause the following:

“2. Issue of money out of the Consolidated Fund

The Treasury may issue, out of the Consolidated Fund and apply towards the supply granted to the Government for the service of the year ending on 30th June 2022, the sum of twenty-seven trillion, six hundred twenty billion, seven hundred ninety-six million and three hundred sixty-three thousand shillings only.”

I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

The Schedule 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, I propose an amendment to the schedule and the proposal is to replace column two of the schedule with the following figures, as indicated per vote. I believe that these schedules are available to all the Members. It is all contained in the report of the committee for all the Votes in Government, and it comprises recurrent expenditure on one part and development expenditure on the other, and the total thereto. I beg to move. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am at a loss. What is the schedule we are talking about? What total are you referring to? Is that the total for the entire budget vis-à-vis the current and development? I need to be helped to understand before we can move on. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, the figures we have presented are the figures as supplied for appropriation, excluding statutory expenditure. We have not altered any figure; it is as supplied for both recurrent and development expenditure for those non-statutory agencies. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the figures supplied for recurrent and development expenditure do stand part of this Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Appropriation Bill, 2021 and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2021

5.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Appropriation Bill, 2021 be read the third time and do pass. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Appropriation Bill, 2021 be read for the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE APPROPRIATION ACT, 2021”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. 

5.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I wanted to use this opportunity to thank you for the endurance and spirit that you have put in this process to make sure that we pass the budget on time. 

I also thank the Chairperson and the members of the Committee on Budget and all the Members that have been involved in this process. We know that this has been an extraordinary time. There is COVID-19 pandemic and this is also the end of the 10th Parliament; so, we appreciate you. 

I want to mention, once again, that the budget that we have appropriated today is aimed at transforming the lives of the ordinary Ugandans, the people that we represent here. One of the key things that we have put in this budget is the Parish Development Model. If implemented in a phased manner, it will directly put money in the 3.2 million households who live in a subsistence economy. 

It will also strengthen our security and maintain peace, expand infrastructure and generate more energy and electricity, which is a catalyst for industrialisation that we need to create jobs and wealth.

I want to pledge, on behalf of Government, that we shall have value for every shilling that will be spent. We want to join you, through your oversight committees, to fight this cancer of corruption. I also would like to repeat what I said in the morning, that we will ensure that our debt levels remain sustainable in the short and long terms. Thank you. 

5.41
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Honourable chairperson, just a moment so that you can take care of my concerns, too. 

I have reflected on the processes that we take to get to this stage. First of all, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is very happy but his ministry has been submitting some documents late. That explains why even the reports from the sectoral committees – we could not; we had to suspend the rules to allow the process to go on.

It would be very important that the minister makes a commitment that going forward, such things will not happen because we missed a very important opportunity to reflect on that.

Secondly, when we debate here, and you read the mood of the House, how is that carried and reflected in the budget? I will take the example of today and the minister should really commit himself because I know other processes will come. Hon. Benard Atiku had raised a very important matter; we talked about the fate of the hospitals but all that debate just went. Next time the minister comes with any Bill here or a supplementary budget, he should make a commitment that the issues that were raised in this House are reflected.

Otherwise, it would not make any sense for Members to comment if their views are not going to be built into the budget at all. It would be important that before the next budget process, the minister commits to reporting on the matters that were raised here and how he has captured them in the next budget when he comes to this House. I wanted the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget to take note as well. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, it is indeed proper that my colleague raises that issue. So, what will happen after the passing of the Appropriation Act, 2021? We are going to look into the issues that have been put in the report of the Committee on Budget but also the issues that were captured on the Hansard. They will become part and partial of the planning processes for the budget of the coming financial year. 

However, honourable colleague, this is to also remind you that Shakespeare once said, “All is well that ends well.” Whatever has happened in this process, all is well now that it has ended well. Therefore, we should end on a good note. Thank you. 

5.44
Mr NATHAN nandala-mafabi (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, the minister is saying that all has ended well. That is fine for him. What hon. Jonathan Odur has raised is very important. First, committees have reports; I would be very happy if those reports were brought here and they are part and parcel of our Hansard. We never debated them yet they did a lot of work. They should have been here because there is more information in those reports than the summary of the Budget committee. 

Secondly, it is not good for us to just talk. Sometimes, it is better that when we come here and debate and discuss issues. There must always be a win-win situation but not that one must win and another loses. 

The issues we have raised here are very serious and if they are not analysed very well, they are going to make this same budget fail to perform. If you are putting money in the same pit, it will die from there. 

If we do not put systems in place or agree to what we are saying - by the way, hon. Bahati, we have given you the total sum to which you are going to get one warrant. However, you have the liberty to manage it in such a way that it performs. Along the way you can say, “No, this is your money but we are not going to release it. According to this, you must have this certified first before we deal with it.” You still have the liberty because you are the one in charge of the treasury. 

I hope you will come back. If you do not, the one who will come will pick this Hansard and use it. Maybe he is listening already because many of you are walking around positioning yourselves to become the next Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Parliament should be taken seriously. I came here thinking that we shall go Vote by Vote. Then I saw the chairman of the committee coming up and I saw the thing end. I said, “Oh, I wish I had gone home to sleep.” Thank you. 

The Speaker: Honourable members, about the inability to discuss the committee reports, the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 required us to finish this process by the 31st of May. However, we cannot reach there because the tenure of this House ends next week. That is why we shortened the time. 

I am one of those who like to listen to Members, as we have seen. I want to listen to all the reports and pick up ideas from the Members but that is the reason we could not have it. This happened because it is the final Session of the 10th Parliament.
 
Having said that, honourable minister, there were some major issues and I am glad the Minister of Health is here. For instance, when will the old referral hospitals – (Interruption) - that when the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes next year, they must be able to answer that. 

I think they should also answer the question of funding, which hon. Atiku raised and a number of other issues so that the country knows that you raised these issues, Government has picked them up and will be able to address them. Thank you. 

5.47
The chairperson, committee ON budget (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, I have two issues. The first is to add to what you and hon. Bahati have said. This Budget process has two stages within Parliament. The first is when we get the Budget Framework Paper. The reason behind it is to ensure that if Parliament has any views, they would be captured at that stage and then presented to Government. When they bring their estimates, we expect that Government, to the extent possible, would have incorporated those proposals.

In my opinion, I think a problem comes when a Member begins to assume that he will make an amendment at the tail end of the process when it started way back in January, at the submission of the Budget Framework Paper to Parliament. That is when hon. Atiku should have made that proposal, which would then have been processed through the system to provide for resources needed by those various cities. That is the essence of the Budget Framework Paper coming to Parliament. It is for us to get the opportunity to make our proposals and amendments to the Budget. We need to seize that opportunity.

However, sometimes Members forget. I do not know where they go at that time but they are not available to articulate those issues. They wait at the stage of appropriation when it is very difficult to change. That is the procedure and I need you to appreciate that –(Interruption)

Mr jonathan odur: Madam Speaker, laws exist so that they are applied. Rule 152 is about rules governing Committee of Supply when considering the annual or supplementary estimates.

I will read rule 152 (2):

“When the House is in the Committee of Supply to consider annual or supplementary estimates —

    (a) any Member may move to reduce the amount of the vote of the estimates, and such motion shall take the form…”

It is not correct for this House to be misled that once we are in the Committee of Supply, a Member cannot rise to adjust. Otherwise, these rules would not be applicable. That should be taken care of. 

We should not be taken for granted even when we sit there and let it pass like some of the provisions probably have passed today. It does not mean that Members are not alive to these provisions of the rule. Otherwise, if it is now taken as a matter of abusing; that Members do not understand what is there, the spirit will not go well with us.

These rules must be applied. The chairman cannot try to take advantage of the courtesy that the Members have accorded to this Budget process today. Thank you. 

Mr lugoloobi: Thank you for that information. Mine was a piece of advice, given the years I have been here, on how to lobby for your constituencies. It was free advice; you can either take or leave it. I was simply telling you that coming to amend the Bills at the tail end of the process would be very complicated. I know the rules provide for it but it is very complicated.

Mr nandala-mafabi: Mr Chairperson, the Budget process ends when appropriation is being done. You are right that we should read the Budget Framework Papers. They will say that the Ministry of Local Government has an indicative amount but they will not come out clearly and say, “We have allocated Sironko District this amount of money.” It is just indicative of the entire block.

Secondly, it talks about the previous performances. Therefore, as the planners of this country who are now in power, you do not need to wait until a Member of Parliament comes to raise it here. If you are planning, come up with a very good distributional mechanism. For instance, why are we giving Arua city this? This is a mechanism, which somebody just plugs in and knows that he is entitled to this amount of money.

However, if we do numbers that are not backed up by working papers, you make us assume that it is those who are nearer who can get. That is why Members are raising the issue of Mbarara. They think it is well favoured because it is where the President and hon. Bahati come from –(Interjections)– I am just helping you. That is why Members are raising this. Oh, that is the road hon. Bahati takes when he is going to Kabale. (Laughter)

Mr bahati: Madam Speaker, is the former Secretary General of FDC in order to disturb the peace of the House when we have reached the end, debated this process very well and he continues raising issues and mixing places yet he is a man who believes in one Uganda and one people? 
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I know today it is going to be difficult to make your ruling. If he means the former Secretary General, I would like to inform him that I am still the current.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I rose to express my appreciation to you, in particular, the members of the Committee on Budget and the entire House for the way you have been handling the reports of the Committee on Budget. We would like to appreciate you and the House. 

I believe that, for the years I have been the chairperson of this committee with the Members, we have done a great job. I have not been alone because the Members have always been there. I would like to inform this House that I have had very articulate members; experts in the field. In fact, they have been gurus. They have not let us down in the scrutiny of documents that have been presented to us. 

Therefore, I would like to thank those political parties that sent these Members to the committee. They have been very good members and we did not have a shortage of experts on the committee. We had all the experts that are needed to process the kind of documents we are required to deliver to this House. 

Madam Speaker, I stood up to express my special appreciation to the members of this committee. A few of them are available and I just want to request them to stand up for recognition because we have come to the end of the term. The vice-chairperson could easily step in without any problem whenever I was not around and business would go on normally. They have been a very elegant and articulate team and I would like to appreciate them. 

On the side of the Opposition, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi and others have been very useful. As a team, we believe that we have worked so well for our country. Thank you very much for passing the Appropriation Bill, 2021, and thank you, all, for your support. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson, members of the Budget Committee and members of the House, who have stood by the institution to ensure that our work is done. Thank you very much. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INLAND WATER TRANSPORT BILL, 2020

5.57 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are happy that you have given us this opportunity. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Inland Water Transport Bill, 2020.” Be read for the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is it seconded? It is seconded. What is the justification? 

MS KABATSI: Madam Speaker, this Bill is to provide regulation of inland water transport by –

    a) providing for registration and licensing of vessels
    b) provide for the safety of life and navigation on inland waters
    c) provide for the prevention of pollution and protection of marine environment and security
    d) provide for regulation of ports and to repeal old laws like the Vessel Registration Act, Cap 362, the Ferries Act, Cap 355, the Inland Water Transport Control Act, Cap 356 and Part XII of the Uganda Railways Corporation Act, Cap 331. 

Madam Speaker, the inland water transport sector is characterised by old and disjointed laws and standards that require immediate review and harmonisation. 

In addition, there are a number of things that have emerged since colonial times; the standard of operating procedures, the types of vessels, the new trends and dynamics in the water transport management, the increased number of users, the increased accidents and conduct of investigations. 

There is also the need to conform to Regional and International Conventions that Uganda is party to. Uganda acceded to the International Marine Organisation Conventions, which compel state parties to comply with international standards for safety of lives, vessels and environment. The Bill seeks to domesticate these conventions through incorporation of these conventions. 

In the same vein, certain provisions of the Lake Victoria Transport Act, 2007 that were not yet operationalised have been operationalised in this Bill.

Madam Speaker, it is also important to note that there has been no established institution with clear functions to regulate and enforce safety measures on water transport in Uganda. The current laws have weak sanctions and penalties of the offenders of the laws in maritime transport. 

This Bill seeks to improve and harmonise the legislations in this subsector, taking into account the emerging trends and ensure that the law is sufficiently relevant to Uganda’s development plans. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I believe our committee had the opportunity to study the Bill. Can we receive their report? 

6.02
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Robert Kafeero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, this is a report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the Inland Water Transport Bill, 2020. 

Before I proceed, allow me to lay on Table the report. Attached hereto are the minutes of the meetings that considered the Bill. I beg to lay. 

The Inland Water Bill Transport Bill, 2020, was read for the first time on 25 August 2020 and referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure in accordance to Rule 128 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. The committee considered the Bill and hereby reports back. 

The minister having given the background of the Bill, I will move straight to Page 7 to briefly mention the object of the Bill. The object of the Bill is to provide regulation of inland water transport by providing for registration and licensing of vessels, safety of life and navigation on inland water ways, the prevention of pollution and protection of the marine environment and marine security, regulation of ports, repealing of Vessel (Registration) Act, Cap 356, the Ferries Act, Cap 355, the Inland Water Transport (Control) Act, Cap 356, Part XII of the Uganda Railways Corporation Act, Cap 331, and to consolidate the law relating to shipping in Uganda and any other matters related to water transport.

Madam Speaker, part four of our report looks at the defects in the existing law. On Page 8, it looks at how the Bill addresses the defects in that law. On Page 9, we show the methodology and indeed the compliance of the Bill with the Human Rights.

On Page 10, we talk about the compliance with the Sustainable Development Goals. On Page 11, that is where we have the observations and recommendations. Having talked about the short title, when you proceed to Page 12, clause 4(1)(b) provides that this Act applies to any vessel while in a port or place within the waters under the jurisdiction of Uganda, which implies that the Bill applies to all the waterways in Uganda. 

Therefore, the committee has no objection to the short title of the Bill.

In Paragraph 9.2, we have the definition of terms used in the Bill. The committee recommends that clause 5 of the Bill be amended to ensure clarity of the definitions and to define the key terms adopted in the Bill that are not defined.

Paragraph 9.3 talks about streamlining Maritime Transport Administration

The administration of water transport in Uganda is fragmented with various agencies managing the subsector, namely; the department of Maritime Administration established in 2016 under the Ministry of Works and Transport, which is responsible for regulation of the water transport subsector, the Uganda Railways Corporation, which handles matters relating to ports, and the Uganda National Roads Authority, which is responsible for the management of public ferries as an extension of the national road network.

Clauses 6 and 7 of the Bill, therefore, seek to consolidate all matters relating to Maritime Transport Administration under the Department of Maritime Administration in the Ministry of Works and Transport so as to strengthen water transport regulation, but also ease implementation and conform to regional and international standards.

The committee observes that water transport is the only subsector under the works and transport sector, which is not regulated by an autonomous body established by an Act of Parliament, and this has greatly contributed to its underdevelopment. The ideal, therefore, would have been to establish an autonomous body whose sole responsibility is to deal with maritime related matters as is the case with the air, water and rail transport sub sectors to promote efficiency and accountability in service delivery.

However, the committee was informed that the establishment of an autonomous body is not feasible in view of the Government policy against the creation of new agencies and merger of existing ones to rationalise the use of public resources.

Madam Speaker, that is why as we seek to align with the Lake Victoria, the committee, therefore, agrees with Clause 6(3) of the Bill since it just seeks to comply with Uganda’s obligations under the Lake Victoria Transport Act, 2007.

Registration of vessels

Clause 9 of the Bill provides that a person who intends to employ a vessel in navigation on Uganda’s waters or fly a Ugandan flag shall, unless exempted by the minister, register the vessel with Maritime Administration. The committee generally concurs with clause 9 of the Bill. 

However, we are not comfortable with the words, “unless exempted by the minister” appearing in that clause.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the words “unless exempted by the minister” should be deleted.

Clause 10 of the Bill provides for the format for an application for registration and the information that should accompany the application. The committee agrees but it also notes that the requirement for life saving appliances has not been included as a condition precedent for registration of the vessels and yet several maritime deaths in Uganda have been attributed to the absence of life saving jackets on vessels. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Clause 9 should be amended to include life-saving appliances on the vessel and proof of payment of registration fees as part of the information that should accompany the application tor registration, and to empower the minister to prescribe additional requirements for registration as and when it arises.

Clause 15 of the Bill obliges Maritime Administration to maintain a register of the vessels and construction until the construction of vessels is complete. The committee proposes that the Clause 15 should be amended to provide for the issuance of a certificate of construction as proof of completion of construction to ease the enforcement.

Clause 16 of the Bill requires the owner of a vessel to submit the registration certificate to Maritime Administration for examination annually.

The committee concurs with the provision as it seeks is to ensure maritime by preventing unauthorised alterations or modifications on the certificate. As you may see, Clause 17 of the Bill provides for change of ownership or master of the vessel. 

The committee notes that the provision does not safeguard the owner of the vessel in case of a fraudulent change of ownership of the vessel, and does not provide for fees for effecting the change since Maritime Administration is required to issue a fresh certificate to the new owner.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Clause 17 be amended, to require Maritime Administration to verify the change of ownership before issuing a new certificate, and to provide for payment of a fee for issuance of a new certificate of registration.

Clause 20 of the Bill prohibits a person from changing the name of a vessel or making major alterations or repairs that modify the structure, soundness, or characteristics of the registered vessel without the approval of the Maritime Administration. 

Our recommendation on page 16 of the report is that we agree with that provision. 

In regard to licensing of vessels to carry on business, Clause 23 requires a person who intends to use the vessel for carriage of goods or passengers, to apply to the Maritime Administration. The committee is in agreement with this provision. 

However, the committee notes that whereas the Bill grants discretion to the Maritime Administration to grant or refuse to grant a license, it does not impose a corresponding obligation on the Maritime Administration to communicate the reasons for refusal to grant the license to an applicant. This is likely to result in the abuse of power and encourage arbitrary decision making.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Clause 27 should be amended to impose an obligation on the Maritime Administration to notify the applicant for a license in writing or the refusal, and the reasons for the refusal within a specified timeframe to ensure that the rules of natural justice are complied with in the decision-making.

Clause 30 provides for conditions attached to the license issued, and imposes continuing obligations to the owner or master of the vessel. The committee concurs with that proposal. 

Clause 34 provides for appeals to the minister against the decision of the Maritime Administration relating to the application, revocation, suspension, or variation of any of the conditions of the license. 
The committee recommends that Clause 34 should be amended to stipulate the timeframe for consideration. 

On regulation of small vessels and vessels of traditional make, special attention should be accorded to the regulation of small vessels and vessels of tradition built to mitigate the occurrence of maritime accidents in Uganda on our navigable waters. Accordingly, clause 35 of the Bill empowers the minister to make such regulations.

Whereas the committee agrees with that clause, it proposes that the regulations made by the minister should provide for the scope of operation and marking of the vessels to ensure comprehensive regulation of small vessels and vessels of traditional build. 

On Page 18 of the report, Clauses 36 to 87 of the Bill provide for the engagement of crew members including crew agreement, prohibition of employment of persons below 18, payment of wages and others. The committee concurs with the provisions because this will attract qualified and competent persons to serve on Ugandan vessels, thereby enhancing maritime safety and security. 

Clause 9.13 introduces logbooks, which are to be kept on all vessels. Clause 71 of the Bill requires a registered and licensed vessel of 10 metres or more in length to have a logbook for navigation and the engine room. The logbook is for entry of events occurring on the vessel. The committee has no problem with that proposal for as long as there are some modifications made as per our recommendation on Page 19 of the report.

On Page 20 of the report, 9.14 talks about manning of the vessel by competent officers. We also note that Clause 90 of the Bill empowers Maritime Administration to suspend or cancel a certificate of registration of the vessel or detain the vessel that sails without being manned by a sufficient and competent crew as prescribed. It also introduces penalties for that. 

When you continue to 9.16 on Page 22 of the report, this part talks about safety of navigation and prevention of collision. We also have provisions relating to road lines, which is item 9.17 in the report.

Item 9.18 talks about carriage of bulk cargo and dangerous goods. 

On page 24 of the report, 9.19 introduces sea worthiness of vessels. The committee recommends that the power to detain a vessel should lie with the minister, on recommendation by the surveyor to guard against abuse of power since the surveyor would be the complainant and judge in the same court. 

Item 9.20 talks about establishment, regulation and management of inland ports. The committee recommends that the functions of the port authority under this Bill should be exercised by a port administrator appointed by the minister for the inland port owned by Government since Uganda does not have a port authority. 

Also, the entire Part II of the Bill should be amended to ensure comprehensive provision for the management and administration of inland ports owned by the Government and private persons. 

On Page 25 of the report, 9.21 provides for wreck and salvage in case of an accident of a vessel. 

On page 26 of the report, we have provisions for prevention of pollution from vessels, and also investigation into the maritime casualties.

On Page 27 of the report, 9.24 talks about offences in the Bill. Our recommendation as a committee is that the penalties should be increased to deter potential offenders from committing the crimes and to prevent recidivism. 

Our general recommendation is that the Inland Water Transport Bill, 2020 be passed into law, subject to the following proposed amendments, which are attached to the report. 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and members of the committee, for this great job. Honourable Members, you have received the report; are there any comments?

6.23
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee first and more so, the Chairperson. Particularly, I appreciate you, Madam Speaker, for the amount of effort that you have put in to ensure that we pass several Bills.

Everybody out there has felt it; even on the streets, people have said that Parliament has worked. I sat around Sheraton and somebody came to me and said, “The work rate in Parliament is amazing.” We appreciate you and we do not take that for granted. 

The Committee on Agriculture has been handling the Fish Bill, and I saw that there is a relationship between this Bill and the other one.

Most times, when people are dealing with fisheries, they are also handling matters of transport, more so when we talk about the small boats and I saw a lot of similarities.

I have not carried a copy of that report and I do not have my iPad, and therefore, I am not able to track the methodology for us to see whether the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal and Fisheries was involved in this consultation. This is because I believe that they are major stakeholders.

There are so many things; if you look at the Beach Management Units (BMU) - I heard the chairperson say that the minister will be appointing port administrators but in the other fisheries Bill, we were talking of beach management units or something of that kind. So, there is likely to be confusion because there are beaches, there are ports, the fisheries; and these will meet those under transportation. I do not know what we are going to do. 

I thought since we are consolidating these laws, we need to be exhaustive in making sure that all those major stakeholders should be brought on board so that we do not make mistakes.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, when we talk about licensing; we are considering the big transport vessels on the waters and the common boats. In the other Bill, we were talking about licensing those people. So, I wonder how many licences people are going to have while on the waters because for the small boats for instance – yes, we are going to produce regulations, if we are going to license them too. They are required in the other law to also have licences.

One of the transporters was asked, “You are saying that we should be carrying these licenses on board, what about when it rains?” Will you allow them to carry duplicates? So, there are many questions.

Madam Speaker, since we are talking about safety on the waters, I have not heard in the Bill of any provision that talks about having lifesavers. Leave alone the safety gear, but life savers - those who are trained in saving people in the waters. I would be happy to hear that we have such provisions so that when the situation is not okay, at least there should be people who are able to dive in waters and save some souls.

I say so because one time I sailed on a boat. I moved with some people and then someday took us up to the source of the Nile. And one of the people that led us said that he can enter into the waters there and come out alive. We need such people if we are serious about comprehensive safety on the waters.

I also think that we need to have quick response preparedness in terms of quick boats which are on standby, so that whenever something goes wrong, they should be able to rush to the scene as fast as possible to rescue the situation.

Under the fisheries Bill, which is coming - I do not want to speculate but they are trying to provide for training of those going to take care of the safety of the fishermen on the waters and this training is going to be done by the UPDF. That was the proposal.

I do not know how many of the UPDF team we are going to have. This is because I felt that there are so many things that we are yet to harmonise; there is a difference but I think there are some similarities somewhere.

This Bill is very necessary because - I think it was in 2019 or 2018, you heard about “the balancing the boat” issue when a certain team left for a tour and the boat capsized - I do not know what happened. That reminds me about consulting with the tourism sector. I do to know whether in this consultation, you took trouble to consult with those in the tourism sector because it is not just about transport. 

People also go on the waters for tourism purposes. So, I do not know whether you also took time to bring them on board. If we are talking about safety on the waters, it should be comprehensively handled.

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether this Bill has thoroughly handled the aspect of insurance. I felt that for anybody who is on board - vehicles have third party insurance, what happens with the boats, these big vessels?, I am not sure whether those with ferries have third party insurance to cover them so that in the event of anything going wrong, compensation is done. I thought that is very important. 

Madam Speaker, the issue of inspection of the vessels is very important. In my opinion, water transport is one of the safe means of transport means, just like air transport. However, once you get a problem, it is very difficult to survive and because of that, there must be a very tight mechanism of ensuring that the facilities on the waters are worthy of being there.

What are we going to prescribe in this law to make sure that there is periodical sort of inspection for water worthiness of the vessels? Madam Speaker, the Bill is timely but my thinking is that we need more consultations if we are to make it comprehensive and thorough. Otherwise, the Bill has my blessing. 

However, before I sit down, I would like to note that we, in the East African Community, are sharing the waters of Lake Victoria. You will realise that there is a challenge with the foreign vessels - leave alone the big transport vessels. Now, when we talk about the normal boats, for instance, there are those that come from across. What are we going to do with the small boats that come from across? Are we going to register them under Uganda? How are you going to manage? And can we be able to draw the boundaries on the waters? How do we dissect the waters and be able to tell that this is where Uganda ends and Kenya the other side or Tanzania the other side?

Most of the insecurity on waters seems to be coming from outside our borders. So, this Bill should be able to handle that and maybe when you are handling that, the ministers of East African Community Affairs should be involved in your consultation and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. This is because we are dealing with a community and not just Uganda alone. We are in East Africa. Thank you.
 
6.33
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I thank the minister and committee for this Bill. Registration of vessels is very critical. I remember when there was a problem with this small lake called Nyaguo between Ngora and Pallisa; it was difficult to identify the culprits who had killed two people from Ngora. 

The canoes were there. They said, “So-and-so was the one who was rowing this one and so-and-so was the one rowing the other one”, because at that time, there was no law. However, when this law comes into effect, all of them will be demanded to be registered. From there, there is no way you are going to run away from the reality.

Secondly, it is one way of streamlining such a sector, which is very critical, if we are to talk about development. Look at Lake Victoria here. Vessels from Kenya, Tanzania and other countries come to Uganda but at the same time, I presume that the other side, they have their own laws governing the vessels on the waters.

Unfortunately for Uganda, we do not have consolidated laws that manage some of these issues here. That could be where the problem is. By the mere fact that Government has now come up with this, I am happy that my Government is talking because this is one way in which you are sorting out many problems affecting our people. 

Remember on 24 November 2018, the cruise ship, where some people who were merrymaking in the lake – about 29 or 30 people – perished that time. Unfortunately – by the way, the vessel was in very bad state yet they were allowed to go. There were no safety measures, no standards had been set.

This law here is now going to set a standard that for you to be on our waters, you must follow A, B, C, D and you shall have fulfilled conditions A, B, C, D. At the end of the day, the safety of Ugandans and our people will be guaranteed. 

To leave people to travel the very way they are travelling is a problem. That is why you find that almost every month, more than 10 people perish on Lake Victoria because there is no way you are going to enforce standards, unless there is a law. That is why this law here is. This law is actually going to help us to sort out other issues.

Secondly, we have been decrying the absence of a law or organ to manage or register the vessels. This one is the way forward; they must be registered. If other businessmen are registering theirs, why are these people not being registered?

That is why this law will help us to come to the same level. For example, my good minister, hon. Bahati there, is all the time talking about raising money, as a way to develop Uganda. He is not wrong because there are laws that he follows. However, the Ministry of Works and Transport has nothing to follow. One way of sorting this matter out is through this Bill here. 

Madam Speaker, I am happy that the minister talked about consolidating the laws. Let us consolidate them. In my opinion, this law is good. My brother here said that we need to consult. We do not need to waste time now; we are under COVID-19.

Secondly, I am sure the committee has done a wonderful job. Let us approve this law. This will be one of the gifts that we shall be giving to our people who use the waters of this country.  I thank you very much.

6.37
MS JOSEPHINE BABUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the honourable minister and committee for bringing up this Bill – the Inland Water Transport Bill. It is really necessary and timely.

First of all, about the safety of our lives, it is true that most of the time, people move without life jackets. However, in Uganda, I realise that sometimes we make laws but do not implement them.

For example, boda boda riders carry passengers without wearing helmets. Sometimes it is only the rider with the helmet. So, we hope that when this Bill is passed, they should make sure that every vessel has enough life jackets for those people who will be on board.

About the types of vessels, we have the local vessels that are not up to standard and most of the time, they cause accidents. We hope that this time there will be a standard measure to make sure that they are all in good condition.

The registration exercise is also good, especially for those waters which border some places like the Democratic Republic of Congo. For example, in my place, Lake Albert is not always safe for us. So, when those vessels and the local ones are registered, it will help us to know which bad people are coming into our country or the good ones.

Clause 4(1)(b) talks about all waterways in Uganda and I am happy about that. That is why I have mentioned Lake Albert. I know it is really going to be a good thing. However, Madam Speaker, I have not heard about the traditional or special vessels in form of water ambulances, which are supposed to ferry our patients who are referred especially those people who live around the islands. I thought it also concerns the Ministry of Works and Transport.

I agree with hon. Silas Aogon about the rescuers. Most of the time, it is the UPDF which has come in to rescue our people when they get these accidents. So, I recommend that there should be special people who will be rescuing people when they are in danger all the time.

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we need to correct the record. That is hon. Babungi Josephine. Is that hon. Oseku? Okay.

6.41
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the work they have done to scrutinise this Bill.

On my part, I want to say that we really need this law in place. It has been common knowledge that apart from the provisions of water transport by the Uganda National Roads Authority, this sector has been neglected so much. It has been “to-whom-it-may-concern”. 

We have rudimentary transport systems on the lakes and this is the reason we have suffered a lot of losses, especially the lives of people. I think this – for the first time – brings into light the regulation of water transport, which I believe will yield results in improving the safety of the lives of the people on the waters.

When we were at school, we used to know that water transport is one of the cheapest means of transport. As a country, we are really blessed with sizeable water bodies and this connects all around our people. So, with regulation that will attract people to use the waters, it means the transport costs are likely to be lowered. 

As we pass this law, we should ensure that safety is prioritised. Like I said before, people have been using all sorts of methods of transport on the lake. At one time, there was a lot of theft of motorcycles. Later on, it was reported that people were stealing motorcycles and removing the engines to be used as engines for the boats on the lakes.

So, it is very important that this law caters for safety, especially by giving specifications on the types of engines to be used on the waters. 

For that matter, enforcement must be very strict. This report provides for the safety but the enforcement department, in my view, is necessary. It is not just enough to provide for a Maritime Administrator. We should provide for an enforcement department to ensure that what has been provided for in the law is followed. 

Lastly, I want to say that it is a bit expensive to invest in water transport because the lifespan for an engine or a ferry on the lake is said to be between 15 and 20 years. After that, you cannot operate it anymore. 

So, there will be need for the Government, especially the Ministry of Works and Transport, to at least ensure that they amortise those people who invest in the water transport. At the end of the day, we do not want the water bodies to have sub-standard types of transport facilities that are going to continue risking the lives of Ugandans. 

Otherwise, with those observations, I think this Bill comes at the right time and in the right direction. It will be a very welcome law especially in as far as the regulation of water transport is concerned. 

Before I forget, there is also need for mapping the routes that a transporter should use in the water bodies. There are hidden risks within the lakes like rocks where sometimes the water transport facilities may crash. 

So, this study must be done and the routes mapped. This should be within the capabilities of the Ministry of Works and Transport to do so as to ensure that there is total safety on the lakes. Thank you. 

6.46 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Minister of Works and Transport for this Bill. I see that many of my fellow islanders are not here. I thought I should also add a voice in support of this Bill and recommend it to the House. 

I think you know that we have been losing quite a number of people every month on Lake Bunyonyi and other related areas. One of the things that we discussed at Cabinet – I am not quite sure whether it is in this Bill – but we think that providing transport on the lake should be seen as infrastructure like providing roads and other means of transport for other parts of the country.

This particular piece of legislation will help us to save lives. When we organise the transport on the waters, we will save lives since we have been losing so many of them. 

Secondly, the Bill also touches on training of marines. His Excellency the President authorised us to fund the Maritime University so that we can train the marines on the lakes. People just come and start their businesses on the lakes the way some of our friends in the Boda Boda industry do. They just come and start transporting people on the lakes; that poses a risk to the lives of our people. 

Therefore, this Bill comes to organise and arrange transport on the lakes. The Bill will also help us to put rules and regulations so that if you are going to have a boat on the lake, you need to have some standards. Those standards have been lacking.

On behalf of my fellow islanders, I recommend that this Bill be passed as soon as we can so that we help in the management of the transport on the lakes, save the lives but also set the tone and platform where infrastructures like ferries on the lakes become part and partial of our infrastructure, which should be provided for free on all lakes of Uganda. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, this present law that we are going to repeal is more than 100 years old. It was made on our behalf by the colonialists. So, we did not have our own input into it. However, I do not see the members of the Kyoga Basin. Other than hon. Josephine Bebona, I do not see Members of the Albertine Graben. I do not see the islanders from Buvuma and Kalangala and so on.

I think we should continue with this debate on Monday morning. Let us have more views. Also, there were some areas where hon. Aogon talked about the intersection between the fisheries law and this law. So, let us give ourselves an opportunity to reflect further. We shall resume on Monday morning.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, about the issue of housing of this Bill, I did not pick the report well. I need the chairperson to clarify on the housing of the Bill. Is it going to be autonomous? Shouldn’t we have put this under the Ministry of Works and Transport, looking at our current policy trend where we are moving towards merging agencies? I need to understand, which line we are towing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. We will be doing that in anticipation. Let us work on the Bill as it is. There is a minister who has brought this Bill. We shall pass it under that minister. If they are going to merge whatever they are going to merge, that will be in the future.

Honourable members, thank you. House is adjourned to Monday at 10 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 6.51 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 10 May 2021 at 10.00 a.m.)






























ANNEX 1



PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE
APPROPRIATION BILL 2021








OFFICE OF THE CLERK TO PARLIAMENT
PARLIAMENT BUILDINGS
KAMPALA - UGANDA



May 2021
THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE APPROPRIATION BILL 2021
1.0	INTRODUCTION
Rt. Hon. Speaker and Hon. Members, on 1st April 2021 the Appropriation Bill 2021was read for the first time and subsequently referred to the Committee on Budget for consideration.
In accordance with rule 170(3) (c), the committee considered the Bill and reports as follows;
1.1	METHODOLOGY
The Committee held consultative meetings with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; and examined the Appropriation Bill to ascertain the consistency and accuracy of the estimates as indicated in the Schedule to the Appropriation Bill against the Resolution by Parliament on the same.
1.2 	OBJECT OF THE BILL 
The object of the Bill is to provide for;
    a) the authorization of public expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of a sum of twenty-seven trillion, six hundred twenty billion, seven hundred ninety six million, three hundred sixty three thousand shillings only; and
    b) withdrawal of Funds from the Petroleum Fund into the Consolidated Fund a sum of two hundred billion shillings only, 
to meet expenditure for the Financial Year 2021/2022 and to appropriate the supplies granted. 


    2.0 LEGAL FRAMEWORK

2.1 	Article 156 (1) provides that; “The heads of expenditure contained in the estimates, other than expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund by this Constitution or any Act of Parliament, shall be included in a bill to be known as an Appropriation Bill which shall be introduced into Parliament to provide for the issue from the Consolidated Fund of the sums necessary to meet that expenditure and the appropriation of those sums for the purposes specified in the bill.”

        2.2 	Additionally under S. 14(1) of the Public Finance Management Act 2015, “Parliament shall, by the 31st day of May of each year, consider and approve the annual budget and work plan of Government for the next financial year, the Appropriation Bill and any other bills that may be necessary to implement the annual budget”.

2.3.     Section 58 of the Public Finance Management Act 2015, provides that;    withdraws from the Petroleum Fund shall only be made under authority granted by an Appropriation Act and a warrant of the Auditor General –
    (a) to the Consolidated Fund to support the annual budget; and 
    (b) to the Petroleum Revenue Investment Reserve, for investments to be undertaken in accordance with section 63.

2.4 	Section 59 (3) of the PFMA 2015, provides that petroleum revenue shall be used for the financing of infrastructure and development projects of Government and not the recurrent expenditure of Government.

2.0  	OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

Rt. Hon Speaker and Members,
Parliament on 7th of May 2021 considered and approved the estimates of revenues and expenditure of Government for the financial year 2021/22. 
Subsequently, in accordance with Rule 170 (3) of the Rules of Procedure, the Committee has examined each vote together with its corresponding figures indicated in the Schedule to the bill and finds that there are several inconsistencies with the approved estimates.

The Committee therefore recommends that the figures as allocated per vote in the Schedule to the Bill should be replaced with the figures per vote as supplied by Parliament and contained in the Resolution of Parliament dated 7th May 2021.
The Resolution of Parliament is hereto attached.

Conclusion 
The Committee recommends that the Appropriation Bill 2021 be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments.

PROPOSED AMENDMENTS 
    1) CLAUSE 2. ISSUE OF MONEY OUT OF THE CONSOLIDATED FUND
Substitute for the entire clause the following –
“2. Issue of money out of the Consolidated Fund
The Treasury may issue out of the Consolidated Fund and apply towards the supply granted to the Government for the service of the year ending on 30th June 2022, the sum of twenty-seven trillion, six hundred twenty billion, seven hundred ninety six million, and three hundred sixty three thousand shillings only.
    2) SCHEDULE
Replace column 2 of the Schedule with the following figures as indicated per vote-
Vote 
Description
Supply 
Shs '000
001
Office of the President
115,221,379
002
State House
392,828,332
003
Office of the Prime Minister
92,607,679
004
Ministry of Defence
1,272,353,757
005
Ministry of Public Service
25,748,876
006
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
63,735,519
007
Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
117,822,618
008
Ministry of Finance, Planning & Economic Dev.
506,078,782
009
Ministry of Internal Affairs
47,087,435
010
Ministry of Agriculture, Animal & Fisheries
35,780,713
011
Ministry of Local Government
32,165,925
012
Ministry of Lands, Housing & Urban Development
64,162,395
013
Ministry of Education and Sports 
248,475,869
014
Ministry of Health
123,018,161
015
Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives
71,624,694
016
Ministry of Works and Transport
119,981,042
017
Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development
31,626,541
018
Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development
199,431,055
019
Ministry of Water and Environment
30,755,687
020
Ministry of ICT and National Guidance
48,003,052
021
Ministry of East African Community Affairs
28,891,051
022
Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities
143,418,456
023
Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation
70,932,588
024
Ministry of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs
4,500,000
109
Law Development Centre
23,602,990
110
Uganda Industrial Research Institute
16,331,462
111
Busitema University
43,606,037
112
Ethics and Integrity
9,188,092
113
Uganda National Roads Authority
129,521,592
114
Uganda Cancer Institute
24,422,857
115
Uganda Heart Institute
19,952,795
116
National Medical Stores
590,235,388
117
Uganda Tourism Board
16,931,169
118
Road Fund
489,364,780
119
Uganda Registration Services Bureau
22,461,351
120
National Citizenship and Immigration Control
90,590,886
121
Dairy Development Authority
10,025,317
122
Kampala Capital City Authority
185,202,674
123
Rural Electrification Agency (REA)
28,796,825
124
Equal Opportunities Commission
11,673,636
125
National Animal Genetic Res. Centre and Data Bank
11,035,833
126
National Information Technology Authority
21,897,929
127
Muni University
19,314,507
128
Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB)
107,804,838
129
Financial Intelligence Authority
15,958,432
132
Education Service Commission
7,781,404
133
Directorate of Public Prosecutions
46,478,113
134
Health Service Commission
6,979,803
136
Makerere University
346,121,570
137

Mbarara University

53,337,402
138
Makerere University Business School
96,890,935
139
Kyambogo University
133,445,619
140
Uganda Management Institute
33,943,412
141
URA
488,299,914
142
National Agricultural Research Organisation
50,576,356
143
Uganda Bureau of Statistics
47,445,160
144
Uganda Police Force
646,291,283
145
Uganda Prisons
237,485,961
146
Public Service Commission
8,056,336
147
Local Government Finance Commission
5,171,955
148
Judicial Service Commission
10,199,586
149
Gulu University
54,328,532
150
National Environment Management Authority
14,872,527
151
Uganda Blood Transfusion Service (UBTS)
15,328,203
152
NAADS Secretariat
4,839,384
153
PPDA
10,626,490
154
Uganda National Bureau of Standards
50,053,077
155
Uganda Cotton Development Organisation
3,421,717
156
Uganda Land Commission
33,197,466
157
National Forestry Authority
23,081,205
158
ISO
95,439,759
159
External Security Organisation
53,875,034
160
Uganda Coffee Development Authority
80,051,151
161
Mulago Hospital Complex
55,578,534
162
Butabika Hospital
12,485,842
301
Lira University
22,882,621
302
Uganda National Meteorological Authority
9,328,524
303
National Curriculum Development Centre
38,215,854
304
Uganda Virus Research Institute
8,901,940
305
Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory
12,845,868
306
Uganda Export Promotion Board
6,175,460
307
Kabale University
38,409,578
308
Soroti University
14,234,938
309
National Identification and Registration Authority 
62,573,760
310
Uganda Investment Authority
18,185,178
312
Petroleum Authority of Uganda
38,767,337
313
Capital Markets Authority
6,894,000
314
National Lotteries and Gaming Regulatory Board
8,370,000
315
National Population Council
15,371,000
316
Uganda Free Zones Authority
6,088,361
317
Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority
7,000,000
318
Uganda Retirements Benefits Regulatory Authority
14,000,000
319
National Council for Higher Education
10,180,000
320
Uganda Business and Technical Examination Board
26,951,489
321
National Council of Sports
18,368,214
 
 Sub-total -Central Votes ( Excl. Referrals and Missions) 
8,883,598,844
 
 Referral Hospitals 

163
Arua Referral Hospital
7,657,567
164
Fort Portal Referral Hospital
7,714,683
165
Gulu Referral Hospital
11,237,447
166
Hoima Referral Hospital
7,649,956
167
Jinja Referral Hospital
12,605,370
168
Kabale Referral Hospital
6,132,028
169
Masaka Referral Hospital
6,369,344
170
Mbale Referral Hospital
14,034,092
171
Soroti Referral Hospital
6,160,805
172
Lira Referral Hospital
13,036,770
173
Mbarara Referral Hospital
12,235,123
174
Mubende Referral Hospital
6,786,185
175
Moroto Referral Hosptial
7,387,108
176
Naguru Referral Hospital
7,817,379
177
Kiruddu Referral Hospital
17,301,328
178
Kawempe  Referral Hospital
10,419,466
179
Entebbe Regional Referral Hospital
3,971,513
180
Mulago Specialized Women and Neonatal Hospital
19,756,164
 
 Sub-total -Referral Hospitals 
178,272,327
 
Missions Abroad

201
Ugandan Mission at the United Nations, New York
17,086,699
202
Uganda High Commission in United Kingdom, London
6,535,959
203
Uganda High Commission in Canada, Ottawa
5,524,694
204
Uganda High Commission in India, New Delhi
5,554,402
205
Uganda High Commission in Egypt, Cairo
3,423,097
206
Uganda High Commission in Kenya, Nairobi
4,765,885
207
Uganda High Commission in Tanzania, Dar es Salaam
5,294,886
208
Uganda High Commission in Nigeria, Abuja
2,446,323
209
Uganda High Commission in South Africa, Pretoria
3,434,571
210
Uganda Embassy in Washington
8,509,896
211
Uganda Embassy in Ethiopia, Addis Ababa
3,440,162
212
Uganda Embassy in China, Beijing
5,980,510
213
Uganda Embassy in Rwanda, Kigali
3,304,529
214
Uganda Embassy in Switzerland, Geneva
7,659,742
215
Uganda Embassy in Japan, Tokyo
6,037,859
216
Uganda Embassy in Libya, Tripoli
-
217
Uganda Embassy in Saudi Arabia, Riyadh
5,210,883
218
Uganda Embassy in Denmark, Copenhagen
6,385,223
219
Uganda Embassy in Belgium, Brussels
5,529,089
220
Uganda Embassy in Italy, Rome
5,031,882
221
Uganda Embassy in DRC, Kinshasa
4,719,705
223
Uganda Embassy in Sudan, Khartoum
3,959,020
224
Uganda Embassy in France, Paris
5,859,489
225
Uganda Embassy in Germany, Berlin
5,768,549
226
Uganda Embassy in Teheran
3,842,123
227
Uganda Embassy in Moscow
5,606,341
228
Uganda Embassy in Canberra
4,617,543
229
Uganda Embassy in Juba
5,678,816
230
Uganda Embassy in Abu Dhabi 
8,500,299
231
Uganda Embassy in Bujumbura 
2,786,115
232
Guangzhou Consulate in China
4,544,718
233
Mission in  Ankara
5,878,014
234
Mission in  Mogadishu
2,876,276
235
Mission in   Kuala Lumpur
3,542,140
236
Mission in  Mombasa
3,096,468
237
Mission in Algiers 
4,617,047
238
Uganda Embassy, Doha
3,183,047
 
Sub-total -Missions Abroad
190,231,999
 
Local Governments

501
Adjumani District
25,777,962
502
Apac District
17,575,455
503
Arua District
12,094,796
504
Bugiri District
28,528,493
505
Bundibugyo District
29,328,677
506
Bushenyi District
24,226,307
507
Busia District
28,428,690
508
Gulu District
19,006,082
509
Hoima District
16,859,596
510
Iganga District
29,609,909
511
Jinja District
26,849,825
512
Kabale District
28,008,219
513
Kabarole District
17,055,147
514
Kaberamaido District
12,780,769
515
Kalangala District
11,495,897
517
Kamuli District
37,821,317
518
Kamwenge District
23,190,706
519
Kanungu District
35,213,314
520
Kapchorwa District
15,333,060
521
Kasese District
59,014,239
522
Katakwi District
21,670,748
523
Kayunga District
31,733,518
524
Kibaale District
14,985,662
525
Kiboga District
20,376,242
526
Kisoro District
33,752,876
527
Kitgum District
23,309,506
528
Kotido District
9,601,993
529
Kumi District
22,073,249
530
Kyenjojo District
30,432,212
531
Lira District
23,757,184
532
Luwero District
51,639,094
533
Masaka District
10,697,306
534
Masindi District
19,518,778
535
Mayuge District
33,338,721
536
Mbale District
28,956,273
537
Mbarara District
19,507,162
538
Moroto District
11,565,987
539
Moyo District
17,440,310
540
Mpigi District
23,250,171
541
Mubende District
21,341,924
542
Mukono District
39,980,613
543
Nakapiripirit District
9,778,572
544
Nakasongola District
24,914,180
545
Nebbi District
22,838,987
546
Ntungamo District
41,694,094
547
Pader District
24,763,396
548
Pallisa District
25,569,016
549
Rakai District
30,160,137
550
Rukungiri District
34,029,829
551
Sembabule District
25,484,143
552
Sironko District
27,294,550
553
Soroti District
17,280,352
554
Tororo District
46,681,924
555
Wakiso District
64,156,563
556
Yumbe District
37,044,376
557
Butaleja District
27,436,998
558
Ibanda District
18,120,237
559
Kaabong District
13,967,967
560
Isingiro District
34,896,382
561
Kaliro District
25,324,618
562
Kiruhura District
15,162,590
563
Koboko District
15,282,727
564
Amolatar District
16,351,660
565
Amuria District
18,731,129
566
Manafwa District
20,497,120
567
Bukwo District
19,718,853
568
Mityana District
24,898,238
569
Nakaseke District
26,862,167
570
Amuru District
17,058,421
571
Budaka District
21,271,276
572
Oyam District
29,975,931
573
Abim District
15,174,538
574
Namutumba District
23,644,184
575
Dokolo District
17,994,271
576
Buliisa District
12,179,012
577
Maracha District
20,314,899
578
Bukedea District
23,788,032
579
Bududa District
23,233,193
580
Lyantonde District
14,070,729
581
Amudat District
7,311,573
582
Buikwe District
18,720,971
583
Buyende District
19,095,975
584
Kyegegwa District
19,070,069
585
Lamwo District
16,494,171
586
Otuke District
14,006,504
587
Zombo District
20,234,144
588
Alebtong District
19,510,731
589
Bulambuli District
19,220,173
590
Buvuma District
10,270,228
591
Gomba District
17,450,181
592
Kiryandongo District
19,517,450
593
Luuka District
22,626,283
594
Namayingo District
20,104,837
595
Ntoroko District
12,292,229
596
Serere District
27,069,994
597
Kyankwanzi District
20,970,189
598
Kalungu District
21,267,445
599
Lwengo District
22,779,163
600
Bukomansimbi District
14,938,153
601
Mitooma District
23,079,527
602
Rubirizi District
14,671,823
603
Ngora District
16,361,283
604
Napak District
12,692,156
605
Kibuku District
18,035,649
606
Nwoya District
15,601,998
607
Kole District
20,220,288
608
Butambala District
18,299,072
609
Sheema District
22,143,504
610
Buhweju District
12,538,337
611
Agago District
24,398,353
612
Kween District
15,995,435
613
Kagadi District
28,352,897
614
Kakumiro District
18,216,836
615
Omoro District
18,637,403
616
Rubanda District
22,543,579
617
Namisindwa District
23,407,732
618
Pakwach District
16,280,922
619
Butebo District
14,252,577
620
Rukiga District
18,030,596
621
Kyotera District
28,512,795
622
Bunyangabu District
16,306,753
623
Nabilatuk District
6,753,509
624
Bugweri District
15,938,176
625
Kasanda District
19,238,609
626
Kwania District
20,290,373
627
Kapelebyong District
10,759,585
628
Kikuube District
16,692,682
629
Obongi District
9,797,119
630
Kazo District
14,879,405
631
Rwampara District
17,115,837
632
Kitagwenda District
16,070,287
633
Madi-Okollo District
14,144,177
634
Karenga District
8,306,786
635
Kalaki District
11,667,159
636
Terego District
22,218,352
752
Entebbe Municipal Council
14,897,053
757
Kabale Municipal Council
12,128,073
762
Moroto Municipal Council
3,929,282
764
Tororo Municipal Council
7,068,123
770
Kasese Municipal Council
11,835,941
772
Mukono Municipal Council
16,297,405
773
Iganga Municipal Council
5,376,908
774
Masindi Municipal Council
9,553,597
775
Ntungamo Municipal Council
4,014,645
776
Busia Municipal Council
5,663,953
777
Bushenyi- Ishaka Municipal Council
8,571,361
778
Rukungiri Municipal Council
7,172,250
779
Nansana Municipal Council
17,342,626
780
Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipal Council
13,091,444
781
Kira Municipal Council
18,022,695
782
Kisoro Municipal Council
3,584,507
783
Mityana Municipal Council
8,627,305
784
Kitgum Municipal Council
5,094,345
785
Koboko Municipal Council
6,412,863
786
Mubende Municipal Council
8,563,770
787
Kumi Municipal Council
5,606,310
788
Lugazi Municipal Council
6,721,096
789
Kamuli Municipal Council
5,931,623
790
Kapchorwa Municipal Council
7,010,131
791
Ibanda Municipal Council
11,261,938
792
Njeru Municipal Council
10,420,312
793
Apac Municipal Council
5,977,423
794
Nebbi Municipal Council
6,285,286
795
Bugiri Municipal Council
4,129,590
796
Sheema Municipal Council
11,315,011
797
Kotido Municipal Council
6,961,400
851
Arua city
28,245,137
852
Mbarara city
26,487,797
853
Gulu city
19,226,583
854
Jinja city
33,507,243
855
Fort-Portal city
16,591,690
856
Mbale city
26,767,343
857
Masaka city
21,701,076
858
Lira city
20,405,088
859
Soroti city
14,267,527
860
Hoima city
12,522,404
500-860
Sub-total - Local Governments
3,408,765,462
 
TOTAL - RECURRENT
12,660,868,633

DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE

Vote 
Description
Shs '000
001
Office of the President
15,496,194
002
State House
12,338,411
003
Office of the Prime Minister
101,411,955
004
Ministry of Defence
2,467,382,828
005
Ministry of Public Service
4,912,759
006
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
712,991
007
Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
40,921,405
008
Ministry of Finance, Planning & Economic Dev.
273,384,205
009
Ministry of Internal Affairs
7,428,702
010
Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry & Fisheries
503,351,284
011
Ministry of Local Government
152,009,143
012
Ministry of Lands, Housing & Urban Development
111,854,453
013
Ministry of Education and Sports 
255,753,314
014
Ministry of Health
1,398,319,633
015
Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives
25,180,389
016
Ministry of Works and Transport
845,609,759
017
Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development
643,386,931
018
Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development
8,487,084
019
Ministry of Water and Environment
1,174,844,318
020
Ministry of ICT and National Guidance
29,022,840
021
Ministry of East African Community Affairs
920,400
022
Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities
16,140,969
023
Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation
193,853,419
024
Ministry of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs
-
101
Judiciary
58,009,500
102
Electoral Commission
66,200,000
103
Inspectorate of Government (IG)
13,293,213
104
Parliamentary Commission
175,691,000
105
Law Reform Commission
200,020
106
Uganda Human Rights Commission
1,051,797
107
Uganda AIDS Commission
1,850,000
108
National Planning Authority
4,414,168
109
Law Development Centre
9,512,771
110
Uganda Industrial Research Institute
5,496,000
111
Busitema University
9,672,570
112
Ethics and Integrity
650,000
113
Uganda National Roads Authority
3,209,718,500
114
Uganda Cancer Institute
49,851,858
115
Uganda Heart Institute
8,650,000
116
National Medical Stores
10,078,764
117
Uganda Tourism Board
155,303
118
Road Fund
16,390,000
119
Uganda Registration Services Bureau
405,000
120
National Citizenship and Immigration Control
9,227,157
121
Dairy Development Authority
1,150,382
122
Kampala Capital City Authority
386,506,255
123
Rural Electrification Agency (REA)
494,420,340
124
Equal Opportunities Commission
360,426
125
National Animal Genetic Res. Centre and Data Bank
61,344,217
126
National Information Technology Authority
117,521,606
127
Muni University
7,200,000
128
Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB)
36,400,000
129
Financial Intelligence Authority
215,000
131
Auditor General
3,050,000
132
Education Service Commission
3,691,530
133
Directorate of Public Prosecutions
13,292,766
134
Health Service Commission
80,000
136
Makerere University
16,716,210
137
Mbarara University

3,685,769
138
Makerere University Business School
3,220,500
139
Kyambogo University
1,842,845
140
Uganda Management Institute
1,200,000
141
URA
44,243,696
142
National Agricultural Research Organisation
51,472,994
143
Uganda Bureau of Statistics
20,409,486
144
Uganda Police Force
244,740,492
145
Uganda Prisons
40,026,536
146
Public Service Commission
2,134,222
147
Local Government Finance Commission
156,700
148
Judicial Service Commission
772,797
149
Gulu University
3,213,666
150
National Environment Management Authority
990,000
151
Uganda Blood Transfusion Service (UBTS)
2,181,330
152
NAADS Secretariat
99,145,057
153
PPDA
10,994,000
154
Uganda National Bureau of Standards
7,652,915
155
Uganda Cotton Development Organisation
4,211,000
156
Uganda Land Commission
38,809,756
157
National Forestry Authority
12,882,993
158
ISO
5,110,710
159
External Security Organisation
3,639,296
160
Uganda Coffee Development Authority
3,063,055
161
Mulago Hospital Complex
7,970,000
162
Butabika Hospital
3,808,141
301
Lira University
5,317,212
302
Uganda National Meteorological Authority
14,202,321
303
National Curriculum Development Centre
3,900,000
304
Uganda Virus Research Institute
6,100,000
305
Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory
12,944,357
306
Uganda Export Promotion Board
56,281
307
Kabale University
2,552,240
308
Soroti University
3,956,768
309
National Identification and Registration Authority 
7,366,563
310
Uganda Investment Authority
49,431,884
312
Petroleum Authority of Uganda
10,927,000
313
Capital Markets Authority
-
314
National Lotteries and Gaming Regulatory Board
-
315
National Population Council
820,000
316
Uganda Free Zones Authority
7,875,639
317
Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority
-
318
Uganda Retirements Benefits Regulatory Authority
-
319
National Council for Higher Education
-
320
Uganda Business and Technical Examination Board
5,000,000
321
National Council of Sports
-
 
 Sub-total -Central Votes ( Excl. Referrals and Missions) 
13,823,217,958
 
Referral Hospitals

163
Arua Referral Hospital
2,200,000
164
Fort Portal Referral Hospital
720,000
165
Gulu Referral Hospital
1,900,000
166
Hoima Referral Hospital
200,000
167
Jinja Referral Hospital
1,065,000
168
Kabale Referral Hospital
2,080,000
169
Masaka Referral Hospital
3,500,000
170
Mbale Referral Hospital
2,700,000
171
Soroti Referral Hospital
200,000
172
Lira Referral Hospital
200,000
173
Mbarara Referral Hospital
1,800,000
174
Mubende Referral Hospital
3,558,723
175
Moroto Referral Hospital
600,000
176
Naguru Referral Hospital
900,000
177
Kiruddu Referral Hospital
2,550,000
178
Kawempe  Referral Hospital
1,500,000
179
Entebbe Regional Referral Hospital
1,500,000
180
Mulago Specialized Women and Neonatal Hospital
3,780,000
 
 Sub-total -Referral Hospitals 
30,953,723
 
Missions Abroad

201
Ugandan Mission at the United Nations, New York
-
202
Uganda High Commission in United Kingdom, London
220,167
203
Uganda High Commission in Canada, Ottawa
-
204
Uganda High Commission in India, New Delhi
-
205
Uganda High Commission in Egypt, Cairo
-
206
Uganda High Commission in Kenya, Nairobi
11,475,770
207
Uganda High Commission in Tanzania, Dar es Salaam
350,000
208
Uganda High Commission in Nigeria, Abuja
3,000,000
209
Uganda High Commission in South Africa, Pretoria
170,000
210
Uganda Embassy in Washington
170,000
211
Uganda Embassy in Ethiopia, Addis Ababa
-
212
Uganda Embassy in China, Beijing
300,000
213
Uganda Embassy in Rwanda, Kigali
-
214
Uganda Embassy in Switzerland, Geneva
-
215
Uganda Embassy in Japan, Tokyo
-
216
Uganda Embassy in Libya, Tripoli
-
217
Uganda Embassy in Saudi Arabia, Riyadh
-
218
Uganda Embassy in Denmark, Copenhagen
-
219
Uganda Embassy in Belgium, Brussels
170,000
220
Uganda Embassy in Italy, Rome
-
221
Uganda Embassy in DRC, Kinshasa
4,507,163
223
Uganda Embassy in Sudan, Khartoum
170,000
224
Uganda Embassy in France, Paris
5,350,000
225
Uganda Embassy in Germany, Berlin
-
226
Uganda Embassy in Teheran
-
227
Uganda Embassy in Moscow
-
228
Uganda Embassy in Canberra
-
229
Uganda Embassy in Juba
1,000,000
230
Uganda Embassy in Abu Dhabi 
500,000
231
Uganda Embassy in Bujumbura 
-
232
Guangzhou Consulate in China
3,170,000
233
Mission in  Ankara
-
234
Mission in  Mogadishu
2,000,000
235
Mission in   Kuala Lumpur
170,000
236
Mission in  Mombasa
200,750
237
Mission in  Algiers 
-
238
Uganda Embassy, Doha
-
 
Sub-total -Missions Abroad
32,923,850
 
Local Governments

501
Adjumani District
8,924,951
502
Apac District
2,089,013
503
Arua District
4,486,396
504
Bugiri District
6,180,308
505
Bundibugyo District
6,004,996
506
Bushenyi District
4,416,304
507
Busia District
5,317,971
508
Gulu District
3,440,677
509
Hoima District
3,247,769
510
Iganga District
4,399,640
511
Jinja District
6,420,686
512
Kabale District
5,470,145
513
Kabarole District
6,600,608
514
Kaberamaido District
1,834,174
515
Kalangala District
2,682,017
517
Kamuli District
7,714,892
518
Kamwenge District
10,424,605
519
Kanungu District
3,181,861
520
Kapchorwa District
3,266,973
521
Kasese District
7,952,384
522
Katakwi District
7,225,602
523
Kayunga District
6,672,466
524
Kibaale District
8,684,388
525
Kiboga District
2,450,135
526
Kisoro District
3,805,794
527
Kitgum District
3,484,756
528
Kotido District
3,168,026
529
Kumi District
4,362,601
530
Kyenjojo District
9,543,012
531
Lira District
5,558,790
532
Luwero District
8,872,623
533
Masaka District
1,891,238
534
Masindi District
3,621,900
535
Mayuge District
10,052,398
536
Mbale District
5,473,214
537
Mbarara District
4,353,049
538
Moroto District
3,028,528
539
Moyo District
3,866,618
540
Mpigi District
3,941,786
541
Mubende District
9,959,852
542
Mukono District
6,809,089
543
Nakapiripirit District
2,767,457
544
Nakasongola District
3,095,519
545
Nebbi District
4,480,453
546
Ntungamo District
9,592,599
547
Pader District
4,618,315
548
Pallisa District
4,792,247
549
Rakai District
5,035,411
550
Rukungiri District
5,132,689
551
Sembabule District
4,493,017
552
Sironko District
5,744,193
553
Soroti District
4,308,455
554
Tororo District
9,080,612
555
Wakiso District
15,438,981
556
Yumbe District
19,528,849
557
Butaleja District
5,016,476
558
Ibanda District
3,647,757
559
Kaabong District
1,869,620
560
Isingiro District
17,340,430
561
Kaliro District
4,462,604
562
Kiruhura District
4,839,556
563
Koboko District
3,402,663
564
Amolatar District
4,357,290
565
Amuria District
6,591,934
566
Manafwa District
4,677,113
567
Bukwo District
5,434,297
568
Mityana District
3,440,429
569
Nakaseke District
4,272,292
570
Amuru District
4,898,860
571
Budaka District
5,689,428
572
Oyam District
8,261,010
573
Abim District
2,566,722
574
Namutumba District
3,855,345
575
Dokolo District
4,563,285
576
Buliisa District
3,587,096
577
Maracha District
4,436,075
578
Bukedea District
5,287,555
579
Bududa District
6,500,689
580
Lyantonde District
3,309,803
581
Amudat District
2,733,932
582
Buikwe District
2,742,236
583
Buyende District
4,202,403
584
Kyegegwa District
8,558,162
585
Lamwo District
7,663,426
586
Otuke District
2,712,469
587
Zombo District
3,910,511
588
Alebtong District
5,200,554
589
Bulambuli District
5,304,006
590
Buvuma District
5,961,616
591
Gomba District
2,832,687
592
Kiryandongo District
8,859,575
593
Luuka District
4,130,167
594
Namayingo District
3,710,999
595
Ntoroko District
3,539,081
596
Serere District
5,723,553
597
Kyankwanzi District
7,187,338
598
Kalungu District
2,603,694
599
Lwengo District
5,031,427
600
Bukomansimbi District
2,148,313
601
Mitooma District
3,145,094
602
Rubirizi District
4,883,801
603
Ngora District
2,851,726
604
Napak District
3,431,195
605
Kibuku District
5,205,924
606
Nwoya District
5,982,243
607
Kole District
3,814,366
608
Butambala District
1,845,792
609
Sheema District
3,243,407
610
Buhweju District
5,288,147
611
Agago District
5,514,413
612
Kween District
3,646,851
613
Kagadi District
6,880,001
614
Kakumiro District
8,746,935
615
Omoro District
3,154,719
616
Rubanda District
4,380,694
617
Namisindwa District
3,136,337
618
Pakwach District
3,107,737
619
Butebo District
3,341,277
620
Rukiga District
1,660,894
621
Kyotera District
4,153,124
622
Bunyangabu District
3,449,470
623
Nabilatuk District
1,596,558
624
Bugweri District
3,072,315
625
Kasanda District
7,757,560
626
Kwania District
2,368,388
627
Kapelebyong District
3,264,707
628
Kikuube District
3,882,532
629
Obongi District
3,986,331
630
Kazo District
5,369,260
631
Rwampara District
2,055,466
632
Kitagwenda District
3,261,354
633
Madi-Okollo District
4,623,253
634
Karenga District
1,978,209
635
Kalaki District
3,069,532
636
Terego District
6,598,875
752
Entebbe Municipal Council
19,686,572
757
Kabale Municipal Council
11,041,458
762
Moroto Municipal Council
5,957,291
764
Tororo Municipal Council
11,462,117
770
Kasese Municipal Council
17,830,071
772
Mukono Municipal Council
1,316,520
773
Iganga Municipal Council
532,407
774
Masindi Municipal Council
1,565,259
775
Ntungamo Municipal Council
5,664,707
776
Busia Municipal Council
12,220,425
777
Bushenyi- Ishaka Municipal Council
798,671
778
Rukungiri Municipal Council
514,011
779
Nansana Municipal Council
6,352,032
780
Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipal Council
10,840,144
781
Kira Municipal Council
7,730,646
782
Kisoro Municipal Council
270,144
783
Mityana Municipal Council
765,186
784
Kitgum Municipal Council
10,181,688
785
Koboko Municipal Council
3,248,933
786
Mubende Municipal Council
20,940,603
787
Kumi Municipal Council
1,034,535
788
Lugazi Municipal Council
19,533,316
789
Kamuli Municipal Council
14,522,223
790
Kapchorwa Municipal Council
413,805
791
Ibanda Municipal Council
1,091,566
792
Njeru Municipal Council
1,772,260
793
Apac Municipal Council
13,231,504
794
Nebbi Municipal Council
250,383
795
Bugiri Municipal Council
449,052
796
Sheema Municipal Council
898,410
797
Kotido Municipal Council
680,159
851
Arua city
12,785,561
852
Mbarara city
31,925,452
853
Gulu city
24,795,148
854
Jinja city
19,098,476
855
Fort-Portal city
12,726,306
856
Mbale city
21,445,327
857
Masaka city
18,195,458
858
Lira city
17,401,722
859
Soroti city
13,432,008
860
Hoima city
18,426,646
500-860
Sub-total -Local Governments
1,072,832,199
 
TOTAL - DEVELOPMENT
14,959,927,730
 
GRAND TOTAL APPROPRIATION
27,620,796,363









