Thursday, 6 May 2010

Parliament met at 3.02 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to welcome you to today’s meeting. I would like to ask you to join me in welcoming a number of guests from the Parliament of Zambia who sit on the Committee on Communications, Transport, Works and Supply. 

The committee is chaired by hon. Ngandu Maganda, chairperson. You are welcome. (Applause) We have hon. Esther Banda, member of the committee; hon. Joseph Kasango, member; hon. Batuke Imenda, member; hon. Willie Nsanda, member; hon. George Chazangwe, member and Mr Martin Phiri, the secretary to the delegation. They are here to share experiences with us. I hope you noted that some of the names are Ugandan. (Applause)

I also want to take this opportunity to remind the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development that about three weeks ago, I submitted the National Development Plan to you with instructions to report back. As you are aware, the President launched that plan and I think the government will benefit from our input. I would like to urge you to complete work on it and report back next week. Thank you very much.

3.04
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on an issue of national importance, which relates to voter registration.

As we may all be aware, this week the Electoral Commission started the process of voter registration countrywide. However, there are two issues of concern. One is that the duration, which the Electoral Commission gave to Ugandans to complete the process, is only about three weeks.

Secondly, the arrival of the materials at the different polling stations and districts of Uganda is quite challenging. For example, in my constituency, some cameras have not arrived and there are fewer facilities than what is anticipated, and the people are not yet aware of which polling stations they are supposed to go to.

My urge to the Government Chief Whip or the Attorney-General is that they should consider advising the Electoral Commission to extend the period of voter registration. This is important because people say they are still planting, given the fact that there are rains in the North. So, I wish the Attorney-General, Madam Speaker, through you, could make a commitment that he will prevail over the Electoral Commission to extend the period of voter registration. I beg to pray, Madam Speaker.

MR KIGYAGI: Clarification, Madam Speaker. I think now that we are operating under a multi-party system, the onus is on all of us as parties, individuals and as civil society. All Members of Parliament received a letter from the Electoral Commission on the continuous registration; the registration exercise has never stopped – we received a letter –(Mr Okumu rose_)– just hold on, let me explain myself. It is because you do not read those documents and you do not follow what is contained in there. Otherwise, continuous registration has been on and every Member of Parliament of Uganda together with all the leaders received that notice. 

What does continuous registration mean? It means that if you are not yet registered, but you have attained 18 years of age – all the offices at the district were open. It was also possible to organise –(Interruptions)

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, hon. Odonga Otto raised a very pertinent issue and everybody in this House knows that we just received a communication from the Electoral Commission in regard to voters’ register update. 

Also, everybody knows that in the countryside, there has been no continuity for voters’ register update as the honourable member claims. Is it, therefore, in order for a backbench Member to talk on behalf of the Electoral Commission as if he understands the nitty-gritty of the activities of the Electoral Commission, yet what he is saying is actually a lie – the exercise is not taking place in the countryside?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, maybe he is giving us an update from his area.

MR KIGYAGI: We all agree that there is a problem because this exercise was not taken seriously. That is why we are now asking – even this date was just a favour; it would not have been as long as this because they know we did not respond to that call of continuous registration.

Hon. Odonga Otto, I agree with you that we have a problem and that what you are raising is a concern, but we should also not blame the Electoral Commission for having given us an opportunity to continuously register; but as Ugandans we are used to massive registration where all of us go to register at once. So, while we blame the Electoral Commission, let us blame ourselves as parties or individuals too. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I hope the Attorney-General will be able to respond. However, I just want to remind Members of this House that if we influence the delay of this process even by another two months, it will affect the electoral programme. I know that I am on record for saying that Members have been blaming the Electoral Commission for delays and mismanaging elections, but I think we should do our work and leave them to do theirs. Anyway, let us hear from the Minister of Justice on what they are going to do.

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I think the concerns being raised are pertinent. I was following up the beginning of this exercise. I have heard the remarks that were made by the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission himself. What I can say is that the beginning of every task is always difficult because there are always challenges to every beginning of any exercise. He has actually indicated that any anomalies that are occasioned at the beginning of this work will be immediately remedied. 

So, I urge my colleagues and other public leaders to identify those concerns and immediately communicate them to the commission and where appropriate, to the sector ministry – Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. We will ensure registration goes on very smoothly. But if there is any need for making any statement at any given time, I am willing to generate one for presentation to the House. Thank you.

MOTION FOR THE RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO URGENTLY MAINSTREAM CLIMATE CHANGE AND MITIGATE GLOBAL WARMING WITH IMMEDIATE EFFECT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Ebong.

3.12
MR DAVID EBONG (Independent, Maruzi County, Apac): Madam Speaker, I hereby move a motion for a Resolution of Parliament urging Government to urgently mainstream climate change and mitigate global warming with immediate effect.  The motion is moved under rules 43, 47 and 50 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS Parliament of Uganda is the legislative arm of Government, and a representative of the people of Uganda is called to be environmentally responsible in carrying out its functions; 

AND WHEREAS Uganda’s continuous and vastly increased use of charcoal, petroleum and fossil fuels have the potential to bring about irreversible changes in the climate and immense suffering for the poor;

AWARE that the recommendations of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 1992, the Kyoto Protocol, 1997 and the report entitled, “Our Common Future’  1987” of the World Commission on Environment and Development chaired by Dr Gro Harlem Brundtland;

COGNISANT of the fact that Uganda is a signatory to the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity;
 
CONVINCED that our home, the Earth is growing hotter, and scientists are essentially unanimous that the release of Greenhouse Gases into the atmosphere is the principal cause of the Chief Greenhouse Gas emitted by burning fossil fuels like coal, natural gases and renewable fuel like firewood;

AWARE THAT the world is finally having the debate over the Greenhouse Gas emissions and what to do about them with the general consensus that much action should have started long time ago;

NOTING THAT the Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in a recent report, makes it clear that the poorest will be the most at risk because of soil moisture reduction, changes in rainfall, and extreme weather events;

AWARE of the need by every country around the globe in general, but particularly in Uganda as a country and Chair of the African Union on Environment to start addressing these eminent challenges;

NOW, THEREFORE –(Interruptions)

MR MIREGEKO: This is a very important motion, which my brother, hon. David Ebong is tabling. However, is it possible for Members to be availed with copies of what is being tabled? Obviously, the Executive will be expected to take a lot of interest in this matter because it is the Executive that is being urged – is it possible that we can be availed copies of the motion that is being moved?

MR EBONG: Madam Speaker, the copies of this motion are on the table in the lobby; they should be distributed – that is where I also picked my copy from. Madam Speaker, I would like to move that it be resolved by Parliament as follows:

    1. The Government of Uganda constitutes an inter-ministerial committee on climate change issues at the highest level possible and strengthens political will at all levels.

    2. The Government of Uganda expeditiously takes proactive action in mainstreaming climate change with immediate and reflect on the planning and budget framework for financial year 2010/2011.

    3. The Government fast tracks with respect to airing, but not limited to clear development mechanisms, reducing emission from deforestation and forest degradation, to mention, but a few.

    4.  The Government of Uganda implements the Renewal Energy Policy, 2007 with immediate effect aimed at reducing Greenhouse Gases.

    5.  The Government of Uganda considers providing funds to promote and jumpstart investment or business models that promote adaptation and mitigation for inflow of carbon credits through public/private partnership.

    6.  The Government of Uganda conducts a carbon audit to see how the country can reduce on net emissions and invest corporate citizenship contribution towards the reduction of Greenhouse Gases.

    7.  The Government of Uganda embarks on aggressive incentives to promote tree planting activities since the carbon offset industry is expanding rapidly; and 

    8. That the climate change unit with multidisciplinary stakeholders’ involvement for proactive institutional linkages and integrated approach be reverted to the Office of the Prime Minster.” 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

3.18
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I would like to second hon. Ebong’s motion. When I am addressing issues of climate change I try to make them simple because these are things we live with and things that we can do. They are important because one of the challenges for us as a country is that as Government or Parliament or civil society, we have not gone out to the people to make these big principles understood in a simple manner.

As you know, Madam Speaker and hon. Members, although Africa and Uganda in particular –(Interruptions)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether I am following it. I thought after hon. Ebong moving the motion, hon. Kigyagi would just indicate that he has seconded it and allow the mover to first speak to it. It is moved, but he has not spoken to it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He sat down.

MR EBONG: Thank you my honourable colleague. Allow me to justify the rationale for having this motion in Parliament. 

Climate change is now a global issue. The effects are already being felt locally. It is already biting. The floods of 2007 in North East and Northern Uganda are still fresh in our minds; the Bududa incident that happened recently reminds us vividly of the impact of climate change in our community. World over, food crisis is becoming an increasing trend. Therefore, failure to take action now, we would meet dire consequences. It is imperative that at this point in time, policy makers like us should realign efforts in matching up and shift in the new development paradigms brought about by climate change.

Uganda is applauded internationally for greater proactive response in terms of policy formulation, but at the same time, we suffer the challenges of poor policy implementation. Climate change would not require this status quo. In maintaining business as usual, we would have sacrificed the future of this country; we would have sacrificed the future of smallholder farmers and especially the poor. We need to take action now. 

One of the instances where I would strongly appeal is the implementation of the renewal energy policy. By December last year, the carbon credits that were meant to be absorbed by developing countries and particularly Africa, were amounting to US$ 92 million, which was unspent, and the trend for this is increasing.

Sub-Saharan Africa, where Uganda is, is only absorbing 2 percent of the entire global share on CDM, but South Africa is absorbing 56 percent. Why? Because of the policy environment they have created. They have adopted clean technology that is enabling reduction in greenhouse gases. So, Uganda has got to jumpstart this process. 

The Renewal Energy Policy 2007 is indeed the entry point for starting implementation of this policy. The policy requires all petroleum companies in Uganda to blend their fossil fuel with 20 percent of plant oil. This is a huge market for our farmers. What our farmers don’t have essentially is the market. You take, for instance, a diesel thermal plant in Namanve, which is utilising approximately 200,000 litres of diesel daily. If you introduce the blending policy on that alone, that means every hour Ugandan farmers, on that one plant, are entitled to a market of Shs 60 million per day. It makes a lot of sense if we are talking about exploring our oil products. The oil resource needs to be conserved for the next generation. 

Surely, the best environmental way of exploiting it, in terms of conserving for the next generation, is implementing the blending policy. Because everyday you save 20 percent; bringing a balance between renewal and non-renewable resources; oil being non-renewable whereas bio-fuel is a renewable resource.

I know there are arguments of food security. The argument of food security does not stand because Uganda has got vast lands particularly in the North where only about 9 percent of the land is being utilised for production. What is important is for our people to have money in their pockets. I have never found anybody with money in his pockets sleeping hungry. That does not happen in practical terms. We need to realign our thinking to having more economic responsive policies and implement them. 

The Renewable Energy Policy, 2007 again says that Uganda has got the potential of generating 5,000 mega watts of electricity from biomass. Now, we have only co-generation facilities in Uganda – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Ebong, hon. Kigyagi had said that you should simplify the message. (Laughter) I think your message is still very high. Simplify it for Ugandans.

MR EBONG: Madam Speaker, climate change will remain a complex issue, but we have to try as much as possible to understand it because doing so would make us have a better country.

The issue of clean technology transfer is not a question of re-inventing the wheel. There are already best practices and technologies that are already piloted in many countries globally. Uganda must take the lead to provide a conducive environment for public-private partnership in order to jumpstart this process. 

We need to embark aggressively on tree planting. If you have land, without trees, it appreciates at 2.5 percent per annum. From a banking standpoint, if you plant trees, it appreciates at 4.5 percent per annum. The implication is that if you have Shs 10 million today and you use it for tree planting, in 20 years you will be a billionaire - if we create this environment for our people, this takes us to toning down to our own perspective. If we create this environment for our people, then inevitably we would have created a big resource for the generation to come. 

Madam Speaker, there is quite enormous data on climate change. We need to do enough research so that this Parliament will act from an informed point of view and realign our development priorities in order to move in such a direction.

Lastly, in terms of justifying this motion, the issue of institutional functionality remains the biggest problem. We are living in institutions which are dysfunctional, with poor implementation of policies. The policies are kept in safes and this does not match the environmental challenges we have in terms of the rate at which they are being depleted. 

Uganda is losing over 92,000 hectares of forests per annum and this is very challenging. We need to act now and ensure that the policy environment, when implemented, will make us deliver the results that will relieve our people. The REDD mechanism would deserve a better institutional framework. 

To me, the mandate of implementing climate change activities would basically be on profiling it institutionally, where there is command. Most countries in the region, Kenya and Tanzania alike, have really made the climate change unit to be under the Office of the Prime Minister with a better mandate in facilitating institutional linkages.

Madam Speaker, based on this justification, I beg and pray honourable Members of Parliament to approve this motion so that it is taken up by Government seriously. And I pray that Government takes a pro-active step in constituting a ministerial committee.

When the DRC constituted a ministerial committee on implementing REDD, straight away they were expecting a budget of US$ 2.6 million, but it shot up to US$ 600 million. Uganda has got the capacity to set this momentum for Africa. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kigyagi, I hope you will be able to explain what REDD is, really in words, for the Hansard.

3.30
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): I will try to be brief and amplify this by seconding, hon. Ebong’s motion. 

As hon. Ebong has said, it is true that as a continent and as Uganda in particular, although we contribute negligibly to global warming and climate change, we have the biggest effects. They are here with us and we must find local ways of dealing with these effects to minimise their effects on human beings and our property.

Madam Speaker, knowledge of climate change is even very well known to the people in Kamuli. When you ask the people of Kamuli or Bududa, they know that the rains have changed their patterns. They know that the yields have gone down. They know that diseases, both of crops and human beings, have increased. They know very well when we had this crisis of Lake Victoria - when the swamps dried and the water levels were low. The issue of famine, floods, drought, death of animals, energy and pollution is very well known to our local people. 

For us as Parliament, we only need to put in place mechanisms through legislation and policy guidance so that these effects which affect our people can be mitigated. We shall go and talk in international fora, make very good resolutions, but we must now look at how we are affected locally. And we have a way of mitigating some of these effects in a simple way. For example, 70 percent of the disasters in Uganda are climate change related. I will not go into details because you know what happened in Bududa; the flash floods in the East and North of Uganda; the famine which is almost endemic in this country; all these issues are known and we need to find a way of handling them. 

We have two challenges: One, low levels of awareness - although people know, for us the leaders, we have not come out to help and show people what can be done. Two, inadequate technical capacity, infrastructure and funds - our environment is already degraded - and weak governance. 

What can we do? My proposal is a humble one, Madam Speaker. With all these challenges that we have as a country, let us move forward and teach our people how to manage some of these challenges. You do not need any technology to inform people that they should leave trees standing; you do not need any science to show people how to plant tress; we do not need a lot of technology to encourage people to terrace and leave patches because when it rains, the soils will go; and we do not need a lot of knowledge to know that ploughing up to the river or lake without leaving a strip will cause erosion of fertile soil. Anyone can know that 70 percent of our forests are on private land. 

As a country, we do not need to know that we need a policy for private forests because that is where most of the forests are. We really do not need to go into all these international fora to understand these simple issues. This REDD, which he was talking about, is the issue of reducing cutting and deforestation. Simple statements a farmer in Kamuli knows. But for us as Government –(Interjection)- yes, in Kamuli, in Bududa, in Mbarara, Manafwa, they know. But for us as Government, what can we provide? I think we need to go back and tell our people - when someone is draining a swamp he doesn’t know the effects of draining a swamp, but it has a long-term effect. Let us go and teach our people; let us use simple policies because these disasters are here; we are all affected but as Government we are not moving strategically to mitigate them.

We have even not ratified protocols and international conventions. We have not domesticated many of them. We need to domesticate them so that we can apply them. My simple request is that as Parliament, let us look at budgetary allocations; let us look at domestication of the international protocols; let us provide guidance and schemes and knowledge that can help our people to reduce degradation. Let us lead by example and through this, we can really achieve a lot. We do not pollute a lot internationally but global warming and climate change effects are intensively here with us and we must find a way of handling them.

Lastly, I think the motion is good, but his last point of moving the climate change unit to the Prime Minister’s Office – I think the Prime Minister’s Office is overloaded. Let us, as a country, agree that climate change issues should be crosscutting in all ministries. We can leave the lead Ministry of Water and Environment, but we introduce it, like we did with HIV/AIDS, for all ministries to be integrated in issues of climate change - Education, Health, Prime Minister’s Office, Labour and Youth and all these other ministries - so that they integrate policies of climate change and global warming.  That way I think we can move forward and manage this issue which is a political issue, because in Manafwa and hon. Dombo’s constituency, because of climate change, the rivers and swamps have changed and I am told that people are fighting. We have a problem in Bundibugyo - River Semliki - because of degradation the river has changed its course. 

We might find ourselves in trouble with international borders because the river has changed course; and as far as DRC is concerned, if the boundary was a river and now River Semliki has gone further into Uganda, we shall see some conflict there. 

We really need to move fast as a country using simple technologies, simple knowledge that we have, simple governance which all of you can agree on, but we fail even to manage simple issues. 

The other day, this Parliament in its wisdom banned kaveera and they gave up to 31st March. But up to today, the government and the Ministry of Finance has failed to bring exceptions. We were sensitive and we said people still have to pack food; people must still use kaveera, but we said bring exceptions. Can you imagine, the deadline has passed but the Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Finance, have failed to bring just exceptions, which we must allow, and then we move on. 

This indiscriminate littering – how can’t we – by pronouncement, Ministry of Local Government or whichever ministry may say, “If you are caught throwing garbage anyhow, you will take responsibility and will be fined?” Just by a simple pronouncement. But everybody is just getting on with business as usual. I think we have a problem. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, join me in welcoming the Mayor of Iganga, soon to be a municipality, Mr Siraje Katono, and his delegation. I think he is following up on yesterday’s issues. 

3.38
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I stand up to support the motion. I would like to thank my brother, Ebong, for having brought this motion. I believe Members here will appreciate the magnitude of the problem of climate change. 

Last year when we were invited to join the Commonwealth Members of Parliament on climate change, we travelled with my brother, Ebong, and when I came back and made a statement to Parliament -(Interjection)- I made a statement to Parliament. When we interacted with other colleagues we found that they had gone very much ahead of us as a country. I actually put Parliament on notice that we needed to have a committee working closely and fast-tracking the climate change issue.

I had gone ahead to engage the research team to make this possible and the Speaker was aware of what was going on. But since my brother Ebong has run ahead and presented, I welcome it and support it with some amendments. 

From the motion and the plea of the mover, which my brother John Kigyagi, also alluded to, to have a climate change unit in the Office of the Prime Minister to fast-track this matter as the demand stands, I think that would be expecting too much. We would like to see a whole ministry created to cater for climate change. 

This is not something outside the ordinary. When we were in Australia, we learnt that they have a full Minister in charge of climate change –(Interjections)– for us to show seriousness on tackling climate change, I would propose that we do not only form an inter-ministerial committee, but create a committee in charge of fast-tracking climate change. This will enable us get quick results as a country.  If we are going to make an inter-ministerial committee, we might fail to know who is answerable to this Parliament on adaptation and mitigation of climate change –(Member timed out_)

3.42
MR JACK WAMANGA (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion, and this motion is long overdue. This Parliament should have taken action since Uganda is a signatory to the Kyoto Protocol. I do not think it is necessary for the Members to labour trying to convince this House on an issue that concerns everybody; it should pass without arguments because we are all concerned about climate change. 

Our neighbours have already taken action. The Government of Kenya does not allow vehicles that are more than five years old. But this country is hoodwinked and told that vehicles that are older than five years can pay taxes. So, we continue importing junk in this country that is causing environmental problems; vehicles that are more than five years are imported in this country; vehicles that have been banned outside Uganda. 

In Europe, way back in 1993, they stopped using red fuel; they use catalysed fuel. But in this country we keep importing junk; these vehicles which do not work in Japan have been brought here. Now, when you go out on our roads, you can see a lot of traffic jam simply because the Government is looking for taxes, and the taxes are passed over to the consumers and these are our common people; the Government is doing nothing. 

Government has got a full Ministry of Water and Environment and they have done nothing at all. People continue building in wetlands; they give away plots in wetlands – you can see what is happening in Bugolobi wetlands, but Government has done nothing. So, if we do not act now, we are in big trouble. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.44
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. David Ebong and hon. John Kigyagi for moving this motion. What hon. Ebong and hon. Kigyagi have done is like in the time of Noah. Noah told that world, “Change your ways, the end has come”. If we do not address the issue of climate change and global warming, then the end has come. It is estimated by scientists that if there is increase in global warming by 0.1, you will all die –(Interjections)– I do not even think people read the demonstration in the lobby; do you? Why are you asking me for the source, why do you think it was put there; it was for you to go and read. Anyway, if you want to hide something from an African, you just write it. I am not surprised. 

When discussing the issue of climate change and global warming, we are talking about your survival as human beings; we are talking about the livelihood of your children and the next generation. 

Madam Speaker, what are the issues; poverty and its impact of global warming. What do we see in our country? Importation of rotten cars! Africa is the dustbin of the world - importation of rotten refrigerators and other useless electronics. If you go to Katwe and Kawempe, you can see how the whole of Uganda has been reduced to a dustbin of the world. Here we are, putting on our good suits, but living in a dustbin. We are not being fair to our country; let us check the importation of these rotten things. In fact we are better off living in the jungle than living with these rotten electronics. The greediness and exploitation of man and its impact on the climate –(Member timed out_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kibanzanga, I would not like the Hansard to remain with what you have said. In this plenary, I remember we had a debate on the banning of importation of used clothing. So, you should not say this House has done nothing; there has been a very hot debate on the Floor of this House. 

3.48
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank hon. David Ebong and hon. John Kigyagi for coming up with this motion. It is true that almost 90 percent of the effect of greenhouse emissions affect the developing world. But it is also true that those responsible for these emissions are in the developed world. Much as we can go ahead and instil some discipline amongst ourselves as developing countries, we will not have done much. The biggest challenge that we have as a continent and as the developing world is to launch a campaign and strategy to confront the developed world which is responsible for these emissions; this is the only way to move forward. 

Ninety percent of all these greenhouse emissions are from the developed world. So, we should unite as Africans or as the developing world and launch a strategy and campaign for our own existence; this is about our future; about our children and grandchildren. It is our children and grandchildren going to die of the effects of all this, yet the people responsible are up there in Europe or in North America busy enjoying. 

This is time to unite and Government should now take a lead in mobilising other governments on the continent and in the third world and we confront the first world that you are killing us; you are killing our children. (Applause) you can ban kaveera - it is something very small; and you can ban these refrigerators hon. Kibanzanga is complaining about. 

With the challenges of poverty - because of some of these things, we need to balance both poverty and development. You need to find a way of balancing to see which is good for our development and which is good for the environment. Those are challenges we can really overcome, but the biggest challenge is where it comes from and it is the role of Government to work as a regional block.

We now have the East African Legislative Assembly or the East African Community; we can put it up and take it to the Pan African Parliament or the African Union. Come up with resolutions; confront the European Union; confront the US and say look here, “We are dying!” - confront China. The problem is that all these countries move to China negotiate a few deals individually -(Member timed out­_)

3.51
MR CHARLES EKEMU (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the mover of the motion, MP for Maruzi and MP for Mbarara Municipality. Climate change and global warming definitely are now serious concerns, not only to us as a country, but it has touched the whole world. The disastrous and life threatening effects are very clear.

Recently, we had the floods in Teso; we have had drought in parts of this country; Karamoja, for instance, had always been in drought; and we had the landslides in Bududa. I think it is a very serious national issue. Although the motion has given us what you would call a global outlook and the seriousness of climate change and global warming, I believe that the problem must be localised now. We must look at it as a responsibility that our Government must take on, first of all, at the individual citizen level. What is our Government not doing about it, and then what I would call Government accepting to take the blame because it has all that it has, to take responsibility in mitigating this situation?

I will give an example. What the motion cites here as the increased use of charcoal - of course that goes with tree cutting as one of the factors that is contributing to climate change and global warming. What is causing this and why has the government with all the agencies that it has failed to do what it should do? So, much as we are looking at joining other nations in the world to mitigate the effects of climate change and global warming, our own house must be cleaned first. Because a thing like charcoal burning has become a way of life; why are people going for charcoal burning? Poverty —(Member timed out_)

3.55
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the mover of this motion and I want to add my voice that I support the motion. As hon. Katuntu put it, Africa is a recipient of the green gas emissions, but as a country like Uganda, we still have a part that we can play to mitigate climate change. The last speaker was saying that cutting of the trees - the charcoal; we may not have alternatives if it is not provided for by Government. People will still cut trees to get firewood. They will still cut tress to get charcoal to cook their food. What are we doing with the programme of rural electrification? Why don’t we have other measures that can be put in place so that there is a reduction in the consumption of the forests? 

Climate change impacts on human settlement and development, and hence, it limits the economic growth of a nation. The issues of Bududa have a lot to do with human settlement. We have seen people cutting the forests and settling there. We have seen people drying the swamps and building there and this country is watching. The minister who is responsible is watching; the local governments are watching; what are we doing in as afar as enforcing the laws and policies that we have in this country, because we have good policies? 

Recently, we passed the Physical Infrastructure and Planning Act, but you may find that it will be shelved and there will be no implementation. Still we will come here and talk about climate change when we have in our hands tools that can really be put into proper implementation and we curb the challenges of climate change.

I think that as a country, we have the weapons, but we are not using them appropriately. I want to urge the frontbench to take this motion which has been presented today very importantly, and to act immediately and make sure that Ugandans are saved from the challenges of climate change and global warming. I thank you and I support the motion.

3.57
MS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I also want to appreciate the mover and the seconder of this motion which I support. It is true that Africa is a very small contributor to these greenhouse gas emissions. I understand of the whole lot, Africa contributes only 2 percent. But that notwithstanding, I am also a strong believer in the saying that, “One by one makes a bundle”. Although we are contributing a very negligible percentage, I believe that as country, we need to take up the challenge now before our percentage goes high. I believe this percentage is going to rise very quickly once we really go into the full production of our new found oil.

This House - as a group of national leaders - needs to take on the challenge and agree on how we want to go about minimising the effect of this climate change. I have always wondered, the women of this country are the biggest users of firewood and charcoal, but if one was to go around and just take a random survey, how many of them have ever heard about climate change or how many of them know about carbon footsteps? Each one of us here and each person on earth does contribute to the climate change effect. Our carbon footsteps are there, but I doubt that there are people who are conscious. And perhaps as leaders, we can start talking about the issues of climate change and what it means for us in our own constituencies.  Madam Speaker, I come from -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe you can tell the people of Uganda what the carbon footsteps are. Can you explain to them so that those who are in Apac and Kamuli can - 

MS LAGADA AMONGI: Yes. From our own activities, like I am a woman; I cook and I use charcoal. I cut down trees and in the process of cutting down trees, which I must cut down to get firewood to cook food, I am contributing – I, as Beatrice Lagada. So, one should be able to know that each person, whatever you do, you are contributing - that is your carbon footstep. You are doing something; you are leaving a trail behind you –(Member timed out­_)

4.01
MRS RUTH KAVUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I definitely would like to support the motion. Let us go to simple issues. Almost all of us pass by wetlands that have been filled. What is happening? All of us, when we leave Parliament and go to our homes - I live in Kyanja and everyday one bit of the wetland around that area is being filled and what can we do? When you try to challenge the people, the LC will say, “If I challenge them, I will not get the votes next time.”

When we talk about what will spoil everything we have - for me on the islands, for example, the fishing village nearest our home is the cleanest on the island because we tell them straight, “If you litter around here we will chase you away.” They still give us votes and still hold us in high esteem because we tell them the truth. I think we need to do something about that and teach ourselves and the population about disposal of rubbish. Like in schools - you pass, for example, Kampala Road, and somebody is driving and they throw out these sachets of Splash because they have finished drinking the Splash. And they are people who are wearing suits like you people and probably some of you, Members of Parliament. (Laughter) I have not seen anybody in a busuuti but basically in suits. So, we need to educate ourselves on simple things before we talk about the big global warming. 

At home, what are we doing? How are we disposing of condoms, sanitary towels and all these things we use everyday? We have to use them. So, how do we dispose of them? Go down to schools and really teach the young about disposal. It is the way we dispose the rubbish that is going to hurt us more than anything else. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am still wondering what happened to the Community Mobilisation Bill that we were told would come about three years ago. Maybe it would have helped us on this issue. In the days of the Kyabazinga, if you did that they would cane you.

4.04
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support the motion and in as far as this motion is concerned, I would like to urge colleagues that other than lament, we need to give real solutions towards environmental degradation. I am very sure that as hon. Katuntu has said, we should go international, but we should also have a local kind of approach that as the international world remits more of the emissions, we should also make sure we are defending ourselves in as far as this is concerned.

I would like to mention that, first of all, we have a ministry and I would like to inform hon. Anywar that there is a Ministry of Environment because she was saying that we need a whole ministry. There is a Ministry of Environment and hon. Eriyo is here. This ministry should massively carry out campaigns - like maybe Ministry of Health carries out campaigns against Malaria - such that people know.

The other simple thing would be that as we develop a curriculum, we should have something to do with environment taught in schools right from primary. Certain subjects are taught at maybe higher levels, like environmental economics at university, and I think that is at the top; but let us have it right from the beginning. 

In as far as encroachment on swamps is concerned, in environmental economics if you are destroying a given swamp, I think there is something done in as far as costs are concerned, and if you are destroying it, then you should pay the amount equivalent to what you have destroyed and you plant a forest, for example at the Centenary Park. And now there is another unserious Ugandan who has destroyed the environment at Spear Motors. The swamp is being filled and I do not know what the Ministry of Environment is doing and hon. Minister, that is where you pass when you are going that end. How strong and how serious is that person who is filling that swamp? That is why we end up with a lot of floods, Madam Speaker.

The other issue is that in Uganda, we make laws but we are cowards when it comes to implementing them. I would like to ask Government to use an iron hand when it comes to environmental degradation - forests, mention them. 

On the issue of votes, the leaders are voted in order to give light to those led, but not to say that when you are encroaching on a forest and you are told to vacate you will not give me the votes. I think that is very unfair. We must handle the issue of environment with an iron hand; without fear or favour.

Lastly, there is the Department of Meteorology. I am told this department is underfunded and that is why it has failed to forecast. When it is likely to be drought they will mention that you are likely to have heavy rain. I am told this department is underfunded and so the Prime Minister’s Office and Minister of Environment let us –(Member timed out_)

4.07
MR TOSKIN BARTILLE (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. First and foremost, I want to support the motion and from the contributions by Members, it is clear that we are going to follow two fronts.   

The first front is the international one, where the African countries and all other developing countries must come together and put up a spirited fight so that the developed countries can be able to do what they are supposed to do - to reduce the emissions because whatever we do here, unless the emissions are reduced, we shall continue to suffer. And of course, it is clear, as it is stated in this report, that we the developing countries are the ones who are suffering most. So, it is important that we take up this position very strongly. 

Before the Copenhagen meeting, all African countries came together and tried to come up with an African position, and the world was supposed to win; and the winning was that the developed countries were supposed to even contribute towards the suffering of the developing countries, but we did not succeed. All of you who followed the debate know very well that the developed countries are not willing to do what they are expected to do. And, therefore, this war must be fought and the developing countries must come together and continue to fight for it; otherwise, we shall continue suffering.

The other front is our own national effort as has already been stated here. The problem is that we know what the problem is. We know the effects of climate change. We are already suffering from them. In Kongam, we never got rain since last year; we suffered so much. You came there, Madam Speaker, and you saw it; and this was just an effect of the climate change. 

Now, what we need is practical action. The Ministry of Environment must do practical things and not simply come here to talk and pass the laws, which are not put into practice. What is it? As has been stated, it is planting the trees; protecting the soils; and all these other things. What is difficult with that? Why can’t this country be able to implement what is supposed to be implemented?

We have the local governments with budgets; we have the central government with a budget, why can’t we do it? Why are we still so dependent on NGOs and development partners? In whatever we want to do we have to look at NGOs and not looking at our efforts and yet it is a matter of education, sensitisation and practically making people do what they are supposed to do. If we do that, we shall be through with this problem. I thank you. 

4.10
CAPT. EMILLY OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion and thank the movers. The issue of global warming and climate change is like a new war in this world of ours and I would rather call it the “Third World War” because it is real war. 

Here in Uganda, many places have been affected but I know the most affected of all is the area where I come from, Teso. This is because Teso has experienced a lot of climatic changes which had not been experienced before. Flooding which was not there originally is there now, almost annually. If it is not flooding, then it is drought. So we have a very big problem and I would like us to take it very seriously.

My ndugu, Kibanzanga, was talking about climatic change which is very good because even in his own home area of Kasese, the snow on Mountain Rwenzori is melting away. And it is anticipated that within the next ten years, we shall have no snow on the Rwenzori Mountains. I read that in the newspapers. 

Now we all know the causes of climatic change, we know the causes of global warming. I would like us to start thinking locally before we start thinking globally. What are we doing at home? Is there anything we are doing because if the issue is cutting of trees, what are we doing? 

We went as a committee to Western Uganda and Kibaale District in particular. I was very amazed to see that the forest reserve along the road has all been cut and nobody seems to care about what is happening, which is a very big mistake. Even all along the road as we were going to Bunyoro, most area’s forests have been cut down. 

When we had a problem with the LRA, we as Parliament appropriated a lot of money to the Ministry of Defence to fight LRA because there was an eminent danger to our lives. When the roads started killing many of us, including Members of Parliament, we allocated the roads Shs 1.1 trillion. Now that there is another threat to our lives – climatic change; global warming - why don’t we redirect funding to the environment? It is us because if we say it is Government, we are the government -(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members maybe before hon. Sauda Mugerwa comes in, his contribution reminded me about the work going on in the Parliament of Cameroon. Each time the Speaker and Deputy Speaker go for an outreach programme, they plant 5,000 trees in that part of the country. (Applause) They don’t leave without planting 5,000 trees. So, I hope the Clerk will give me a budget and we go. (Laughter) 

4.14
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I hope you will start doing that from Masaka District. 

I am standing to support the motion and to appreciate what Government has done in terms of setting up the Ministry of Water and Environment, which has got units that are dealing with climate change and which have actually been very active once approached. 

Hon. Minister, I would like to thank you very much and I would like to thank NEMA, the Meteorology Department and Climate Change Unit for the work they have done. 

I would like to invite Government to appreciate what climate change is in as far as its impact on economic development is concerned. Climate change, according to one of the experts I talked to and who simplified it for me, refers to very heavy rains, a long spell of drought and changes in seasons. And I think this is what we have been seeing in Uganda. Given that condition, I am wondering as to what Government has done to safe guard us from the impact of those changes.    

Let me give you an example of solar energy. About two years ago, we used to have a lot of load shedding because of the shortage of water in the lakes. But I don’t know how much Government has invested in the use of solar energy for lighting so that we can reduce on the impact of load shedding. So I am urging Government to improve on its budgeting and develop the use of solar energy and since the Minister of Defence and that of Labour are here, I am going to look at their budgets and see whether they are using solar energy for lighting.

Let me look at water as a consequence of climate change. We actually use it for the household, we use water for animal needs and we use water for agriculture. But I am wondering how much the government has budgeted for water harvesting because we have a lot of good rains now. But how far has our budget reflected the need for water harvesting? If we do not do this, water is going to become a problem. It has already become a problem in Masaka and I am urging all local governments to budget for the provision of water harvesting for –(Member timed out_)

4.17
MR COSMAS BUSIMA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and I would like to thank the mover and all the Members who have contributed on this motion. Actually if it was possible, I would have rephrased the motion to say, we are “directing” the government but it has its own implications. So, I will support “urging” Government to mainstream climate change and mitigate global warming with immediate effect.

But before we talk about developed countries, we have to talk about ourselves because Uganda is along that line of the developed world. Just look at what is happening in Kampala alone, all these houses that people are putting up are going to use air conditioners and some of us know what an air conditioner does to the environment. The emissions from that simple air conditioning plant are enough to cause havoc to our environment. Let me correct the Members; there is a difference between air conditioning and air handling. So what we need here is purely air handling. All we need is to pack used air and we pump in fresh air. But we do not need to condition the air because conditioning the air means that we have to filter it, treat it – it should be subject to people who are sick, not to health people and this is what is happening in the whole of Kampala and in Kampala, you have all these buildings like Workers House coming up - I am not quite sure about this system. 

How about the cars we drive? One Member said that we buy junk and I support him. We do buy junk because those cars are meant for European countries. Sometimes they are so advanced and they have to be air-conditioned and they are not meant for us here with this nice, sweet and hot air -(Member timed out_)

4.21
MRS BEATRICE MAGOOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the movers of the motion because it touches my heart. I am one of those people who have been struggling solely to look after the environment at my own pace. I have advised, I have taught and I have sensitised people about the environment. Why are we getting so much touched? We are touched because our environment has been degraded so much that what we see now and what we are experiencing is because of that degradation. 

In Uganda, it is common knowledge and we all know why our environment is like this and we should own up to everything that is happening to us. Take an example of the swamps; people are growing rice everywhere in the swamps and no one cares. If you did care, people would think you are mad because it is from the swamps that people are going to get money; so, you cannot talk about it. Go to places where they are putting up structures for factories; honestly, aren’t we going wrong? How do you put up a big structure under the water? What do you expect from that? 

We are cutting trees anyhow without replacing them and in addition to that are our poor agricultural methods. People are digging anywhere anyhow with anything and that cannot leave our environment safe. I would like to propose to NEMA to take very serious and punitive steps against those people who cut down trees without replacing them, and we would also like to ask Government to put up policies that must be followed. Because we do not follow the laws which have been put down on paper and it is our environment we are affecting and that is our own making. If we could have laws that the wanainchi could follow, I am sure something would be done in the near future. I have seen areas where houses have been built but no single tree has been planted! 

I would like to call upon Government to criminalise instances where there has been tree cutting and no replacements made, and to force us to plant and own our man-made forests –(Member timed out_)

4.24
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the spirit behind my brother’s motion. I thank hon. Ebong for causing debate on this very critical matter this afternoon, and one wishes that the House were as full as it were when we were voting for districts! I would like to persuade hon. Ebong to take advantage of the critical points that colleagues have made in supporting the motion so that when we go to voting stage, we really make appropriate amendments. In my view, I think we should move along three fronts and Parliament should be at the forefront to take initiative. 

One, I think we should lead a massive movement for tree planting. You, Madam Speaker, have made a point that in Cameroon whenever the Speaker moves out, you get so many trees planted. So, this motion should be an entry point for us to lead this movement of tree planting and we can start in a small way with our CDF. Let every Member of Parliament have a tree nursery in their constituency because one of the constraints to tree planting is the lack of trees for planting. So, this is one entry point that we can use. We should be in the lead and we should be seen to be acting.

The second point along which we can provide leadership has been made by many people but particularly hon. Katuntu. The question remains that we are small players in pollution but we take the impact. So, we need to find ways and means even as parliamentarians to strengthen our voice. We have, for example, a forum here called AMANI. Our colleagues go all over the region to contribute to regional development. Can we be AMANI-like in the issue of speaking against pollution? So, if we start from here, we can go to Kenya, to Congo and appeal to our colleagues there to form similar structures like we have here. 

The third point was again a point made by many people but particularly hon. Kibanzanga from Kasese and it is the issue of poverty. I have heard people like hon. Magoola say that we should criminalise tree-cutting. That is more easier said that done. The people we represent here are poor people. They have no other option. They must go and cook food. So, if you criminalise someone for cutting a tree, then you are saying that they should go and die. So, we must deal with the poverty question, as a contributor to pollution. So, I want to persuade hon. Ebong that before we vote, we should really make some amendments and take initiative. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Jessica Eriyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover and the seconder of this motion and I would like to congratulate the parliamentarians forum on climate change for the initiative that they have put in place to compliment Government work and to sensitise colleagues and mobilise our constituents in terms of climate change but also environmental conservation in general. So, I commend the work of this forum and I pledge continued cooperation with the forum. 

Before I go to the aspects within the motion, let me just make brief responses or observations on the contributions by Members. First of all, I would like to thank all Members for the concerns they have raised and for the contributions they have made but as you rightly said, Government and this House discussed and passed a number of aspects in relation to taxes and levies as far as environmental tax and levies is concerned. The only challenge perhaps is in implementation which I think all of us need to rally together and ensure that we implement. It is up to Parliament to amend these taxes and levies on the environment when the time comes for debate in this Parliament for the aspects of taxation. 

I agree with colleagues on the issues of wetlands management but I don’t agree with those who say that nothing has been done because something has been done. There are challenges that are involved and I am sure Members very well know what has been done and what has not been done.

I would also like to inform colleagues that Uganda, as a country, has done a lot at both international and national level as far as climate change is concerned. First of all, the Government of Uganda acceded to and ratified the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Kyoto Protocol respectively in 1993 and 2002. As of now, Uganda is a member of the Climate Change Convention. The African Union last year formed a committee of heads of state on climate change and I would like to inform those who may not be aware that Uganda is a member of the committee of ten of the heads of state on climate change. Our head of state has been recognised by the African Union Commission as an important stakeholder in tackling climate change. The representative of our head of state - the Minister in charge of Environment - is also working together with the head of state on climate change issues within this committee. 

On the 11th of this month, there will be a meeting of this committee in Addis-Ababa and in the next African Union meeting to be held in Kampala, Uganda, issues of climate change will also be featuring very prominently. 

Cabinet approved a memo on the establishment of the climate change unit and the unit has been established under the permanent secretary’s office in the ministry. As of now, the ministry is preparing a motion for a resolution of Parliament to domesticate the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Kyoto Protocol and to formally establish the climate change unit. Very soon Parliament will make declaration on the climate change unit. We will benefit from your rich contribution as far as that is concerned. 

The climate change unit coordinates the implementation of the activities of climate change, including the institutional framework to handle carbon finance activities through, for example, the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM). As I speak now, about 12 projects are in the process of being registered and financed. I think Uganda is one of the best performing countries as far as CDM is concerned in Africa. The CDM has benefited more countries in South America and Asia. Although Africa is lagging behind, Uganda is on the top within Africa. Among these innovative projects, for example, is the Municipal Waste Project which the ministry together with the municipal or urban councils are implementing. There is also the renewable energy and many other projects working together with the private sector.

The National Development Plan, unlike the PEAP, has captured environmental management with climate change in particular as a development and environment issue. This will be addressed under four objectives of the National Development Plan. I would like to urge Members to read the National Development Plan and see how climate change issues have been identified in the National Development Plan and how they will be implemented so that as we continue with our legislative function, we do not divert from what the National Development Plan has provided but we enhance what the development plan has provided.

The Metrology Department is also being transformed into an agency or authority and this will also very soon come to Parliament for approval. It has already been approved by Cabinet and the Bill has been drafted and is coming back to Parliament. For Members information, the Metrology Department is under funded but with the transformation that is being planned, I am sure quite a lot will be done.

I would like to thank Members who suggested that we need local action. We need to involve communities and the Minister of Defence is here – we need to involve the army. I am glad that the army has a number of nursery beds for tree planting and the army, including the veterans are being involved in tree planting. However, that is not enough. Madam Speaker, as you suggested, I think Parliament also needs to do something about this; we need to also lead by example and if it were possible in the budget of Parliament, we could also put something little to support the Speaker’s Office and Members of Parliament. MPs and the forum can come up with innovative ideas. Development is not a one person’s issue but an issue of all stakeholders. We are all stakeholders and we can put our heads together and see what we can do.

I agree with the Minister of Defence who said that we can put a little of our development fund, even if it was Shs 500,000 by each Member of Parliament, to contribute to raising seedlings because it will do something. If it is to plant trees on the avenues, then the MPs can do something. I know that we do not have enough funding to facilitate every Member of Parliament. I know that Members of Parliament want support from the ministry and the government – let us be rational about this. If we are to have effective contribution and support from each Member of Parliament, how much do we need to do that? I do not think we need to include that in this resolution but we need to rationalise it first since I am not sure how much can be given to each Member of Parliament although we can do so in different ways. 

Uganda is also preparing itself, under the Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD) approach which has been arrived at through the international mechanisms, to address climate change. It is to reduce on deforestation but also support afforestation because forests play a very big role in absorption and stocking of carbon dioxide. The approach is to address poverty because when people are poor, they will cut the trees for charcoal and timber until they exhaust them. But REDD is to offer alternative income for those who are within the forest areas, support them in other economic activities to conserve the existing forests.  Also, it will involve supporting them in tree planting so that they can have alternative products from the forests and conserve the forests.

A number of things are being done. Uganda is now preparing itself in the readiness aspect. With its international mechanisms, there are principles and procedures, which are set. So, unless you qualify according to those procedures, you may not access the funding. But there is funding for REDD; there is money for CDM. Uganda has prepared National Adaptation Programmes of Action (NAPA), which outline in broad terms, what needs to be done by each sector.

Implementation is still a problem; but I agree with those who say that we can do the implementation at the local level since we expect money under the climate change mechanism for the adaptation funding. 

Madam Speaker, I want to make specific comments on the motion. 

The first resolution proposed in this motion is saying that the Government of Uganda constitutes an inter-ministerial committee on climate change to profile climate change issues at the highest level possible and strengthen political will at all levels. 

I would like to beg that this resolution is not passed because we have a policy committee on the environment, which is chaired by the Prime Minister. In the past, this committee has not been very active but I would like to say that now the committee is very active. The chair has been delegated; but if it is a policy committee, it does not report to Parliament. It is now being chaired by the Minister for General Duties in the Prime Minister’s Office and even next week this committee, which involves Energy, Agriculture, Health and many other ministries at the ministerial level, is going to – they have been discussing a lot of issues - the oil area of Hoima and other districts to look at the environmental aspect.

Issues of climate change have been discussed by this committee but further issues will be discussed. It is the responsibility of this committee to propose policy reviews and policy proposals for the Ministry in charge of Environment because environment is a cross-cutting sector. So, I do not think it will be necessary for Parliament to resolve that another committee is formed. It will be duplication and then it will be difficult to implement it.

Then, the other resolution, which is on top of the second page, is that the Government of Uganda implements the Renewable Energy Policy of 2007. I would like to report that implementation of this policy is already ongoing. Maybe the resolution should be amended to say, “The Government of Uganda enhances implementation of the Renewable Energy Policy.” I am saying this because Government is implementing hydro-power projects in the country. You are very well aware of this solar energy, energy-saving bulbs and stoves and a number of communities are benefiting from this. The Government, through the Ministry of Energy, is also doing bio-fuel and fossil fuel blending, which is also an aspect of renewable energy. The ministry has also developed -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Minister, we would be more convinced if you told us that 70 percent of the population is benefiting from those programmes. But now you are saying, “renewable energy, solar energy”, how many people in Uganda are actually accessing those facilities? I think that would make more sense to us.

MS ERIYO: Madam Speaker, I wish the Minister of Energy were still here; I would give you specific figures of this. (Interjections) Yes, he is here so I will give him a chance to expand this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How many are using fossil fuels in Uganda? How many are using renewable energy? How many are using solar energy in Uganda, of the 28 million? That is what we want to hear. And in Kamuli - 

MS ERIYO: Yes, Madam –(Interruption)

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. With respect to that specific recommendation, Members can recall that in 2007, Government came up with a Renewable Energy Policy and this policy is currently being implemented as has been said by my colleague. This Renewable Energy Policy came into effect in 2007 and it has many, many parts. 

One of the things in that Renewable Energy Policy is to do with blending; blending of bio-fuel with fossil fuel up to 20 percent and to that effect, we have now given permits to two developers to develop bio-fuels in this country.

Secondly, as my colleague was saying, are the small hydro stations. So many of them, as you have seen in our last statements, are being developed and in order to give incentives to the private sector for the development of renewable hydro projects, we have developed a standard power purchase agreement and a standard feeding tariff. I think the mover of the motion alluded to this. This is being done. We have many ongoing renewable energy projects including Bugoye, which we have already commissioned and Buseruka, which is soon going to be commissioned. 

With respect to charcoal, as my senior colleague, the Minister of Defence, said here, 90 percent of our people use bio-fuel, which is really charcoal. Now it is not possible to say, “Stop burning charcoal”, but what my ministry and therefore Government has done is to introduce improved stoves. On improved stoves, Madam Speaker, we have given a report to this House before. We have done work in numerous districts and our concentration has been in schools, prisons and areas where large-scale cooking is done. 

We also have co-funded co-generation projects including Kakira; now we are in Kinyara and we are also doing –(Interruption)
 
MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I have heard the minister labouring to justify how he is going to replace charcoal with solar. I want to remind the minister that whatever you are telling us, you should be practical in the sense that the real person, the poorest of the poor, is using wood or at most charcoal. How are you going to help this poorest of the poor buy a solar stove or an improved stove? Is the government planning to distribute those stoves free of charge? It is important that you are practical so that we, as the mobilisers of the population, know what we are going to tell our people.

Madam Speaker, I just want to remind these ministers who are trying to defend the position of Government to read their own plan, I have tried to scan through –(Interjections)– you want me to give you the page. I am part of it but I am talking about the Executive who are supposed to implement all this. If you have read it, you notice there is no focus. As a matter of fact they are saying there are certain international protocols, which have not been ratified or domesticated. 

So I think it is important that you become practical and tell us what you have done with the little resources that you have been given in terms of mitigation and adaptation. You can tell us, “This is the far we have gone and these are the challenges and this is where we are going”. But you are just running around in circles. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR KIGYAGI: Madam Speaker, I would like the minister to be specific and tell us that with the Renewable Energy Policy, small hydro and whatever he has mentioned – let him tell us the relationship between those things and the decrease in use of firewood and cutting forests. That will enable us to know that when the policy came in place, we were cutting 80 percent of our forests, but since it was established we are now cutting 60 or 90 percent. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, now that we are going for the budget, can the minister tell us the percentage reduction they will make on gas; because most people who live in Kampala City, including me, still use charcoal. You can see the truck loads of charcoal entering Kampala every day. So, can you come up with a clear statement and tell us that in the next budget, we shall have zero tax on gas so that more families can afford gas as opposed to charcoal.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Actually as Parliament, we are putting in place mechanisms where we the representatives of the people can fast track climate change. As we have heard from the ministers concerning the inter-ministerial committee, nobody will be directly responsible for answering to Parliament as an institution whenever we need an update. Wouldn’t it be prudent to put in place a committee on climate change that will update and fast track climate change for the good of this country? I need your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was going to speak about that at the end because I am aware that we have instructed the Rules Committee to revise the rules and I would like to request Members to make proposals to that committee. They will eventually come here and we will debate them and that could be one of the things we include. 

And also help me and instruct the Parliamentary Commission to give us money for the trees, and we also want the Community Mobilisation Bill. When we first arrived here, the Minister of Finance and Planning said he was going to bring the Community Mobilisation Bill. 

MR D’UJANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There were two clarifications. One is with respect to changing from charcoal stoves to solar stoves. I think I did not say that. What I said was to improve charcoal and wood stoves. My ministry is carrying out research on solar stoves but it is still too soon. What we are promoting now is the use of improved stoves. Improved stoves are very simple to make; we have covered most of the districts now. What we do is to train the rural people to make these stoves in their villages. I do not have the number of districts now, but our target is to reach every district in this country. These stoves are made from soil/clay and saw dust. It is very simple indeed.

To clarify on hon. Kigyagi’s question, on how much saving we have done, I can confidently say that if you have the improved stove, you use a third of the charcoal or a third of the wood that you would use with the ordinary stove. That is therefore 67 percent savings and it would translate into a 67 percent reduction in tree cutting. 

Madam Speaker, my colleague, the Minister for Environment, will comment on the rest but let me comment on the gas issue. We are in the budget process so it will not be possible for me to say now what taxes we shall impose and what taxes we shall remove. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS ERIYO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank my colleague for the information he has provided. I would like to comment on the last resolution. If we agree to amend on the one I was commenting on; on the issue of implementation of the renewal energy – the implementation is ongoing but the resolution seems to indicate that nothing has been done at all. 

The last one is that the Climate Change Unit with a multi-disciplinary stakeholders’ involvement for proactive institutional linkages and integrated approach should be reverted to the Office of the Prime Minister. I agree with hon. Kigyagi who said that it is not necessary since we have the policy committee in the Prime Minister’s Office. But for effective implementation, it is better to have it in the Ministry of Water and Environment. 

I would like to say that so far, the climate change unit has also requested and many departments have submitted in names of focal persons responsible for climate change within their departments or institutions. Within the Ministry of Water and Environment, or the three directorates - NFA, NEMA and within the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - we have a number of areas where we have focal persons on climate change. The Global Environment Facility Focal person sits in the Ministry of Finance. So, that person is automatically a member. The Environment and Natural Resources Sector Desk Officer in Minister of Finance, the Aid Liaison Officer in charge of Environment and Natural Resources, the National Planning Authority, Uganda Bureau of Statistics – they have all identified focal persons. Then, all the other ministries have all identified focal persons. 

And in the private sector, we have received focal persons from the Private Sector Foundation, Uganda Manufacturers’ Association, Madhvani, Mukwano, and then from other institutions  like, National Agricultural Research Organization, NAADS, Makerere University, Lake Victoria Environment Management Programme, Nile Basin Initiative, Uganda Road’s Authority, Kampala City Council, Electricity Regulatory Authority and Uganda Investment Authority. 

For NGOs, we have also received focal persons nominated by DENIVA, Oxfam, Uganda Women Agriculture Entrepreneurship Association, Uganda Red Cross Society, Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Climate Change, the Uganda Forestry Association and NGO Forum. Automatically we relate with them. So, all these have identified focal persons that the Climate Change Unit is going to work with. We still seek more people from the other sectors that we coordinate with because as it has been said, climate change is a cross-cutting issue, it affects all other areas. 

So, my comments are on the three resolutions: the first resolution which is on the inter-ministerial committee, the one on renewable energy and the last one on the Climate Change Unit to be moved to Prime Minister’s Office. I rest my case. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, Minister, I do not know whether you could arrange a one day workshop for the Members? We have done it with Agriculture; we have done it with Finance. I think we need a day so that Members can get this information.

MS ERIYO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. We are going to organise this workshop. We will interact with your Office and see how best and where to have it. Thank you.

MR KIGYAGI: Madam Speaker, I know why these people are proposing that the Climate Change Unit moves from the Ministry of Water and Environment. Uganda Government has the best technical people on climate change. If you go and see how they represent us at the international fora and at the regional fora, you will be impressed but if you come and visit their office and they tell you that these are the people coming from that office, you will not believe. It is a hole; no implements. Hon. Minister, save the face of our technical people; improve that unit. Let it have a good standing; there is a wealth of knowledge there but the conditions under which they work are impossible. Maybe that is why hon. David Ebong was proposing that. I think the ministry should move first and improve the image of our climate change unit in the offices where they are working from. The offices are bad!

5.02
MR DAVID EBONG (Independent, Maruzi County, Apac): Madam Speaker, allow me thank the Members who have contributed very objectively to this motion. The resolutions were carefully worded and for very good reasons. The idea of moving the Climate Change Unit was born out of the dis-functionality of the unit under the Ministry of Water and Environment but, with the assurance the minister is giving, we can give a chance. 

The Government of Uganda did sign a Memorandum of Understanding with the Danish Government to be implemented with effect from 15 July 2008 and five million Danish Kroner was dedicated to the Climate Change Unit. To-date, there are funds which have not been spent; these were meant to fast track the institutional capacity building, they were meant for  mainstreaming climate change planning in ministries and within the context of local governments and I lay this on the Table.

The title of this document is, “Climate Change Initiatives: outlaying components, description, mainstreaming climate change adaptation in Uganda. Ministry of Water and Environment Uganda-Royal Danish Embassy, Kampala, December 2008.” This is a document between the Uganda Government and the Royal Danish Embassy in Kampala -(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let me put the question to the motion. I put the question now that the motion, as amended, be adopted by this House.

(Question out and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL YOUTH COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008

5.05
THE MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio): Madam Speaker, following yesterday’s debate on the amendment of the National Youth Council Act; allow me to make the following statement regarding the issues that were raised during the debate. I have copies which I am circulating.

The National Youth Council was established by the 1993 National Youth Council Act with a main intention of providing a forum through which young peoples’ concerns can be addressed. Prior to the formation of the national youth council structures, there was no forum through which young people could be mobilised and organised to benefit from development programmes. The absence of a forum through which to organise young people create a big gap between the youth, the government and development partners. The establishment of the councils therefore provided an independent and a united forum through which the youth could participate in the decision making process and it also provided a channel through which social economic amenities could reach the youth.

The objectives of the council were as follows:
a)	To organise the youth of Uganda in a united body.
b)	To engage the youth of Uganda in activities that are of benefit to them and the nation, and 
c) 	To protect the youth against any kind of manipulation.

The functions of the council are:
a) 	To inspire and promote among the youth a spirit of unity and national consciousness.

b) 	To provide a unified and integrated system through which the youth may communicate and coordinate their ideas and activities.

c) 	To establish channels through which the economic and social services and amenities may reach the youth in all areas of Uganda.

d) 	To encourage the youth to consolidate their role in national development in the economic, social, cultural and education fields.

e)	To initiate and encourage the formation of youth organisations and facilitate communication among them.

f) To promote relations between youth organisations and other bodies with similar objectives or interests.
 
g) To do all such other things as are incidental or conducive to the attaining of the objects of the council under this Act.

From the above objectives and the functions of the council, it is clear that the intention and purpose of creating of the councils was to provide a non-partisan, non-discriminative and all inclusive body through which young peoples’ concerns could be addressed. The council was also intended to act as a channel through which to instil a spirit of patriotism, national consciousness and a spirit of unity among the youth. The idea was further to ensure the youth all over the country, irrespective of their tribes, religion and ethnic background, are able to meet objectively, discuss their common concerns and initiate activities and programmes for their own development.

The Youth Council and Elective Politics

When the councils were established, the country was in the process of democratisation. It was therefore important that all the leadership positions within the council structures were accessed through an elective process rather than through appointment. It was therefore provided within the law that the youth were to elect their own leaders from village to the national level.

In the same vein, there was a need for the youths to be represented in the Constituency Assembly in 1994 and it was necessary that the council structures were used as electoral colleges for the election of youth representatives to CA. 

In order to effect the above, an amendment was effected on the National Youth Council Act to provide for the youth council structures to act as the electoral college. This marked the beginning of the politicisation of the youth council structures since they were turned into an electoral college. 

At that time, the country was still operating under the Movement system of government where elections were based on individual merit and so it did not prove to be a contradiction. However, with the advent of the multi-party political system in 2006, Maj. (Rtd) Rubaramira Ruranga petitioned the Constitutional Court on the constitutionality of the National Youth Council Act and the National Youth Council Election guidelines. The Constitutional Court ruled as follows:

    i) That the National Youth Council Act should be amended to provide for the participation of political parties in the election of the councils. The argument was that under a multi-party system, all political parties are free to sponsor candidates in all public elections. However, the current National Youth Council Act does not provide for participation of political parties and therefore the law is inconsistent with the Constitution.

    ii) The court decided that sufficient time was not given to candidates during the youth council elections at the village and parish levels. A candidate is only given five minutes to introduce him or herself to the electorate and withdraws from the session. The court ruled that campaign is the very essence of an election and therefore any law that does not provide for adequate time for campaign is inconsistent with the Constitution.

    iii) The court also ruled that compulsory membership of all people between the age of 18 and 30 in the youth council at the village level was tantamount to conscription as it is inconsistent with Article 29(1) of the Constitution on the freedom of association.

    iv) During the youth council elections, the chief administrative officer is the returning officer for the whole district and the sub-county chief and parish chief are the presiding officers at the sub-county and the parish levels respectively. The court ruled that this contradicts the Constitution Article 1(iv) and 62 on the independence of the Electoral Commission. The court ruled that the present law retracts from the independence of the Electoral Commission. It is therefore necessary to amend the law for the Electoral Commission to use their own staff.

    v) During the election of youth council leaders, nominations are done orally. The Constitutional Court ruled that oral nominations of candidates during the elections under multi-party politics is inconsistent with the Constitution under a multi-party political system. Political parties are not human beings so they cannot nominate orally. Court therefore ordered that the National Youth Council election regulations be amended to provide for written nomination in order to enable political parties to participate. 

    vi) The current position in the National Youth Council Act regarding the membership of the village youth council states that the village youth council shall consist of all persons aged between 18 and 30 and resident in a village. The court ruled that this current membership which considers residents in the village does not exclude non-citizens from membership of the council. Court ruled that the law be amended to exclude non-citizens from participating in elections. 

Following the court ruling, the Attorney-General advised Government to amend all sections of the law that were affected by the Constitutional Court ruling to reflect the multi-party political system. It is against this background that the government decided to amend the National Youth Council Act to correct the constitutional inconsistencies identified by the Constitutional Court. 

I would like to call upon all Members to support the amendment as presented so that the youth elections are conducted in a multi-party system at all levels. Failure to do this would mean delay in conducting youth council elections, the election of the youth Members of Parliament in the next Parliament and the two youth councillors at each district and sub-county level. 

The Way Forward

The way forward is to allow and implement the command of the Constitutional Court to the effect that all youth council elections are conducted on the basis of multi-party politics at all levels. 

Madam Speaker, the situation of the National Youth Council described above also applies to the National Women’s Council. I would request that while considering the submission we keep in mind the amendment of the National Women’s Council Act which I am also going to present before this House. Madam Speaker, I request the Members to support.    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday we had a very lengthy debate on this matter and instructed the minister to give us the policy and legal guidelines, which he has done. Really, I think our hands are tied. I put the question that the National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill be read for a second time.

(Question out and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL YOUTH COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008

5.10

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 1 do stand part of the Bill. 

MS LAGADA AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, I beg to submit this amendment to 1(a) that we substitute the words, “of the” in the last line with the word “youth” so that it reads: “A village youth council shall consist of youth who reside in the village and who are willing to be members of the village youth council.”

MS NAMAGGWA: Madam Chairperson, I have a problem as far as the general Bill is concerned and I want to seek guidance on whether I can be assisted. 

I really have a problem in terms of having this on record that we are passing this Bill against the wishes of the Government -(Interjections)- yes, if you looked at the –

THE DEPUTY CHAIPERSON: Hon. Namaggwa, yesterday you were here. We had a very lengthy debate on this matter. It is a Government Bill and we deferred conclusion of this Bill pending the final policy guidelines from the government. The Minister for Gender, who is in charge of the Bill, has informed us what the Government position is. 

MS NAMAGGWA: Madam Chairperson, if you looked at the objectives of the establishment of this council, whatever has been said by the court is contradicting Government’s objective. Is the council still useful if the initial objectives of Government are neglected? So, can Government give us a new objective so that what we pass today will be meeting that objective? Otherwise, why are we actually taking it up when we are -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you move an appropriate amendment to the objective?  

MS NAMAGGWA: Madam Chairperson, given time I would move an amendment but we have a big job to do. And the other thing I wanted clarified is the initial idea of establishing these women councils. Was it a national or an international demand? What was the basis of establishing them? I would like the minister to explain that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it relevant that there are other councils internationally? What bearing has the international status have on this Bill?

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to give hon. Namaggwa information; you were in the Seventh Parliament and that is when we passed all these laws. So, it would have been at that time that you should have known why these youth councils and women councils were put in place. It is something that I would request that after the minister’s submission, hon. Namaggwa should quietly and slowly lead in explaining to the youth why we are amending this law.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Namaggwa, I think the minister’s statement is clear. You go and sermon the young people in Masaka and read this to them on the radio because it is really clear.

MS NALUBEGA: I think hon. Namaggwa’s concerns are very important. The object of the principal Act as compared to what we are amending today - the amendments contradict and actually defeat the object of this Act. For instance, one of the objects of the principal Act is to protect the young people against any kind of manipulation. And politics of multi-party is manipulative.

When you look at the functions of the National Youth Council, you will see that they are providing a platform for unified ideas for the young people. So, we had better repeal these clauses and bring in other new clauses that will be in line with the proposals that we are putting in this Bill today.  But if we remain with these clauses, you should know that they will be defeating what we are trying to put.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So what are your proposals, hon. Nalubega? Can you propose amendments? 

MS NALUBEGA: Madam, one of my proposals is to repeal clause 3.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Have we gone there yet?

MS NALUBEGA: The whole of clause 3 on the object of the principal Act should be repealed. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Just for the consumption of hon. Nalubega, the Woman MP Masaka and the House, Article 78 talks of the composition of Parliament and under 78 (4) it says: “Parliament shall, by law, prescribe the procedure for elections of representatives referred to in clause (1)(b) and (c) of this article.” 

So, we have the powers to make that law. Nothing stops us from doing it. I would rather suggest that if your submission is that the youth should not be involved in partisan politics then you wait for the appropriate time at the committee stage because there are some of us who are also saying that leaving the youth out of partisan politics is why we only have NRM MPs in the Youth seats. So, there are either sides of the argument. You should wait for the appropriate stage and move that amendment.

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I would like to allay the fears of hon. Nalubega that politics has never been a manipulator. It is the people who are manipulators and manipulative. She is a product of the Movement kind of politics and we know how her elections were manipulated by people but not the politics. (Laughter)
 
MS NALUBEGA: Madam Chair, I think the Members on the other side do not understand what we are trying to put in this Bill. This is a legal perspective; it is not a political perspective. We are saying what we are proposing defeats the object of the Principal Act as is presented. So, we want a legal redress in this, can we repeal the object of the Principal Act and have new objects which are political because these objects are not political? It is just a legal proceeding and not an argument. We are seeking a legal mind. How do we proceed with a new amendment vis-à-vis the object of the principal Act?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General, the submission is that the objectives are at variance with the proposed amendments; what do you say?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I did not have anything useful to add on the statement made by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development because he had a very extensive and a very useful statement on this matter.
 
The Constitutional Court in its ruling that was cited by the minister struck down some provisions of this Act as being unconstitutional, which gave way to conscription and compulsory registration, which did not afford freedom to associate at the relevant levels particularly of local governments in terms of the youths, women and others. The ruling is with me here; it can be accessed and be read. 

But without prejudice to that, I do not see how under a multi-party dispensation these objectives spelt out in the Act can be undermined -(Interjections)- The objects of the council – you mean to say that for instance in a multi-party dispensation you cannot talk of unified bodies? That we cannot talk of youths engaging in activities that are of benefit to them and to the nation, to talk to the youth against any kind of manipulation? 

In any case, if the structures that we had within the Movement system of governance, which seemingly defeated – because we tend to hide our heads in the sand – at the end of the day, there is politics in these institutions. Go to our tertiary institutions like Makerere and MUBS, even if you hide your head in the sand, if you talk in terms of any elective office, you actually see politics in there. And I think that is what the Constitutional Court was saying that we are under a multi-party dispensation, allow for fair play so that we know who is coming in. Let us know who is willing to associate with whom openly and transparently without doing it under cover. And these objectives are certainly not undermined in my opinion. That is my submission.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We were dealing with the amendment by the chairperson. Was it clause 1(b)?

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My amendment is about the inclusion of the word “willing”, to refer to those who are willing. I think we should leave the word “willing” because in her amendment, she says that members of the village youth council should be those “willing to belong to the council” but being a youth is not by choice. So, I think automatically, every youth should belong to a village youth council so that we do not have the word “willing.” I think the law should be more serious than that. I am not comfortable with the word “willing.”

MS LAGADA: Madam Chairperson, in the minister’s statement, I thought he explained very clearly that court directed that you cannot forcefully make everybody or the youths in the villages to be members of the youth councils, thus the word “willing”.

MS NAJJEMBA: I just want to get clarification on the object (a) “To organise the youth in a unified body.” How do you link that to the willingness of the youth to belong to the youth council because it is by choice? It is no longer automatic that when you are a youth, you automatically become a member. So, how shall we have a unified body if some members are not willing? How unified will that body be?

MS NAMAGGWA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to find out how the minister intends to achieve objective (b), “To engage the youth of Uganda in activities that are of benefit to them and to the nation” because of the discriminative allowance given that people can choose to belong to the youth council. How is the minister going to cater for those members who are not in the youth council? 

MR MADADA: Madam Chairperson and colleagues, when you talk about a unified body, it does not mean that you remove other different political feelings or aspirations. Look at the national objectives and directive principles of state policy where we base interpretations of the law. Under those policies, we have the objective of national unity and that objective talks about encouraging national unity under diversity of different cultural backgrounds and political backgrounds. 

So, in whatever definition or interpretation of the law, we have to look at the national objectives. Here we are talking about unity and diversity including different backgrounds but also including different political affiliations. In terms of willingness, under our law, belonging to a political party is one’s choice. You cannot force anybody to belong to any political party. 

MS LAGADA: And in addition, Madam Chairperson, this question of how the decisions of the village youth councils will be binding on all youths in the village should not arise. I want to remind hon. Members that while here in Parliament, we debate and some Members agree and others do not agree but when we make a law here, isn’t it binding to all Ugandans? So, what is all this? 

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, I wish to move an amendment on clause 1(b) to read as follows: “The decision of a village youth council shall be binding on all members of a village youth council.” This in effect causes a change with a result that it is only those youth who participate in decision making; it is the youth who are members of the council that are bound by the decisions of the council. My justification is supported by the Constitutional Court ruling and contained in item 3 of the minister’s statement today and my argument is that if Court saw it wise not to conscript anybody into the membership of the youth council, I think it would be wrong for us as Parliament to pass a law where decisions of members after all who refuse to belong to this youth council be bound by that decision. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Amuriat, by that proposal, you are negating the objects of this Bill. I want to give you an example; supposing the village youth council says that every married youth should create a path through his garden and that every youth should dig the road leading from his home to the road and then you say, “I am not a member of the youth council; so, am not bound. I should not dig my road.” 

MR RUHINDI: We are here representing the people of Uganda as Parliament when we make Bills like these or any law or any decision. Can you say that those decisions can only bind you here in Parliament or must they bind all the people whom you represent? 

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I want to seek clarification. I think both you and the Attorney-General have almost said the same thing. So, I would like to know whether the decision of those youth councils have the power of law so that we are all forced to abide by them because you are comparing it to Parliament. I know that as a legislator once you enact a law here, every body is bound by the laws and the district councils make by-laws which are subsequently approved and have the power of law. Do the decisions of these youth councils have the equivalent backing of law? If they do not, then they are not binding. I do not want to imagine a situation where the youth councils sit and say everybody should pay Shs 50,000 and then I am not a member and then I am dragged and arrested by the youth. Under what law does that decision have? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I do not know why you want to create a society which is fragmented through the authority of this House. I really find this stressing. Maybe we should abolish them.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I want to make reference to the same Bill that you have. If you could look at the last page of the Bill, it is talking about regulations. “The minister may, after consultation with the council, by statutory instrument, make regulations for better coming into effect the provisions of this Act without prejudice.” Sub-section (1), “The minister shall, after consultation with the council, make regulations for the implementation of the provisions of this Act regarding election of members of the council.” That is the election but (i) is pertinent; and 
3. “Without prejudice to sub-section (i), the minister may prescribe as penalties for contravention of regulations made under that sub-section; 
(a) A fine not exceeding 72 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding three years or both, a daily fine not exceeding five currency points for each day on which the contravention continues ….”

These are sanctions in breach of implementation of this law. But of course, that comes at a later stage.  

MR KASOZI: I thank you. The moment you put this word, “willingness” in clause 1, that denotes the power of choice. If you look at the memorandum, the object (a) to remove compulsory membership of every village youth resident aged between 18 and 30 years of a village youth council - what I am trying to drive at is that if we want to remove the impasse that is around it, we must delete this word, “willingness” in the clause because the moment you put it there, it means that even if I am between 18 and 30 years, I have the right to decide whether to belong to this council or not – and that is the court ruling because you want to avoid conscription. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Kasozi, were you here when the minister was reading the statement about the contents of the judgment?

MR KASOZI: Exactly. I have it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The court ruled that you cannot conscript everybody into automatic membership. 

MR KASOZI: Not conscript everybody - it necessarily means that the decisions made by that council cannot be binding on me who does not belong to that body. So, if you want to make the decisions binding on everyone, then you must remove the, “willingness”.    

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, are you suggesting that we ignore the court ruling and retain the original provision where everybody is automatically a member?

MR KASOZI: No.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But that is what you are saying.

MR KASOZI: Now that is when hon. Amuriat –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is what you are saying.

MR AMURIAT: I think the House is between a rock and a hard place because in practical terms, it is even difficult for us to determine what decision these councils may make at this level. Some of the decisions may contravene the rights of village youth who may not belong to the youth councils. For example, if the village council sat and decided that all the youth in the village should go out and clear the wells, this could contravene certain articles of the Constitution. It could amount to slavery, servitude or forced labour -(Interjections)- and – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do not refer to that Constitution selectively. Please look at the national objectives. Read the national objectives together with what you are reading. Read it in totality. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Article 29(1)(e) of the Constitution could have been the basis of that court ruling, which we are now debating. If I may read it: “Every person shall have a right to – (a) freedom of association which shall include the freedom to form and join associations or unions ….” It is a constitutional right. 

In 2001 I opted not to join the youth council and opted to stand on adult suffrage and so I had little business to do with the youth councils. The essence of the court ruling is just to make this Constitutional right under Article 29 sacrosanct. Now, if I am free to join or not to join the youth councils as FDC, Movement or an Independent, we now have a challenge; if I choose not to join and those who are in the youth councils make decisions which are binding on me, do I have a course of action to say that they made a decision which I am not a party to and yet I am a youth? The definition of a youth is - so we are actually in a difficult situation and what I would recommend is that we would be silent on whether the decisions of the youth council should be binding on all the youth. We should be silent and only determine the issue of membership. 

Why this would work – the moment I am elected the chairman of the youth for a village called Nakawa, I am a chairman of the youth in that village and in every fora I would speak as the chairman of the youth in that village whether you participated in electing me or not. So, we better be silent on the second aspect and we just empower because the moment you are elected –(Interjections)- just one thing - like I came to Parliament with 80 percent, it is immaterial whether the other 20 percent elected me or not but I am still the Member of Parliament for that area. So, the moment you are a youth councillor –(Interjections)- the Attorney–General would agree with me that all the decisions of the youth council would be binding on those they represent whether you participated in the elections or not. So, we just need to be silent on that particular aspect -(Interruption)

MR BAKKA: I want to begin from where hon. Odonga Otto has just ended by seeking clarification and a way of finding a middle ground. Instead of being silent on the decisions of the council, supposing we went silent on membership? I was thinking an LC I is a local government, LC III is a local government and so is LC V but the people have their right to vote and so they can exercise that right although some of them do not vote. But the decisions of those local governments are binding on them. 

So why don’t we be silent on membership and we say, “Every youth between 18 and 30 years has a right to participate in the activities of the youth council,” such that it is fine for those who go and participate in elections and other activities and those who opt out then there is no problem. But we should not talk about membership – we just say they have a right to participate in the activities such that the decision of the council can still be binding on those who did not participate just the way it is in these other local governments – (Interjections)

MR MUGAMBE: I thank you. I think we should not relate these youth councils to the LCs. The youth councils are more less advocacy committees and not governance bodies. So I think we should leave them as advocacy committees and leave it to those who are members as proposed by hon. Odonga Otto because he said he was a youth but he opted out of the youth councils and here he is. I think with that example, we should leave it to the members.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Members, I think let us be practical. How do you influence decisions of a body where you are not a member? How will I give my views there? How will I vote if I want to vote on issues that are being discussed? You know it is like a club. There are associate members; there are the other members, all have different categories. How will these youth influence events in that meeting? You say I can participate; today I come, tomorrow I do not come. Sometimes I come, other times I do not come, how do I influence events in the meeting?  I mean what is my voice there? What is my voice there? Today we are 300; tomorrow we are 20 in the village council. 

I do not know what the Minister and the Attorney-General think about these arguments. You know there is so much fluidity. One day you are 1,000 in the village, another day you are 300.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Chair, the moment we make it a right, the way hon. Bakka has suggested, you will only complain when your rights have been violated. If your rights have not been violated, you do not complain. For example, in normal elections, we have almost 40 percent voter turn-out, yet everyone has a right to vote. We cannot forcefully start getting those who did not vote and lock them up in prison. So, if we make it a matter of right; then it becomes an issue of choice for an individual. I think hon. Bakka’s suggestion will really get us out of this situation, which we are in.

MR AMURIAT: Probably we need more time to think about this. I have a great fear that we might be indulging in something that could be unconstitutional and really against the ruling of the Constitutional Court because the ruling is very clear. If we cannot force anybody to belong to the council; then how can we force them? How can they be bound by the decisions of the council? For me, I rest my case. That is my proposal. I propose that probably we vote on this –(Interruptions)

MS LAGADA: Madam Chairperson and hon. Members, up to now I have not understood why 1(a) is such a difficult thing to decide on - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We have not yet pronounced ourselves on either of them.

MS LAGADA: We are debating on whether to remove the word “willing” from 1(a). I thought that was the debate. (Interjections) No, it is there in 1(a). “A village youth council shall consist of youths who reside in the village and who are willing to be members of the village council.” This is where some Members are raising objections.

It is okay for people to be willing or unwilling. Let us be in tandem with the Constitutional ruling so that we do not – it does not stop business going on in the youth council in the village if other members are not part of the village council. That is okay.

This 1(b), “The decisions of a village youth council shall be binding.” I was thinking of these by-laws, which are made by the district councils or even local council IIIs. I thought that when they make by-laws, they have to refer those by-laws to the Attorney-General to see if it is in tandem with the rest of the laws. I cannot imagine that a village youth council will sit and say, “Let every youth pay Shs 50,000 and if you do not pay, you are locked up.” It will not be in tandem with other laws -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But also, there is an interesting example. Supposing the village youth council said, “There should be no buying, selling or smoking of bangi in this village.” Then you say, “For me, I will smoke my bangi because I am not a member of your council.” Can you imagine?

MS LAGADA: Madam Chairperson, I want to agree with you or let me present my case. I want to agree with the Chairperson. For me, I see a situation where the decisions of the village council are for the youths. Now, if the village council makes a decision, which is bad for the youth in the village, then they have the option of challenging it and if it is not in tandem with the rest of the laws, they need redress surely.

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, it is not that we just do not want the youth to be orderly; I think we have to really make a good law. I hear the continued reference to Local Government Council. If you read Article 180(1) of our Constitution, it talks about the Local Government Councils. I want to read it: “A local government shall be based on a council which shall be the highest political authority within its area of jurisdiction and which shall have legislative and executive powers to be exercised in accordance with this Constitution.” To the best of my knowledge, this youth council does not have the Constitutional mandate to exercise legislative and executive powers. I do not know where they derive that authority from. So, that is the help I want. 

Maybe hon. Kabakumba can show me which part of the Constitution empowers the youth council to have executive and legislative powers so that their decisions are binding based on a mandate they derive from the Constitution.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. One of the other functions, at least according to our laws of the youth councils, is that they form the electoral colleges to elect their members to legislative bodies like the sub-county, the district council and even Parliament. So, you cannot simply say that the youth councils do not have legislative powers. In a way, they will elect people who will - the youth councils form electoral colleges that will elect representatives to these bodies. That having been said, we are reviewing this law following the court ruling. But I want to be guided. If we find that the court ruling is not so practical in our circumstances, what happens? 

Now that we have run out of time, I am asking, what happens? There is a problem. If you know, in the United Kingdom, once a child clocks 16 years, he or she is independent and free to decide whatever he or she wants to the extent that if she does not want to go to school, it is okay for them. But everybody is complaining about this arrangement including in the UK itself. In Uganda, youth are defined as those people between 18 and 30 years. When we look at that section and try to organise them and we say, “We are conscripting them”, I do not think it is completely correct. I want to suggest that if we are going to go by the court ruling, you put the question. When we put the question and decide on this issue, my considered opinion is: once the youth councils make the decision, it should be binding on all the youth of Uganda -

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Following the trend of this debate and owing to the fact that every ten years we have got to review the interest groups, owing to the fact that political parties have women’s youth leagues; the fundamental question is, is it the right time to review the interest groups? Isn’t it the right time to leave the youth and women’s leagues within the parties? I want clarifications, because the trend is taking us nowhere. 

MS NALUBEGA: Madam Chairperson, I want to give this clarification to this House. As the minister has stated in his statement, the youth councils are not legislative councils. They do not have any mandate to pass any laws or by-laws. If you look at the purpose of the youth councils as stated by the minister, they are supposed to be implementing institutions; they are supposed to be for advocacy and organisation. They do not have any mandate to legislate. 

The elective role of the youth council was actually deposited to them by this Parliament having not had an alternative of the college. If you want to amend the Principal Act by conforming to the condition of multi-party, we want to address the objects and functions very clearly to suit what we want the youth councils to do under the multi-party system. But if you want to carry on with the function of the youth councils, then we have to look again at the purpose as to why they were created. 

When a Member says that the youth league – we know that youth leagues are political organs of the political parties and can also make by-laws within their political parties and so on. But the youth councils do not make laws. So, for you to say that the youth councils are going to make decisions to bind youths and determine whether they are members or not, then you are giving them more powers which are not even in the object of the principal Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, have the youth councils outlived their usefulness? Could it be that they have outlived their usefulness so that we can do away with them?

MS NALUBEGA: Not that, Madam Chairperson. The only controversy in this is the elective role of the youth council which we must address clearly by conforming to the object. We need to repeal the object and have new objects and functions of these councils to suit their role as elective youth councils because we are now making them to look like political party secretariats.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, you are saying the only work of the youth councils is to elect? What are your proposals? Can you make concrete proposals?

MS NALUBEGA: My proposal is that the objects as they stand in the Principal Act do not suit the new amendment because the new amendment says that we provide for a Member of the youth council to join willingly. And then we say that those who will not join willingly will be bound; they are not privy to the decision of this council. 

MS AOL: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am getting mixed up especially on that decision. But if this was there before in the youth council, then why are we arguing about it? When we talk about electoral colleges, then we also have adult suffrage. The people who elect us do not participate in decision making; we represent them. Even these youth who are in the youth council elect –(Interjections)– let me finish what I want to say. I want to say that these youth elect Members of Parliament who come and represent them just like the population elect us to come and represent them here in Parliament. So why don’t we allow this to be like that?

MS LAGADA: Madam Chairperson, I want to appeal to the representatives of the youth in this House not to force the scraping of the youth councils prematurely. 

You remember that in 2004, the interest groups were reviewed when we had a Constitutional review. I have already heard hon. Kibanzanga leading towards a proposal of scraping the youth councils. I think that will be a big disservice to the youths of this county. I want to go on record saying that is a big disservice. It is not a Constitutional matter; after the first review, by the way, so many people cannot call for a review. It is the first one which is automatic, after ten years. But after that, anybody or group of people can call for an amendment to the Constitution; I want you to bear that in mind. 

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I would want us to pronounce ourselves on this; we have bodies that make decisions that are binding to everybody. We do that in Parliament here everyday, whether people voted for us or not, the decisions we make are binding to them. 

So please, Madam Chairperson, put the question, except that I wanted an amendment in 1(a) so that instead of say, “Without prejudice to sub-section (1), a person …, the committee wants to replace that word, “person”, with “youth”, to read, “Without prejudice to sub-section (1), a youth who is not a citizen of Uganda shall not be a member of a youth council”. Thank you.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I have consulted and I think that this is the right decision. I am reluctant to accept the proposal because by doing so you would be making a law more or less for a club or an association. But we are making a national law to galvanise the youth in being useful citizens of this country. And it is the benefits that accrue from these councils against which we should gauge this provision being put in place.

Therefore, as I said before, there is no way that this provision, 1(b) is in any way – even in terms of the object - the objects are really very wide. 

You can actually find a way of implementing something in an Act to give it legal effect and there is always provision for that: “To inspire and promote among the youth a spirit of unity and national consciousness, to provide a unified and integrated system through which the youth may communicate and co-ordinate their ideas and activities, to establish channels through which economic and social services and amenities may reach the youth in all areas of Uganda …” - these are benefits percolating through the  entire society as far as the youths are concerned. It is not for a club that it is only those who are within that club that must be bound by those decisions that are made. Therefore, I beg to move that we sustain the provision as it is.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MS LAGADA: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that in clause 2(6)(a) substitute the words “At the village level and parish level” which is on line three of (6)(a) with “All levels” and the justification is to make it more accommodative and cater for levels not mentioned.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You are writing “All levels” instead of village and parish. You are saying “All levels”. Is that okay? I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there something on 2(c)? Why is the women council election here? 

MS LAGADA: 6(c), it is a mix up, it should be youth.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Instead of women’s council, it should be youth council election. Anything else on clause 2?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Yes, 6(a) where it says “the Electoral Commission shall by statutory instrument designate a time period for registering youth...” I wish to move that we delete the words “who wish” because whether you want to vote or not, it is not the role of the Electoral Commission -(Interjections)- 6(a) “The Electoral Commission shall by statutory instrument designate a time period for registering youth to participate in youth council elections”. We delete the words “who wish” because the Electoral Commission - it is like we have a register of voters in your constituency, whether you want to vote or not, the Electoral Commission must provide a comprehensive list, otherwise, to subject them to find out who wants, who does not want, I think it may be so demanding.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed by hon. Otto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MS LAGADA: I wish to delete the words “After consultation with council” appearing in the second line of clause 2. The justification is that it is redundant. It was already there in clause 1. Clause 4(2), if you read clause 4(1), you will see “The minister may after consultation with council” then you come to clause 4(2) again “The minister may after consultation with the council” which is already referred to in (1). So, it is redundant in (2).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you know there are two things. In the first one, they are making regulations for the better carrying out of the overall Act, in (2) they are dealing specifically with the election. They are two different things. I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, agreed to.

The Title

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Title - 3(c)?

MS LAGADA: Please where you see “women” substitute with “youth” in 3(c).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Gabriel Opio, you really were thinking about women. (Laughter) Okay, substitute “youth” for the word “women” in the last line.

MS NAMAGGWA: I want to be assisted by the Attorney-General whether actually 4(a) can be easily implemented -(Interjections)- but I am talking, he is confusing me. I am talking about 4(3)(a), I was inquiring from the Attorney-General whether it is implementable because I think those youth who are not in the council could still take us to court. I was wondering whether 4(3)(a) is implementable without going to court.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The issue of the fine?

MS NAMAGGWA: Yes, whether those people can actually pay up fine -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Whether they can levy a fine and implement it.

MS NAMAGGWA: When they are not part of the -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Judicial system.

MS NAMAGGWA: We agreed but I am wondering whether it is implementable so that it is on record. Secondly, I wanted to find out whether the minister can give us a promise to give us an association that would cater for the youth who are not in the councils - (Interjections)- yes because I know that when the government sets up these councils, it is going to get them a budget. What will happen to those people who are not in the councils? Are they going to be catered for? (Interjections) We should have this on record.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But really hon. Member, the government provides the channel, through which you can participate, then you say “I do not want”, then you say the government should look for you and also cater for you who refused. Really what sort of government is that? I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.19
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.20
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill, 2008” and passed it with some amendments.  I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.20
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, I rise to beg for a recommittal of clause 1 -(Interjections)- yes. What we passed would read, “A village youth council shall consist of youth who reside in the village and who are willing to be members of the village council.”

I am not very comfortable with the word “willing.” First of all, it is too litigious. Secondly, it contradicts the 1(b) which we have just passed. The 1(b) states, “The resolution of the village council is binding on all the youths,” and yet in 1(b) we are saying that the council shall be composed of those who are willing. 

In the drafting which I had done, if you look at section 6 of the parent Act which the minister sought to amend, it says, “Composition and hierarchy of the youth council.” Now section 1 is what the Constitutional Court was not comfortable with. It reads, “A village youth council shall consist of every person who has attained the age of 18 years but is below the age of 30.” 

This is where the issue of forceful conscription emerged in the Constitutional Court. Now, if we want to cure this problem, I do not think we have cured it by leaving the word “willing” in this amendment, because if I am unwilling and the decision in binding on me, it means I was still forced. 

So, the submission which I am asking for recommittal would read that instead of the 1(a) we should have, “Every youth who resides in a village has a right to be a member of the village council -(Interjections)– yes, it is a right. So that we dispense with the issue of willingness and unwillingness - (Interruption)

MRS SSENTONGO: Do you want to imply that every youth living in that village, no matter whether one is not a citizen, is free to be a member on the council?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I am seeing a situation where the Attorney-General may agree with me. If someone files the pleading in the same court that section 1(a) is still forcefully conscripting someone to the youth council that court may rule in the affirmative that it is. But the moment we make it a right and we do not bring this litigious issue of willingness whose exact opposite is unwillingness, and the exact opposite of a right would be you are not participating; you do not want to exercise that right. For example, I have a right to join a trade union but I have not joined one but it still does not remove my right to join any trade union. So, I would really plead that if we could adopt that every youth who resides in a village has a right to be a member of the village -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want us to look at this logically. Let us use the example of driving cars in this country. We have a regulation that you must have a seat belt. Would you want someone to say, “I am a non –citizen; I have a right to use the road anyhow; I am not bound by the law of the country to use a seat belt in Uganda?” That is what you are suggesting.

MR ODONGA OTTO: What I am suggesting is this. The law that will require seat belts would attract immediate penalty if you have not been wearing a seat belt. What I am saying is that I cannot be forced to join a village council even if I am a youth but I still have the right to join or not to join. So, I feel we would agree that, fine if there are regulations that everyone who is driving should put on a seatbelt, then you have to put on a seatbelt. Those are regulations; those are guidelines for driving. If you have got to drive on the left, you have got to drive on the left. But you cannot emerge and say, “I am unwilling to drive on the left side of the road.” 

So, Attorney-General, I would still appeal to you- unless it has grave issues that I am not seeing - probably as a senior counsel -(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I do not see the worry. If you have a right and you want to exercise it then you are willing. Actually there is an implied right that if you are willing then certainly you have a right. 

Let me actually read you the worry of the court as it was expressed in the judgment. It is on page 21 of the judgment that we have been referring to Maj. (Rtd) Rubaramira’s case: “Section 6(1) of the National Youth Council Act provides, ‘a village youth council shall consist of every person who has attained the age of 18 years but is bellow the age of 30 years and is a resident if the village.’ Our understanding of the above section 46(1)(C)of the Local Governments Act sections 1(6) of both the National Women’s Council Act and the National Youth Council Act is that they respectively conscript their members from persons of a certain age and or sex resident in a village. The word ‘shall’ in these provisions imports the conscription message; it gives a member no choice whether or not to join the body. That is contrary to the clear spirit of article 29(1) (e) of the Constitution that you are referring to.” Therefore, when you say, “willing,” it certainly rules out conscription. 

Now you are bringing in the other element which I thought we had debated exhaustively and finished, that is on the binding nature of the decisions made by the council. I thought we had actually conclusively dealt with that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Otto, how will you exercise your right without participation? You say, “It is my right” and you sit here on the fence and in the meeting you say, “It is my right but I am not attending your meetings.” (Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the interpretation of the Attorney-General and it would rest that issue. However, for how long does “willing” run? Because I may not be willing today but tomorrow I might be willing -(Interjections)- because I can be unwilling yet I have the right - (Interjections)- yes, the right is a creation of law.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The right is inherent, hon. Otto. If you want to exercise it you do. If you do not want you do not exercise it. You have your right and nobody has taken it away. So, you either exercise it by going there or by not going there. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: So, in what timeframe would willingness be determined? Is it by event? Would the Attorney-General clarify that? Is it by event?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think let us move for the third reading.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE NATIONAL YOUTH COUNCIL AMENDMENT BILL, 2008

6.29
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill, 2008” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that “The National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill, 2008” be read for a third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE NATIONAL YOUTH COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2010”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Title is settled and the Bill passed. (Applause) 

Hon. Members, I would like to thank you for all the work in what may appear to be a very small Bill but which has occupied us. So, please keep the ideas in mind because we still have to deal with the National Women Council Bill. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 10 O’clock in the morning. 

(The House rose at 6.30 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 11 May 2010 at 10.00 a.m.) 

