
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Wednesday, 4 May 2022

Parliament met at 2.09 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I have read, in the media just a short while ago, about a bus accident which took place today at Sebitoli along Fort Portal-Kyenjojo Road. 

According to media reports, about 20 people have died. I urge the Minister of Works and Transport to investigate the cause of the accident and also establish measures to reduce road carnage because every day, we receive such cases.

Honourable members, I request that we stand up in honour of those who have perished in this accident.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I have also noticed that in the House, we spend a lot of time handling matters of national importance. It has more or less become a substantive item and yet it is not even provided for anywhere in our Rules of Procedure - when you duly interpret them.

I also would like to draw your attention to Rule 25(2)(m), which provides for brief statements by Members and that is where we usually put matters of national importance. It seems like a substantive item on our agenda; if you do not allow it, it is as if you are not allowing Members to speak but we would like to have an orderly House.

When you come and spend around two hours of prime time where the whole country is waiting to look at very important issues and we are just rotating - So, when I am chairing, I will be taking only five matters per day and presentation of each matter will take only two minutes, and a response of not more than two minutes because these are urgent matters; they are not matters where you expect structured answers, so that we go on to serious business on the agenda.

The first five Members to come will be the ones I will allow; so, you cannot come here and start sending chits the way they have been coming and we end up in a game that does not make us look clean and smart.

Today, I have guided most of you to refer to other rules - chapter 9 or 11, and rules No.41 to 45; you have all avenues of presenting your issues.

Most of the issues you are bringing are issues where you need structured answers; you took time to do research and structure your question but you want an immediate answer and in the end, you get an answer that does not satisfy you.

Colleagues, if the issues are not extremely urgent, we utilise other rules so that you can come for “Questions for Oral Answer”, Prime Minister’s Question Time and we ensure that we give those other items space on the Order Paper. I request that we address this matter and give it the urgency it needs.

Secondly, I have also seen colleagues who abuse the “point of procedure” to raise substantive issues or questions that should come as petitions or come to the Prime Minister. Then someone stands up under “point of procedure” and finds a way of passing “via the kitchen” to bypass the rules to present matters.

Honourable colleagues, I will not tolerate that because if you insist, I will be invoking rule No. 78(4), which requires that for any procedural matter you are raising, you should refer to a rule - where the House has gone astray.

I do not want to go to that extreme because the moment you go that way, you will have suffocated many. I would like us to have the freedom. I am trying to emphasise that we should not abuse the good will of the presiding officer.

I was happy last week - this came from you - that indeed, we need to have an orderly House and orderly business. We should come here and do business and ensure that we finish that business.
I request that if it is a point of procedure, it should be about proceedings within the House and not issues that are not on the agenda of that day or that are going on.

Today, the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Malaria commemorated the World Malaria Day. This should have happened on the 24th of April but due to unavoidable circumstances, it was postponed.

We continue to lose around 10 children per day to malaria, not to mention the suffering pregnant mothers. Uganda is still ranked seventh among countries affected by malaria in the whole world.

As a country, we have committed to eradicate malaria by 2030. On the basis of this commitment, the Minister of Health should present a statement to the House in two weeks on measures being taken by Government to eradicate malaria and ensure that this target is met, come 2030.

We shall have a comprehensive debate on that statement because each one of you - I am sure - has malaria-related cases in your constituencies and I urge you to join that forum.

I am the patron and I am going to follow up to ensure that most of the commitments that Government has made in fighting and eradicating malaria are met. With those very many words, let me allow matters of national importance.

2.18
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Mr Speaker, let me, once again, congratulate you upon ascendance to that chair. Under Rule No.49: Matters of urgent public importance, the controversial deal that was signed to give exclusive powers to Uganda Vinci Coffee Company to export and deal in all matters coffee, is a very bad law and has triggered a lot of backlash from the populace, especially in the Bugisu subregion where coffee is more than gold. 

Yesterday, this matter was referred to the relevant committee of trade and the chairperson was unequivocally clear here that the report is ready. I have perused through the Order Paper but that particular report is conspicuously missing. 

As a matter of procedure, Mr Speaker, I would implore your Chair, seeking your indulgence, to amend the Order Paper and have this rather dicey, risky and unpredictable matter of urgent public importance included. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Nambeshe. The Order Paper belongs to the presiding officer. So, whenever an item is not on the Order Paper, you cannot use a language of “conspicuously”, as if there was connivance. That would not be and that is not an honourable way of referring to an item missing. 

I know, indeed, that the report is complete but the presiding officer always has to read through the report, comprehend it so that you are able to moderate the matter, once it is on the Floor. Otherwise, if you just got a report and say, “Start”, then you will also start reading from here. So, as Presiding Officers, we have it. We are reading through and we shall ensure it gets space on the Order Paper. On that one, be guaranteed, honourable member. 

I had allowed Hon. Basalirwa.

2.21
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to respond briefly to your guidance, with regard to matters of national importance and other related matters.

At the beginning of this Parliament, when it was being chaired by the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah – May his soul rest in peace - we had issues on how the presiding officers manage business.

I did advise that one of the ways of addressing these concerns is through amendment of these rules. At that time, I had a disagreement with the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah on the interpretation of these rules. I even went to his office and we had a discussion. I foresee the same thing emerging.

If we want harmony and consistency, I would request that the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker harmonise the manner in which the House is presided over. Take an example of the issue you raised - matters of national importance. I know that, for example, in the 10th Parliament, the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker had different approaches. One was liberal on admitting matters of national importance - even on the Floor - but the other was not.

On matters of procedure, one would be liberal to entertain anything and another was very strict. Now, if you create that situation, it becomes a very big problem to the MPs. In fact, what happens in practice is that an MP will wait on who is in the Chair to have their way. (Applause) So, to avoid this situation, I humbly appeal that you, the presiding officers, sit and harmonise so that we do not create a situation where people will now begin planning – “Who is chairing? It is so and so; let me go and have this matter. It sets a very bad precedent. It happened in the 10th Parliament. I do not think it should happen in the 11th Parliament. 

If we are agreeing on matters of national importance, let it be known that they are five, regardless of who is chairing. If it is matters of procedure, let it be known. Is it procedure within or outside, and should it be uniform? Otherwise, if you create different standards, you are going to create a very big problem and then people will now begin judging you; so, it becomes a very big problem. 

I have listened and I think this is a matter that - fortunately, the two of you are moving on very well and I want to thank you. You are creating a very good team. (Applause) The Speaker and the Deputy Speaker are creating a very good team. I am very sure this is a matter you can harmonise such that the communication you make is a corrective communication that reflects the position of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. That is how we should be guided. We will know there are five matters of national importance. 

Even beyond the practice, we could even consider having the rules clarified, so that whoever wants to know how things are done, can only seek refuge in our Rules of Procedure. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Asuman Basalirwa. What you have raised is very important. I want to assure you that this is something we have discussed, as presiding officers. 

Honourable members, we come here to debate an agenda, isn't it? You have an Order Paper and you look at as you come but for three hours, you are handling items which are not on the Order Paper. Sometimes you have visitors who have come to witness the debate but for three hours, you are discussing matters which are not on the Order Paper. However, like you have proposed, we are going to sit so that we see whether we need to look into our rules and be clear. 

Also, when we talk of five items or five matters, it is not that it is engraved in stone. What I mean is, if, for example, something has happened at 1.00 p.m. and you walk straight into my office and I look at it as a very urgent matter, I would be flexible enough. However, the problem is that some people are abusing our flexibility. That is the biggest concern.

Honourable members, as we work on our side as presiding officers, I request you, colleagues, to also work on your side. Hon. Solomon Silwany and then, we go to matters of national importance.

MR SILWANY: Thank you. Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for your communication. I rise particularly on the accident that happened this morning. 

Far back, in this country and in this same Parliament, there was a clear directive on all public service vehicles to have speed governors. This moved on for a long time. As we speak, the Ministry of Works and Transport has not enforced speed governors in most of the public transport. 

I am one of the common users of buses in this country. I use buses a lot and the speed that the driver uses is determined by himself. If this is not enforced, Mr Speaker, we are going to continue experiencing such accidents. 

Much as some accidents may be unavoidable, the Ministry of Works should come out to deliberately regulate, put the speed governors and monitor, especially public transport that carries more than 10, 15 or 100 people.

Mr Speaker, the procedural matter -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Solomon Silwany, I would guide that - You did not rise on a procedural matter. No, you were responding to my communication; those are two different things. Now from responding to my communication, you are going into procedure. It really cannot work. 

However, I would guide that you write a question to the Prime Minister so that we get a structured response to that issue. That is a very important issue you are raising for us to just dismiss it that way. Write a question to the Prime Minister. We will ensure that next Thursday, the Prime Minister gives us the structured answer.

2.28
MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA (NUP, Mukono county North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On several occasions, issues of human rights violations by the Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence (CMI) have been coming on the Floor of Parliament and have consistently been referred to committees of Parliament.

Of recent, even the President came out distancing himself from human rights violations and directed the Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence (CMI) and the Internal Security Organisation (ISO) to stop harassing, abducting, kidnapping and detaining citizens.

Mr Speaker, as we speak, the CMI is still carrying out operations of abduction, torture and arrest of citizens in this country. The case in point is Isma Ssemuto, who was arrested in Kalagi, in broad daylight, using a drone. He was arrested last Wednesday. Up to now, he is still detained at Kireka, on the orders of Gen. Birungi and his agents.

Mr Speaker, my prayer is for the minister for security to prevail over the CMI agents to stop the atrocities being committed against the citizens. I humbly pray.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister?

2.31
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Nakadama Rukia):  Mr Speaker, sorry for our brother who is in detention now – Isma Ssemuto. I am going to get in touch with the minister for security so that he can come here and explain why the abductions are still ongoing. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the minister get in touch with the honourable member for more details and report back to the House on Tuesday.

2.32
MS KEVIN OJINGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join my colleagues in congratulating you upon achieving that chair. I had not done that before.

I rise on a matter of national importance. It was last week on Thursday, the 28th, when we had a heavy downpour in my district. It rained for about five hours. You know that Pallisa is a low-land district – the whole district was flooded. 

The flood washed off, particularly Kaboloi Bridge, as well as Ometai and Otut bridges. Kaboloi Bridge links Pallisa to Ngora District via Aleles Bridge. It is not the first time that I am raising this issue on the Floor of Parliament. Last year, around October, I raised the same issue.

Normally, we have heavy rains in March-April and October-November. Since then, the ministry sent technocrats to assess the situation. After assessing the situation, that was it – the bridge has never been worked on. This particular bridge was built in 1960 before I was even born – (Interruption)

MR OGWARI: Thank you very much, honourable member. Mr Speaker, the honourable member has mentioned the bridges, but the information I want to give her and the whole House is that even the roads have been totally swept off. 

The road from Obwanai to Apopong is totally impassable. The road from Amotot to Kawukura is totally impassable. The road from Agule, which connects to Akisim, is totally closed. In Agule Town Council, three people’s houses are washed off. As we talk, children and other people are in the hospital. 

I wanted to add information that apart from the bridges, even the roads are down. I request the honourable member – I have all the details here, plus all the photos. You can lay it on the Table for the record. (Laughter) We have talked for a long time but we have not got any reaction. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have just allowed you because you are from the same area – Hon. Polycarp had also brought that same matter. Otherwise, on matters of national importance, I do not allow information.

MS OJINGA: Mr Speaker, we have written to the ministry several times -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, make your prayers. You are now repeating yourself.

MS OJINGA: What I was coming to is that we have written several times but seen no response. So, my prayers are that the Ministry of Works and Transport should come to our rescue. 

Mr Speaker, we are now going to open schools. Where will our children pass while going to school? Where are the pregnant women going to pass when going to the district hospital? For a very long time, Pallisa has been ignored in every aspect of development in this country: where does Pallisa belong, Mr Speaker? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, why ignore Pallisa? (Laughter) [Ms Nakadama: “She did not lay the document.”] Laying on the Table is her choice. In fact, honorable colleague, you only have to lay on the Table a document you have verified. You do not just receive a document because a colleague has said there is a document to lay, and you lay it. You need to verify it. What if it is your censure – (Laughter) - someone is saying you should leave this House and it goes on record? So, verify. I will give you time in case you want to lay it.
 
2.36
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Mr Speaker, I am sorry about what is happening in Pallisa. She has talked about the bridges but she is saying the bridges are very old – it is as if they were not washed away just recently. So, it is work that has not been attended to for some time. Even the honourable member has given information about those roads that have been washed away. 

I am going to call the Minister of Works and Transport and the minister for disaster to come and work together to see to it that the roads and the bridges are put back. It is an old bridge – (Interjection) - which means people have been using that bridge but it was washed away, recently.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please, link up with the two Members and engage with them. Send a team to visit, verify and come up with solutions. Not everything will be put here again to be reported back to the House. Make a written response to her issues and copy to the presiding officers. If a Member doesn’t feel satisfied, she will come back on the Floor and then, you will be required to make a statement on the Floor. 

MR OSEKU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Whereas it is true that the bridges we are talking about are old, the current position is that the rains have washed away the connections; the bridge is still hanging but you cannot pass through it. 

Therefore, the place is cut off because you cannot drive through. Only Boda boda cyclists are able to put some logs to reach the other point - the bridge is isolated, but the other parts are all cut off. We have the pictures, which the engineers have given to us and the minister. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, so pass them on to the right honourable and on Tuesday, I am going to give you space in my office, so that we meet with the MPs from Pallisa and see what action you will have taken by then. 

If a Member is not satisfied, that is when you should come back instead of reporting here and we clog our Order Paper with very many issues. Some of the issues should be finished from behind the scenes as long as a colleague is satisfied that we have done the job.

2.40
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County, East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance with respect to the enforcement of the digital stamps by URA - (Interjections) - I said that I am raising a matter of national importance with respect to the implementation of the digital stamp by URA. In 2017, Parliament amended the Tax Procedures Code Act, 2014 to insert a clause section that introduced digital stamps. 

Early this year, the honourable minister, through the regulation, expanded the list of goods and services that are supposed to be affixed on digital stamps. The deadline was supposed to be the 30th of April.

Mr Speaker, these stamps are put on locally manufactured goods. The expansion was to allow, on the list, other goods like soft drinks. Soft drinks undergo a process of certification from the Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS). The Uganda Revenue Authority says that to be able to access digital stamps, you must be certified by the UNBS.

The Uganda National Bureau of Standards is saying this does not have the capacity to certify all the products that are before it. They still have backlog since 2018. People have invested in the beverages industries, yet they cannot take their products to the market because they do not have stamps.

Mr Speaker, why has the Ministry of Finance failed to harmonise with the Minister of Trade on the implementation of the application of digital stamps? From the 1st of May to date, people are not able to sell their products. So, what should they do? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Bahati, your traders are suffering. This is a very important issue, you know, especially with the effects of COVID-19. Why, again, should we give another problem to the traders and manufacturers?

2.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, the introduction of digital stamps has seen our revenue collection increase. So, it is a positive thing that this Parliament did when you passed the law.

We did expand the list after we realised that some of the companies were not in the bracket that we were collecting from. There are those challenges that are now coming and that we are attending to. 

I will have a meeting with the Minister of Finance and then we will have a meeting with Hon. Mawanda and inform him, after the meeting, and then we can bring this House to speed next week on the progress that we are making. But we are looking at ways of resolving the issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this is not an Hon. Mawanda issue. It is a national issue that is beyond the constituency. Therefore, the chairperson and the vice-chairperson of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, the chairperson and the vice-chairperson of the Committee on Finance, and the shadow ministers for finance and trade, should meet with you, as a team, and then you report back to the House on Tuesday. Is that feasible?

MR BAHATI:  It is possible. We can have a meeting on Friday and then I report back on Tuesday. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister.

2.44
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and my dear colleagues. I rise on a matter of national importance. The issue is about insecurity around the area bordering South Sudan by armed thugs suspected to be from South Sudan, covering the areas of Koboko, Yumbe and Moyo District, and the subcounties of Lefori, Moyo, Metu and Dufele. 

Mr Speaker, on 6 January 2022, three farmers and three tractor operators were abducted by armed men along the South Sudan border and detained inside South Sudan. Again, from the 2nd of March up to date, armed men are carrying out logging, using South Sudanese refugees as labourers on the Ugandan side of the border, and they have also been carrying out cattle raids.

Mr Speaker, mobilisation for agricultural development and activities under Operation Wealth Creation have all been disrupted in the Gwere North in Lefori Subcounty by displacing, exploiting, oppressing and suppressing the local farmers especially in areas like Abaya, Beri, Bamule, Arapi and Wano.

They claim that land covering around 200 square hectares belongs to South Sudan. Also, they have entered deep inside Uganda about eight kilometres inside Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to draw your attention to the fact that on 15 February 2012, that was about 10 years ago, an inter-ministerial committee sat so that they could fast-track the demarcation of the border. However, up to now, 10 years down the road that has never happened. 

My prayers, Mr Speaker, are that the government should expedite the border demarcation in order to make programmes under Operation Wealth Creation and agricultural activities to flourish. 

Secondly, patrols by police and the army along the border should be stepped up. There should be sensitisation, mobilisation and education of the people along the border in order to embrace peace. 

Thirdly, the NFA and the environmental police should help in stopping illegal tree cutting and logging at the border. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, can we involve international organisations like the IGAD, the European Union, the African Union and the East African Community so they can come in, in order to help in demarcating the border so that we can have peace along the border? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government.

2.48
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Mr Speaker, this is an issue which needs bilateral engagements. So, the Ministry of Security, the Ministry of Lands, Planning and Urban Development, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs are all involved. Therefore, we have to call upon these people to see how this issue can be settled. 

Secondly, deployment has been done in some of the parts with a lot of insecurity and I expect those areas to also have some deployment. Maybe it also needs to be strengthened. So, it is an issue that we are going to consider, as the government, and we will see how it can be handled. Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, information to who? There is no one on the Floor. 

Right Honourable, since you have said this is a multi-sectoral issue, indeed, let us give you two weeks to give us a response. However, in the meantime, look at the urgent components. One way of doing it is quickly linking up with the Members from the affected areas. The moment you do so, they will even give you information beyond what they have presented here and then you will be able to address the immediate challenges.

Honourable colleagues, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have Mr Aliga Cliff Asher and Mr Mulamuzi Dan from the Federation of Uganda Nurses and Midwives. They have come to observe proceedings of the House. Please join me in welcoming them -(Applause)- you can stand up. Thank you. 

2.50
Mr aloysius mukasa (NUP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Accept my congratulatory message, where majority of the honourable members elevated you to that specific position. 

I rise on a matter of national importance in regard to the inadequate sanitation services in Kampala City, more particularly, toilet services to urban slum dwellers. 

Research surveys have consistently shown that over 70 per cent of urban dwellers in Uganda lack private sanitation facilities in their homes and rely on an informal network of shared toilets - if they are lucky to have them within communities, where they live. The predominance of these shared toilets in Uganda is a result of unplanned urbanisation, lack of space, unfavourable features of housing and socio-economic characteristics of the population. 

Kampala Captal City Authority (KCCA), under the KCCA Act, is obliged to, among other things, provide public lavatories and urinals as well as sanitary services for the removal and disposal of all kinds of refuse and effluent. 

Sadly, a big percentage of Kampala’s faecal sludge remains uncollected. Therefore, the unpicked human waste ends up in either side drainage or indiscriminately dumped in the open. This manifests in slum communities, where residents resort to defecation in polythene bags, which they call the “flying toilets”.

Kampala City currently has only 16 toilets. I repeat, Kampala City currently has only 16 public toilets - serving a population of about 4.5 million people during daytime. This demonstrates the magnitude of the health crisis I am referring to.

The consequences of poor sanitation are well known and disastrous to the population. There is water pollution, typhoid, and cholera –

The Deputy Speaker: Prayers, honourable member.

Mr mukasa: Stunting in children and lowering immunity of diseases like malaria, tuberculosis and others.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable member, prayers. Otherwise, it has become a petition.

Mr mukasa: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want the minister in charge of Kampala City to present to this august House a comprehensive plan to fast-track construction of more public toilets in parks, markets and within vulnerable communities, including those living in slum areas of Kabaawo Parish, Ndeeba Parish and Nateete Parish. 

I also want KCCA to undertake an audit into services of several NGOs that claim to be providing sanitation services to residents in slum areas yet in reality, they do not and are using the situation to fleece unsuspecting donors for this service. Thank you and I beg to submit.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable minister, they need a comprehensive response; so, come back in two weeks’ time. Link up with the honourable member to get the full statement. 

2.53
Mr enos asiimwe (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I congratulate you for having been elevated to the position of Deputy Speaker. 

I rise on a matter of national importance, relating to coffee. We are in a coffee planting season. Most of the farmers have run to Uganda Coffee Development Authority to seek support in terms of seedlings but the authority says they have no budget for the seedlings. You are aware that we have a coffee policy that was passed in 2017. Part of the objectives was to support farmers in terms of productivity and increase production.

Unfortunately, the UCDA says they do not have funds because the Ministry of Finance has not provided a budget for that - (Interjections) – a minute and I am going to give you that. 

Mr Speaker, based on that, I went to the Committee on Budget and followed up on the report from the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries relating to the Budget Framework Paper. They had made a recommendation to the Ministry of Finance to provide Shs 19 billion in this budget to provide for the seedlings –

The Deputy Speaker: In which budget?

Mr asiimwe: The coming budget - the budget process we are running right now. The Ministry of Finance did not make a provision for the Shs 19 billion. Basically, they are claiming that they are taking the money to the PDM.

The Deputy Speaker: Is that for the next financial year?

Mr asiimwe: That is for the next financial year. However, even now, there is no money for the seedlings.

The Deputy Speaker: We have to avoid being in conflict with rule 80, on anticipation. We have not passed the budget for the next financial year. The budget is with us here.

Mr asiimwe: That was in my prayers, Mr Speaker. Let me first give my colleague to give me some information then I can conclude –

The Deputy Speaker: Colleagues, on matters of national importance, there is no point of information. So, he is going to conclude for you, honourable member.

Mr sekabira: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. I congratulate you, sir, for assuming that chair. I happen to be a member of the Forum for Sustainable Development Goals. We have been getting coffee seedlings and other tree seedlings. This morning, I called the executive director because I had mobilised 1,223 farmers in three subcounties that were willing to consume 300,000 coffee seedlings. The executive director said there is no money. Unfortunately, the nursery bed operators have the seedlings ready. 

Therefore, the seedlings are available but the UCDA does not have money to procure them. The farmers are equally waiting to get seedlings because there has been a practice that every season, we provide seedlings as Members of Parliament. With your indulgence - honourable colleague, please proceed. Thank you.

Mr asiimwe: With your support, Mr Speaker, our prayer is that – 

THe Deputy Speaker: I think you have witnessed a coup. (Laughter)

Mr asiimwe: Mr Speaker, we are seeking your support to compel the Committee on Budget to make sure they do not scrap the UCDA budget in relation to coffee seedlings. 

With your support, again, we pray that you compel the Ministry of Finance to release some money to, at least, cater for the coffee seedlings for this coming season. The season is ending in a month or so and people are crying. They invested a lot in clearing the land, making them ready and now UCDA cannot provide the seedlings. I beg that you support us. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, Hon. Enos. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, these coffee seedlings and even other tree seedlings - eucalyptus and all that, which you have been giving us - is one of the ways the MPs are able to go to the communities and engage and work with them -(Applause)– it is one of the things we had. 

You are also an MP - even on the front bench. The Speaker is an MP. Therefore, this is very important for us. Can we have our seedlings? We need them.  

2.58
The third deputy prime minister and minister without portfolio (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Mr Speaker, I really do not know why the executive director said that there is no money to give out the seedlings. The Member of Parliament has said here that the farmers have the seedlings ready to be given out. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those are nursery bed operators. 

MS NAKADAMA: In their nursery beds - I am also a farmer who has been giving out those seedlings to people who want to plant. When you apply for seedlings, you give seedlings to the Community Development Officer (CDO) without money and then, the money is claimed after. Why is it that they are now saying there is no money? It is because the farmers do not request for money immediately. They first take the seedlings - in fact, it even takes a year without being given. What I request is - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister, the Executive Director of UCDA can only commit the Government against a budget line. He needs to be given money to spend, by the Ministry of Finance.

MS NAKADAMA: Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Finance did not give money to UCDA; so, I was going to request that farmers are given coffee, as we commit the Ministry of Finance to give us money - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister, tomorrow at 2.00 p.m., come back to this House and tell us what you have done about this matter. (Applause) Please, go and meet the Minister of Finance and then tomorrow at 2.00 p.m., come and tell us what you have done about this matter so that we can have coffee siblings. 

Honourable colleagues, we still have COVID-19 in our midst. I can see some of you do not have masks. I also know that most of you have them in your pockets. Therefore, for those with masks in the pockets, please, put them on and those that do not have, kindly, get a way of securing one. We still have COVID-19. Some colleagues can fundraise for you for some masks. We have some who keep several – [Hon. David Bahati rose_] - Hon. Bahati is fundraising for one of you. Hon. Tebandeke, you can take the opportunity of Hon. Bahati’s offer. Colleagues, please, if you do not have a mask, get out of this House. 

MR NSEREKO: Mr Speaker, our rules are very clear that your ruling is final and incontestable in a sitting of the House. (Applause) You can only contest it in another sitting, if you feel so. Therefore, let Hon. Tebandeke and others feel honourable to get masks or depart.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. On the issue of masks, colleagues, you know we have an air conditioner here. Hon. Richard Wanda, Hon. Bahati can help you. Please, take advantage of that but each one of us should mask up. Thank you, colleagues. 

3.02
MR RICHARD SEBAMALA (DP, Bukoto County Central, Masaka):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you for becoming the Deputy Speaker and rising to those heights in such a short time, at such a simple age. I congratulate you. 

I would like to draw your attention to a matter of national importance. The Minister of Finance suppresses the budget for all MDAS and other entities. However, I would like to take interest in the suppression of interest – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, repeat that statement. What does the Minister of Finance do?  

MR SEBAMALA: There was suppression of the budget of the Indicative Planning Figures (IPFs) for all MDAs across board -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They suppressed to a certain threshold. Otherwise, when you say “suppression”, it is as if none has a budget. 

MR SEBAMALA: Yes, I would like to take interest in the suppression of the budget of the road sector across the nation. 

Since the budgets were suppressed, most of the contractors have failed to get paid by the MDAs. Also, the MDAs have a lot of liquidated damages. If you went today, even suppliers to the contractors are also facing a hard time. 

Today, I was reading through particular reports and I want to single out the Uganda National Roads Authority, which is facing Shs 334 million in liquidated damages per day. This means that we are spending more or less a district budget per day on interest. By the end of this financial year, they will be in deficit of Shs 1 trillion. This means we will not be able to maintain any roads next financial year in our districts. Colleagues, you know roads are one of the things that bring us back to Parliament. 

My prayer is that the Ministry of Finance should come up with immediate intervention to some of these MDAs; maybe some little money - a supplementary or so - to help us to at least clear the Uganda National Roads Authority on some particular districts that have very big interest; interest of almost half a billion per day is very high. I would like the Ministry of Finance, through your indulgence, Rt Hon. Speaker, to act faster and give us a response.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. This is a very serious issue, colleagues. We are losing a lot of money on interest payments. These are contracts that the Government entered into. They had projected - I remember, when the Committee on National Economy is borrowing for most of these projects, they usually insist on having a confirmation of availability of counterpart funding. 

However, after signing and the contract is under execution, you take zero – for some of the existent projects, they even take nothing. It is not only UNRA but if you check projects under the Ministry of Water, a lot of money is being spent on interest. Some of these contractors are just comfortable because they would have borrowed this money at a much lower rate compared to the interest and penalties they are charging UNRA. 

Therefore, on top of the response from the Minister of Finance, I would like to implore the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to study that matter of the interest we pay to contractors for failure by the Government to pay. The committee should report back to this House within two weeks. Study the matter comprehensively and report back so that we get a solution. 

There is also the issue of dimmed energy, where we are paying hundreds of billions every financial year and yet, we cannot even have money for free connection. We are paying for power we are not consuming but we have people who are saying, “connect us so that we start consuming.” For the money you would be paying for unconsumed power, you would be using it to connect our people under the free connections policy. 

The Committee on Environment and Natural Resources should also do the same for dimmed energy so that we come back here and debate those two, as a House, and give proposals to Government on how they can be addressed. We should come to an amicable conclusion and see how best funds can be got to address those challenges. 

However, for the Minister of Finance, please, respond to this matter on Tuesday next week. Let us go to the next item. 

3.09
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you. Mr Speaker, the Rt Hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister had indicated that the Minister of Internal Affairs would come here and explain the issue of torture. On 21 April, I raised an issue regarding a lady called Marinos Alexandria, who was allegedly abducted on Easter Monday and the act was repeated again. She was raped and tortured. This even appeared on the televisions and most of you could have seen this.

The Speaker directed that the Minister of Internal Affairs comes to this House and gives us a report on what exactly transpired. That statement should have come on the 26th. Today is 4 May 2022 and we have not had a report.
 
Wouldn’t it be right that when the minister is coming here, he also reports on this matter? This is because when women are tortured, it seems nobody cares. When women are raped, it seems business as usual. (Interjections) The torture is on men but it is worse when women are actually arrested, tortured and raped. Most of you could have seen this lady’s body on social media. It is very unfortunate. 

We have an Anti-Torture Act, which is not being implemented. Who are these people torturing Ugandans? We also want to know what action the Government is taking against these people who torture Ugandans: they should not go scot-free. We shall not end torture unless we take action against those who are torturing Ugandans. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Sarah. Today morning, I received a call from the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, Gen. David Muhoozi. He told me that he was on duty in northern Uganda and he requested to be here tomorrow, to respond to these issues. 

Clerk, put them on the Order Paper. Tomorrow, the Ministry of Internal Affairs should come and respond to that issue and the issue of replacement of national IDs, as raised by Hon. Luttamaguzi. Next item – procedure?

MS NABUKEERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Are we proceeding well without all the ministers here, yet the questions are supposed to be answered by them? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister, we need your ministers. The Member of Parliament is asking. We have discussed this matter and each ministry has a minister of state, some of them are as many as six but we do not have ministers here. So, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, where did you send the ministers?

Now, Members have even hijacked their seats. I do not know what they will do. (Laughter) I want my Member to be comfortably seated.

3.12
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO 
(Ms Rukia Nakadama): Mr Speaker, we will do better but the Minister for Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs is here, ready to handle the next business –(Interjection)

MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, we have about 80 ministers. The honourable member is asking the Government where the ministers are and the person representing the Government rises to tell us that the Minister for Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs is here as if we are asking, only, for the minister for Kampala. We need the entire Frontbench around. 

Is the honourable member in order to try to cover the ministers who are absconding from their duties intentionally?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are not in order because, at least, I am privy to information that ministries make rotas on which minister should be attending which day in Parliament. 

We are going to ask for that rota. I know it is yours but business here – even putting aside this business of saying the ministers for the items on the Order Paper are here; no, ministers are Members of Parliament are supposed to be in the House. Okay?

We could, at least, have one minister. How comes Hon. Bahati is always here every day? How comes the Rt Hon. Rukia Nakadama is here every day? It is because they take Parliament seriously. 

Therefore, I implore other colleagues to also take Parliament seriously. Otherwise, if you only come when we are processing your business, that is how you even come and fail to get allies here. That is why, sometimes, you find colleagues asking: “Who is that Member? Isn’t that a stranger?” 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please, I implore you to call your colleagues to come and attend parliamentary business. Next item. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021

3.15
THE MINISTER FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AND METROPOLITAN AFFAIRS (Ms Minsa Kabanda): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the Bill entitled, “The Kampala Capital City (Amendment) Bill, 2021” to be read for the first time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is referred to the Committee on Presidential Affairs. Honourable minister, I hope you have the Certificate of Financial Implications?

MS KABANDA: The Certificate Of Financial Implications is also here. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh, you had laid them together. Next item.

PRESENTATION OF THE PETITION ON SALARY ENHANCEMENT DISCREPANCIES FOR NURSES AND INTERNS IN LINE WITH THE COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT AND THE PRESIDENTIAL DIRECTIVE FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023 BY THE FEDERATION OF UGANDA NURSES AND MIDWIVES

3.16
MS RUTH LEMATIA (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to join the rest to say congratulations to you, publicly, for attaining this position.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I request you to come closer to the microphone so that you are audible enough. You can pull it closer to you. 

MS LEMATIA: I rise under Rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure. This is the humble petition of nurses and medical interns presented by me, one of the most senior nurses in this country. (Applause)
It showeth and states that:

    1. Your humble petitioners are the leaders of several professional nursing bodies united under their professional nursing organisation, the Federation of Uganda Nurses and Midwives (FUNM).

2.	 The petitioners are aggrieved by the continued non-implementation of the terms of the 2018 Collective Bargaining Agreement intended to streamline the salary discrepancies amongst various categories of the medical practitioners.

3. 	The nursing profession in Uganda has, over the decades evolved, with nurses acquiring super specialised skills to handle complicated 20th century high tech medical challenges and equipment in various specialisations.

4.   Currently, the pool created by the nursing resources contributes over 70 per cent of staffing levels of the Uganda health system, which is highly multidisciplinary and multisectoral. This is very clear; a majority of health workers in this country are nurses. Although we have stated 70 per cent here, but there are more than 75 per cent of health workers.

5. 	With their training and passion, nurses have, over the years, demonstrated tremendous commitment to serving the country’s healthcare system; from health centre II to regional and national referral hospitals as demonstrated during the challenging national health crisis of the COVID-19 pandemic.

6. 	Despite the commitment and dedication, working for long hours alongside doctors in the same risky environment, nurses continue to be heavily disgruntled and demotivated due to the continued underpayment and non-recognition as important players in the medical care service delivery. Nurses now attain degrees - starting from 1992 when the first nursing schools in university were introduced. We now have a large number of nurses with university degrees. Some have risen up to doctorate level but they are not recognised.

7. 	The failure of the Ministries of Health and Public Service to implement the Schemes of Service for the Nursing and Midwifery Cadre, 2018 regarding recruitment and promotion has further resulted in continued improper recruitment, promotion and failed retention of well-trained nurses and midwives. We are losing a lot of these highly trained nurses to other countries because the country has failed to recognise them. 

8.     In a bid to address the remuneration challenges faced by nurses and medical interns, the Government, through a collective bargaining agreement, reached a consensus with different public service labour unions whose terms are supposed to be implemented in the Fiscal Year 2022/2023.

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

    1. Government fulfils its commitment under the Collective Bargaining Agreement to enhance nurses’ and midwives’ salaries in Fiscal Year 2022 and 2023. - I am sorry this is coming after the budget process; the primary arrangements are almost over, but Mr Speaker, I wish you could take this into consideration.

    1.  Government, through the Ministry of Health, pays lower cadres (Diploma, certificates) the emoluments agreed upon in the collective bargaining agreement of 2018.

    2. Government, through the Ministries of Public Service and Health, harmonises the salary discrepancies between nurses, midwives, medical interns and other medical practitioners including doctors and pharmacists.

    1. Parliament, through its relevant committee, should ensure that the Health Service Commission fast-tracks the re-designation of nurses according to the scheme service for nurses and midwives 2018, to regularise nursing and midwifery terms of services.

5. Government, through the Uganda Health Service Commission, should desist from advertising jobs that consider a bachelor's degree as an added advantage rather than as a requirement. Many times, when advertising jobs, they say it is for nurses but they say, “A nurse with a Bachelor of Nursing Degree or Masters will have added advantage.”

Your humble petitioners, as in duty bound will forever pray and hereto, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures. 

You may not see the signatures but the most senior nurses have appended their signatures here. Many of these hold doctorates in nursing. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Lematia. The petition is referred to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government in line with Rule 30(5) of our Rules of Procedure.

Colleagues, the Kampala Capital City Authority Amendment Bill, 2021, is a three-clause Bill and when you read through the Certificate of Financial Implications, the money is already provided for.

They require getting emoluments for the Speaker and Deputy Speaker. I, therefore, want the committee to process it within one week and bring a report because it is a three-clause Bill and very direct.

Committee on Presidential Affairs, you have one week to give us a report on this Bill so that we pass it before we pass the Budget.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2021

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Commissioner, read all of them as you lay them and then I will refer them at once. 

3.26
MR ESTHER AFOYOCHAN (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to lay reports of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the financial year ended 30th June 2021 for the following districts:

    1. Ngora District Local Government
    2. Amuria District Local Government -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable commissioner, can I request that you lay on the Table each one you read, then I will refer. 

MS AFOYOCHAN: Ngora District Local Government; I beg to lay; Amuria District Local Government, I beg to lay; 

Olio Subcounty, I beg to lay; 
Amolatar District Local Government, I beg to lay; 
Kumi District Local Government; I beg to lay; 
Kalaki District Local Government; I beg to lay; 
Soroti District Local Government, I beg to lay; 
Kapelebyong District Local Government; I beg to lay; 
Soroti City, I beg to lay; 
Bukedea District Local Government, I beg to lay; 
Kumi Municipal Council, I beg to lay; 
Serere District Local Government, I beg to lay; 
Otuke District Local Government, I beg to lay; 
Kaberamaido District Local Government, I beg to lay; 
Katakwi District Local Government, I beg to lay; 
Dokolo District Local Government, I beg to lay; 
Soroti Regional Referral Hospital, I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable Commissioner. The statements, apart from that of Soroti Regional Referral Hospital, are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) and then, the one for Soroti Regional Referral Hospital – Take your seat, Commissioner. 

MS AFOYOCHAN: Mr Speaker, I had not mentioned the report itself. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which one is that, honourable Commissioner?

MS AFOYOCHAN: Mr Speaker, there were other reports not on that list. There is a report of the Auditor-General on the Fund Accountability Statement of Young Africa Works Uganda – Lead Firm –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, that one is coming under (b). The first ones were under (a), okay? So, the ones – please, take your seat so that I guide you. The ones under (a), apart from the one of Soroti Regional Referral Hospital, are referred to local governments accounts committee, okay? Then, the one of Soroti Regional Referral Hospital is referred to PAC (Central). 

Honourable Commissioner, you can again lay the ones under (b). I am following our Order Paper. So, if you could have a copy, it would be better for you.

MS AFOYOCHAN: Mr Speaker, allow me lay the following reports: 
    i. Report on the Auditor-General on the Fund Accountability Statement of the COVID-19 Economic Recovery and Resilience Response Programme, implemented by Private Sector Foundation Uganda, for the period 22 May 2022 to 30 April 2021. 

    ii. The report of the Auditor-General on the Fund Accountability Statement of Young Africa Works Uganda – Lead Firm Structure Project for the period 5 November 2019 to 31 December 2020. 

I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable Commissioner, for the good job. (Applause) The statements are referred to PAC (Central) for processing. 

Colleagues, in the public gallery, we have members from the National Malaria Control Division, under the Ministry of Health and other stakeholders in the fight against malaria. These include:

    1. Dr Rek John     - Pilgrim Africa and the Ministry of Health 
    2. Dr Silver Kasozi  - SBC Officer, National Malaria Control Division, Ministry of Health 
    3. Robert Mugerwa  -   National Malaria Control Division, Ministry of Health 
    4. Marion Natukunda      -  Senior Communications Officer, Ministry of Health 
    5. Kenneth Wycliffe Mugisha  - Board Chairman, Malaria Free Uganda
    6. Aubrey Agaba    -  Country Coordinator, Malaria Free Uganda
    7. Mbabazi Peter   - National Malaria Control Programme.

We also have guests from Target Malaria, Quality Chemicals and Centre for Policy Analysis (CEPA)
You are welcome.  (Applause)

You remember in my communication, I told you about our celebration for the National Malaria Day. We have requested the Minister of Health to present a statement here within two weeks, so that we can have a comprehensive discussion in this House on measures being taken and what we can do, as legislators, to contribute to the fight against malaria because it is finishing up people everywhere. 

(Hon. Otimgiw rose_) Honourable Colleague, you do not access a microphone before I give you permission.

MR OTIMGIW: Apologies for the slight error. Mr Speaker, I do not know whether you are aware but I stand on a small matter. We are new Members of Parliament. It is clearly stated that Members of Parliament shall be provided for, in order to exercise the duties. 

However, one year on, we do not have even computers in our offices –(Applause)- and we have to produce evidence-based debates here. We cannot print anything or research anything. I know we have iPads but we are not always in movement with it. 

We have our Commissioners here who are supposed to lobby for us on this matter. Maybe they can give us an update on what is happening that one year on, new Members do not have any computers, printers and even stationery in our offices. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, is that a matter where you want me to rule against myself? (Laughter) A monkey to decide a case of the forest - So, it is an administrative matter. 

MS AFOYOCHAN: Mr Speaker – (Laughter) - I pray you protect me from those people behind. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected.

MS AFOYOCHAN: Honourable members, we got that challenge last time. Members were complaining about computers and printers in many cases. However, we were implementing a budget that we found had passed. So, we could not do much in this ending financial year. It is in the coming budget that we hope to put some of those things in place. I hope that honourable members bear with us, in the meantime. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. But honourable colleagues, our doors are open. We are the people you elected to be your Speakers. These are matters, which we should handle internally; they are not matters for national television or for the House. So, I am going to link up with my senior, the Speaker, and we ensure we address this matter as members of the Commission. I would feel comfortable if we closed this matter. Thank you. 

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO WITHDRAW THE LAW REVISION (FINES AND OTHER FINANCIAL AMOUNTS IN CRIMINAL MATTERS) (MODIFICATION OF WRITTEN LAWS) INSTRUMENT, 2021

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs?

3.37
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Mr Speaker, before I move this motion, allow me to convey my congratulations to you upon ascending to that high post of Deputy Speaker. Congratulations, Right Honourable. 

I wish to move, under rules 8 and 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, seeking leave of the House to present a motion to withdraw the Law Revision (Fines and Other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters) (Modification of Written Laws) Instrument, 2021. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Hon. Bahati, Hon. Silwany, Member from Kapelebyong, Hon. Noah Mutebi and Member from Rwampara. Honourable minister, would you like to speak to your motion?
 
MR MURULI: Yes, Mr Speaker.

“WHEREAS on 5 October 2021, the Attorney-General laid in Parliament, the Law Revision (Fines and Other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters) (Modification of Written Laws) Instrument, 2021, for approval - the Statutory Instrument was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for scrutiny;

AWARE that Section 7 (2) of the Law Revision (Fines and Other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters) Act 2008, empowers the minister to, with the approval of Parliament, modify any written Law to give effect to the principles stated in the Act, to remove any doubt in the application of the provisions of the Act, and for the purpose of removing any injustice or any inconsistency arising out of the application of the principles stated in the Act;

NOTING that Parliament has amended or repealed various laws contained in the Statutory Instrument, including the Firearms Act Cap 229, the Uganda Railways Act Cap 331, the Ferries Act Cap 355, the Inland Water Transport (Control) Act Cap 356, the Vessels Registration Act Cap 362, and the National Social Security Act Cap 222, thereby making the Statutory Instrument redundant in certain aspects; 

COGNISANT of the need to withdraw the Law Revision (Fines and other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters) (Modification of written Laws) Instrument 2021, in order to harmonise the Statutory Instrument with the legislation the Statutory Instrument proposes to modify;

NOW, THEREFORE, this motion is moved:
THAT this Parliament approves the withdrawal of the Law Revision (Fines and other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters) (Modification of written Laws) Instrument 2021.” 

I beg to move, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Colleagues, this matter is not for debate. They are bringing amendments for most laws, which were already repealed. 

Minister, next time, the level of preparation for work brought here should be smarter. Last evening, I checked through sections 5(2), 16(3), 18(4), 33(4) and 36 of the Firearms Act and I observed that they are no longer good laws since they were amended and the fines are converted into currency point, which have increased.

Section 79 of the Uganda Railways Corporation Act that you are proposing was repealed by Section 156(d) of the Inland Water Transport Act, 2020. When I read through, I wondered how this came here. You need to be smarter next time. This is your law and proposal but you are again withdrawing it. Colleagues, I think we shouldn’t have a big debate over it. 

I put the question that leave be granted by this House to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to withdraw the Law Revision (Fines and other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters) (Modification of written Laws) Instrument, 2021.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you can go ahead and withdraw. Next item.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE NATIONAL BACKBONE INFRASTRUCTURE/ELECTRONIC GOVERNMENT INFRASTRUCTURE

3.43
MR MOSES MAGOGO (NRM, Budiope East County, Buyende): Mr Speaker, I also take the opportunity to congratulate you for having ascended to that office. I will go to the item on the agenda.

Whereas the committee presented the report of the performance of the national backbone infrastructure/electronic government infrastructure for consideration of this House, at the same time, the committee was considering a petition by Hon. Bashir Kazibwe, Member of Parliament for Kawempe South. The findings and recommendations of these particular reports are almost similar. 

Tomorrow will be the last day we shall visit one of the key players in the industry and that is MTN Uganda. By next week, Mr Speaker, we shall be in position to present both reports. The recommendations are almost similar and there are more findings we have made. Since this report was signed, that would be beneficial for consideration of this House. Therefore, the prayer of the committee is that we are given next week to present the two reports.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, don’t you think it would be better to consolidate the two reports so that we have one report? Or do you want each report separate but we debate them at once? 

MR MAGOGO: The request of the committee was to present both reports separately but on the same day because one report speaks to the other in a way. There were two different assignments, and we thought, unless guided, that the best way was to present the reports on the two assignments, differently.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Permission granted. Clerk, ensure that the two items follow each other on Wednesday next week. Chairperson should be ready. Chairperson, ensure we receive these reports early so that as the presiding officers, we are able to comprehend and upload it for Members. Please, ensure that the two reports follow each other so that the debate for the two reports is combined, and then, we handle the matters expeditiously. Thank you. Next time.

MR MAGOGO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO DEVELOP A DOCUMENTED COMPREHENSIVE TAXATION POLICY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemwanga Gyaviira? The Member is not in the House. Colleagues, there being no other item on the Order Paper, House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 3.47 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 5 May 2022 at 2.00 p.m.) 

