



Wednesday, 6 May 2020

Parliament met at 2.28 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I want to inform you that we have reverted to the 100-Member sittings. We had to use several tents when we were voting but because we pay for them every day, we have had to set some of them aside and revert to having 100 Members at each sitting. Your whips will, therefore, assign you sittings on a day-to-day basis. 

Secondly, I would like to encourage the joint committee of finance and gender, labour and social development to expeditiously handle the National Social Security Fund Bill. The Bill was read for the first time on 13 August 2019. Without delving into the merits of the Bill, I am aware that there are a number of issues of public concern that have gained prominence during this COVID-19 pandemic. Please, use the next 10 days to process the Bill for the Second Reading.

Thirdly, I would like to raise the issue of the education packs and lessons for children who are at home. In my district of Kamuli, I received reports that the radio lessons are only broadcast on Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC), yet the local administration had submitted two local radio stations, Ssebo FM and Kamuli Radio. They are more effective, but they were not designated; the Ministry of Education and Sports chose to go to UBC. 

Uganda Broadcasting Corporation’s coverage is not quite good, especially in the areas of the cattle corridor. Therefore, I hope that the minister will come first to tell us – You know, we have heard about these packs but no one has seen them; we have not been briefed as a House and now, we are getting issues from our constituencies about those issues. 

There was also a complaint that the broadcasts come at a very awkward hour. The children in Kampala may study in the morning but the children in Kidera will start by going to the garden. So, if the lessons are done in the morning, they will not be able to accommodate them. Therefore, the ministry needs to address that issue so that the children are able to attend.

The other matter concerns what they call the education packs. In Kamuli, we have 17,858 students in secondary school. However, the Ministry of Education and Sports only sent 2,700, which is grossly inadequate. The district has no money to produce copies for the other children, and I know I speak for many districts that are also in the same position. 

I also received another compliant from parts of Mpigi that they would have been happy to have Radio Buwama, which has wide coverage, to broadcast the lessons but this is not the case. Therefore, I think that we need to look at how best to deliver these lessons to the young people of the country. 

I would like to give hon. Obiga Kania a few minutes to just say something small.

2.33
MR MARIO OBIGA KANIA (NRM, Terego East County, Arua): Madam Speaker, I stand here in my capacity as Member of Parliament for Terego East County. I stand to register our appreciation to you for having steered the debate of yesterday and the elections, which led the Members to grant us Terego District. We would like to thank you. 

Madam Speaker, this issue of Terego District has been long coming; it has taken quite a long time, from 2005. We are therefore, grateful that at this particular moment, you are part of the history of having made this area a district in Uganda. We thank you.

Let me also take this opportunity to thank, on behalf my colleague, Moses Angundru, and myself, the regional groupings in Parliament who mobilised their Members to support us, beginning from the region of West Nile, Acholi and Lango regions, Busoga, Karamoja, Teso, Buganda, Bukedi, Bunyoro, western and southern Uganda and all the regions that supported and voted for us. We appreciated your votes.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to thank His Excellency the President, who has supported us all the way from 2001 through to 2007, 2009, 2011 up to 2020 to get this district. We thank you very much and we thank you, Madam Speaker. We wish you God’s blessings and keep supporting us. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We are happy that the issue is finally settled. It has been here for a long time.         

2.36
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You raised a very important matter concerning learning through media - the radio and television stations. 

Madam Speaker, the truth of the matter is that pupils and students who are living in the villages are not learning at all through radio. Let the Ministry of Education and Sports be very clear; if they are going to examine our pupils based on the learning going on through radio, then I do not see a future for our children. 

As a teacher, I appreciate that those one who are within the urban centres can learn through television, whereby a teacher can illustrate and the pupils will at least understand. However, for those lessons that are being done through radio, Madam Speaker, there is nothing going on completely in the villages. In my area, Amuru District, there are some places where radio cannot be heard. We only use the radio stations located in Gulu District. In Amuru, there are no radio stations. 

Madam Speaker, let the ministry be very clear; if they are going to examine our children on the learning going on through radio and television stations, then we are not helping our innocent children. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for raising that very important matter.

THE SPEAKER: I had also asked the minister whether they will be coming to brief the country and this House about how this is working. We just hear – He also has a paper to present. Maybe we hold the issues of education. He actually has two papers. I can note you down and when he comes, he responds to your issues. 

2.39
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, in your communication, you concluded with giving the minister from Terego an opportunity to say something. I think that was part of enlarging your communication. 

I would like to congratulate the people of Terego for finally getting their district. Tororo came on this Floor in 1998 when our people ate a rat – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, yesterday we told you that the minister is coming back in 15 days to present your issue. Do not talk about Tororo. Please, do not smuggle, hon. Angura.

MR ANGURA: Most obliged.

2.40
MR MAURICE KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you. Madam Speaker. In your communication, you talked about the NSSF Bill. The Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development is ready with the report. We can present it any time you deem fit, even tomorrow -(Interjection)- I belong to this committee. 

The second issue is that in our area, we have slow and fast learners, so when the person is teaching on radio, we wonder which mode they have adopted to provide room for those that wish to ask questions. We wonder how they will ask questions in case a student has not understood properly. 

Lastly, in villages like those in Kamuli where the parent is looking for Shs 1,000 to buy food for the day, how is he supposed to have Shs 3,000 to buy batteries for a radio? Could the minister help us to have answers for our voters? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will note those who wanted to speak about education so that when the minister comes, I give you an opportunity.

2.41
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to say a thing or two from your communication, since you touched on the districts within the cattle corridor. As you rightly observed and communicated, Sembabule is one of those districts that are within the cattle corridor. 

Madam Speaker, we talk about learning through the media but we are not talking about electricity accessibility in the districts, especially when it comes to rural electrification, Sembabule being one of the rural areas. I do not know what the Minister of Education and Sports had in mind to think that the students will be learning from the media even where you find a school, for example where hon. Ssemujju comes from – Rwijaba - I do not think they have a single TV there because they do not have electricity. When you go to Kikoma, it is the same. 

Madam Speaker, we are not aware when these schools will open, and knowing the failure that has happened with the distribution of reading materials, especially in the rural areas, the students who are there are suffering twice. These students cannot share these materials and they are being asked to go and photocopy them. 

I was with the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) the day before yesterday and he requested me to carry out that responsibility once again. While we have other problems, he asked that I should be the one to look into how we can enable our students access these reading materials. 

What is the rationale that was followed when they were compiling the number of reading materials to be sent to these rural areas? Did they find out how many students are in the villages and in the respective classes? That is my concern. Thank you very much.

2.44
MS CATHELINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to appeal to the Government for emergency assistance to Kabale District because of the rains that have destroyed everything in the district. 

Kabale District has always been prone to floods and landslides. The scale of the floods and landslides has, in most cases, been managed by the people themselves and the local leadership in place. However, the recent rains have caused untold damage and suffering to our people. The damage caused is so widely spread that entire subcounties, the town council and all the divisions in Kabale Municipality have been terribly affected in one way or the other. 

I do not know and I cannot tell how the neighbouring country does it, but Kabale District has become a flood pool of waters that are coming from our neighbouring country. Many schools have been damaged; a case in point is Maziba Primary School, which is more than 80 years old. It is a Government school and it has had all its structures razed, Madam Speaker. It needs to be rebuilt, preferably in a new location that is free from landslides. 

Many churches have been destroyed. We have Rwemiyaga Church of Uganda in Katuna Town Council. Health centres have not been spared too. Over ten bridges along River Mivuma, which is a tributary to River Kagera and River Rwabakazi, have been washed away completely, leaving a big percentage of the population inaccessible. 

The main Kabale-Ntungamo-Mbarara Road has been damaged along – 

THE SPEAKER: Give your prayers, please. 

MS NDAMIRA: Madam Speaker, being a district leader, I have some -

THE SPEAKER: You wrote to the Prime Minister. I saw a copy of the letter. 

MS NDAMIRA: Yes, Madam Speaker, I have written to those two leaders. Please, allow me to say that the roads in Butanda Subcounty are impassable. The Katuna-Muko Road and Rwenkorongo-Kagoma Road are all devastated. Over 1,000 households in the sub county have had their residential homes completely ravaged and have had to relocate to stay with relatives and friends. Some people are stranded on the roads. A big number of people have had their gardens washed away in all subcounties. More than 10 people and a countless number of domestic animals have died and some are missing. 

All the divisions of Kabale Municipality have been affected. My prayers, Madam Speaker, are: One, we request the Government to assist in the reconstruction of the destroyed infrastructure. We request Government to give assistance to the affected households by getting them shelter and food. Also, in view of the fact that the hills continue to erupt, it is important that experts be sent to the area to study the nature of our hills and come up with a comprehensive remedy to these occurrences. Sensitising people on proper land use – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have taken more time than you were allotted. Please, this is supposed to be short, for you to make your prayers. Now you are making a very lengthy submission.

MS NDAMIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It was not me but the cry of our people in the whole district. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, the issue of Kabale is very grave. I received her letter; it is really quite bad. I do not know what the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can say.

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What my colleague, Catheline Ndamira, has said is true. We agreed that this matter be raised here on behalf of the people of Kabale and indeed the people of Kigezi. The damage is big.

What has Government done? Today, we had a meeting at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The Ministry of Works and Transport requires money to go and open up the roads that have been destroyed. We have agreed to facilitate Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) to take action immediately. The Office of the Prime Minister is also coming in to give some relief to those people who have lost their houses, especially iron sheets and food. Therefore, there is action being taken. 

The team will be leaving tomorrow, working with the district to see what can be done as we assess the situation. On behalf of the people of Kabale and on behalf of the Government, I would like to say that, yes, the situation is bad but the Government is taking action and action will be seen in the next few days, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Gutomoi, you have two minutes.

2.51
MR CHARLES GUTOMOI (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you. Madam Speaker, there is a picture of a woman being forced to board a prison lorry, which is very high, and it has been shown in the Daily Monitor of 1 May 2020. This woman was struggling to jump into the lorry at the court premises in Lira on 9 April 2020. You can see she was carrying a baby behind her as she was trying to raise her left leg in order to enter the lorry. In the lorry, there was also a woman with a baby behind her and another pregnant woman. The sight is horrible, especially when you look back at our history.

I think this COVID-19 lockdown problem has affected Lango sub-region very much because 16 prison facilities in Lango are all choked up and they are demanding for the transfer of some of these people, who are being remanded, to Kitalya in Wakiso. When you look at the headline in this paper - “Lango prisons choke as hundreds locked up” – you wonder if we are in Uganda where human rights, especially for women and children, can be respected.

Can the authorities concerned go and assess the status of these women? I am told they are packed in the cells, yet we are supposed to honour the social distancing guideline. I am also told that we need more prison cells to be constructed. I wonder if the ministry concerned can construct the new prison cells for the people of Lango sub-region immediately. This picture shows armed soldiers watching this woman struggling while another is waiting to climb – (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that it is very pathetic reading this story in the Daily Monitor but we also saw the crippled persons and the elderly, who ordinarily once you find them crossing the road, you yield. If they were caught past the curfew time – I think they were caught past the curfew time – they ought to have been helped to get to their places. 

However, we have seen as a country, under the auspices of the COVID-19 curfew, even invalids, the lame, being shipped to Kitalya because they had failed to reach home within the stipulated time. What the honourable member is saying – it was a shame to the entire country. 

Ordinarily, yes, we are in this crisis of COVID-19 but we should not be seen to be heartless. You are forcing a woman to jump onto a lorry with a baby with no clear offence other than trying to find a means of sustenance! We saw and read about it. Even here at Buganda Road Court, such a group was detained and remanded to Kitalya Prison. There are those who were brought into the court in wheelchairs, Madam Speaker. They thought it wise that they should be shipped off for remand under the auspices of breaching the curfew. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR GUTOMOI: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I think for the record, I am going to lay this on the Table. I request that something be done about this, especially about the human rights of Ugandans because this is happening all over the country, according to what I have realised. It depicts a very shameful picture of Uganda as we deal with this COVID-19 crisis. That is my prayer. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, actually, there was a day I was watching TV and I saw many of these people being taken to court at night here at Buganda Road Court for breaking curfew. Really, do they deserve to be in prison? You are walking home, it is a quarter to 7.00p.m., and you have to walk because you have no means of transport or you are in a wheelchair. I do not know whether Government cannot consider other punishments other than taking people to prison for breaching the curfew.

2.57
MR PATRICK KASUMBA (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the plight of tobacco farmers in Bujenje and the entire country. 

On several occasions, we have raised the concerns of unpaid tobacco farmers across the country. Last year, during the Hoima by-elections, the same issue was addressed to the President and he told the voters that Government was going to clear the farmers and in turn, the Government would sort it out with the tobacco companies. In February, we raised the same issue and I remember the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Matia Kasaija, assured the House that they were in the process of verifying the claimants so that they could be paid. This is May and nothing has been done. 

I want to know from the Government – I see the ministers of finance and trade are here – how far they have gone with the verification exercise. If it is done – (Mr Angundru rose_) –

THE SPEAKER: You people, we have very little time. I want answers from the minister.

MR ANGUNDRU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On the issue of tobacco farmers, - I come from West Nile, in the new district of Arua, which is -  

THE SPEAKER: No, the new district is Terego.

MR ANGUNDRU: Madam Speaker, one of the unique things about Terego is that they are known for tobacco farming. For the last five years, there are tobacco farmers who have been growing tobacco even when tobacco companies have kept on deceiving them. Those companies keep picking their tobacco and they promise that they will pay the farmers. 

I asked the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives about this issue. There was a group of Members of Parliament that was moving around but I was told they only went to Hoima.  West Nile tobacco farmers are waiting for them to give a comprehensive report on when farmers in West Nile are going to be paid. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The complaint about tobacco has been on the Floor in every Session. 

MR KASUMBA: Thank you for that information, honourable colleague. My prayer is: can we know from the Government when tobacco farmers are going to be paid across the country, not only in Bujenje? (Interruption)

MS LILLY ADONG: Thank you, honourable colleague. I would like to inform the Member on the Floor that tobacco farming is not only being done in his area.

In Nwoya District and Acholi sub region at large, being the new area, in the last two years, these companies recruited farmers and gave them quotas that they agreed upon. The farmers planted the crop but when it came to the time of buying, they bought only a quarter of what they had signed in the contract. The farmers remained with the rest and they are very frustrated. In fact, most of them burnt their tobacco gardens away.

My request is that the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should come and tell us if we still need to do tobacco growing in Uganda, instead of having our tobacco farmers being cheated. You cannot sell tobacco to any buyer or even eat it; it is only the companies that have contracts running with the farmers that can buy it.

MR KASUMBA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. 

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Minister of Finance, Planning and economic Development are here. Honourable ministers, the issue of tobacco has been on the Floor every time. Hon. Kyambadde, what do you say?

3.02
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, on the issue of verifying the number of farmers, the responsible minister and some honourable members moved to some of those areas to carry out a survey. Unfortunately, they had not completed it when this lockdown came in. However, we shall continue with it and we shall be able to submit our report to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for implementation.

Tobacco is indeed a very important commodity as far as our economy is concerned. We regret that we have had very fraudulent partners who are purchasing it; we are trying to rectify that situation.

3.03
MR EDWARD SSEMBATYA (NRM, Katikamu County South, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rise on a matter of national importance.

Sometime back, heavy rainstorms hit Katikamu County South Constituency, specifically Nsanvu and Kalasa parishes in Makulubita Subcounty, comprising nine villages and 3,000 homesteads. One Government-aided school, Namayamba Primary School, was deroofed. Many residential houses were badly damaged including a number of gardens. Luweero District leadership communicated the same to the Office of the Prime Minister but as we talk, we have not had any response. 

My prayer is that the Office of the Prime Minister should give assistance in form of seedlings, since it is still planting season, maize flour and some iron sheets for the affected families. The situation is beyond their control. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is urged to quickly go to Katikamu County South to address the issues of disaster in Makulubita. Hon. Lilly Adong, you have two minutes before hon. Angura comes in.

3.04
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance.

About a week ago, some document was circulating in the media purporting to be from the Nation Media Group. Shortly after that document came out, we started receiving concerns from employees of the Vision Group about salary deductions after they were served with a letter to that effect, arising out of COVID-19 effects. 

Madam Speaker, we all know the effect of COVID-19 on this country but time and again, you and Government have continued to urge the private sector not to lay off staff. You have begged them to continue paying staff while Government looks into this issue. However, Vision Group, a Government parastatal, decided to reduce salaries of its staff.  The communication indicates that those who earn Shs 19 million and above will have their salaries reduced by 60 per cent; those earning between Shs 8 million and 18 million will have their salaries reduced by 45 percent; while salaries for staff earning below Shs 8 million will be reduced by 40 per cent.

Madam Speaker, this is not only irregular but it appears to be illegal –(Interjection)- I will take information from the Member for workers - (Interruption)

MS RWABUSHAIJA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that the New Vision benefited from the COVID-19 Fund; they got a cushion fund. It was expected they would use this fund to run the organisation for some time during the COVID-19 crisis.

It is really unfortunate that even after getting the cushion fund, they are thinking of deducting salaries of the employees. I think they are setting a bad precedent. If Government has a stake and now they are deducting salaries of employees, what will other organisations do? I think something should be done about this. I therefore pray that the minister concerned – 

THE SPEAKER: You are now smuggling in your prayers.

MS LILLY ADONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the Member representing workers has said, the Vision Group is setting a very bad precedent and it may be very difficult for this House to enforce the prayers or directives that are being given to other companies to make sure they keep their workers while Government looks into ways of handling the economy after COVID-19.

My prayer is that Government should act so that the Vision Group rescinds its decision to reduce salaries of its employees because that will be detrimental.

In addition, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should explain to this House what happened since this is a Government company.

Lastly, we also need the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to come and explain to this House what they have in place to make sure that workers are not maltreated and their welfare is catered for.

THE SPEAKER: The minister in charge of New Vision is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and recently, I heard the minister in charge of labour urging employers not to downsize.

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, it is true that yesterday, my colleague, hon. Lilly Adong, raised this issue with me but I had also received information that New Vision was reducing salaries of their staff. I called the Managing Director and he confirmed that for the month of April, their revenue as expected was reduced by 50 per cent and so the Group is facing some bit of difficulty and they are thinking about how to restructure and keep afloat.

He also confirmed to me that this will be done according to the law. However, we are taking this matter up with the management of the Vision Group to see if there is anything that Government can do in the meantime. 

They are facing problems of revenue sales and are trying to restructure the Group to see how they can move forward. One of the things that they were looking at was reduction of salaries but as the majority shareholders, we are going to take up this matter with the management of the Group and see if there is anything that we can do to protect the salaries of the workers as we wait to see what comes out of this situation that we are in.

3.10
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

The boundary between Uganda and Kenya along the eastern corridor, especially Tororo County South, is determined by River Malaba. In the last few days, River Malaba has experienced heavy flooding and has changed its course. As I speak, over 20 families have been cut off and transferred to the Kenyan side. The affected families are of Christopher Ibwalat, Michael Ekakol, Gabriel Oteko, Godfrey Imajir, Julius Olungar, among others. This covers the subcounties of Kalait, Mella, Malaba Town Council which is the most affected, Morukatipe subcounty and Osukuru Subcounty.

As you may have read in today’s New Vision, page 12, some families found themselves hanging on trees for a whole night to survive up to morning. Now that they are on the Kenyan side, they need to be supported. My prayer is we need iron sheets for these families to construct temporary structures as they get relocated to this side. (Interruption)

MR MACHO: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. I would like to inform my colleague and the country at large that River Malaba joins Tororo and Busia and we have a good shortcut that we have been using from Busia via Buteba to Tororo. All that has been flooded. Sometimes we use it for cross-border trade, not smuggling. (Laughter)

As I speak, the biggest problem that the people in Buteba and Busia are facing is that as there are floods, they still have an appetite for the food that was given in Kampala. This is because they have been cut off completely, their gardens have been flooded and they have no food.

My colleague should pray, together with me, that the balance of food that was given out in Kampala be given to the people of Busia so that people do not die from hunger. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude your prayers, hon. Angura.

MR ANGURA: Madam Speaker, we also need mosquito nets to be given to all the people along the border line, especially those who are near the river.

In addition, I need Government to inform our Kenyan counterparts that new visitors have been pushed to their side. They should be received well and supported because it was not their decision to be pushed to the Kenyan side but nature has kept changing the course of the river. I am told that many others are bound to be pushed to that side. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we ask the Minister of Health to address the situation. Will our minister go to the Kenyan side, because you said they have moved to Kenya? I do not know whether our minister will take nets to the Ugandans on the Kenyan side.

MR ANGURA: Madam Speaker, they have been moved to the Kenyan side but they are not comfortable and are trying to swim back to this side. Maybe they can be supported as Government informs the Kenyan side to receive them in these bad times.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister in charge of disaster preparedness is urged to address the situation of the moving river at Malaba and also address the issues of the population in terms of accommodation, food, health and mosquito nets.

3.16
MS ANNA ADEKE (Independent, Youth Representative, National): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. At the instance of COVID-19, many Ugandans have been hit and many more continue to suffer from its effects. 

I rise today to particularly bring to your attention Ugandans who are stranded abroad. We have very many Ugandans of different categories - some are students, some have been gainfully employed - who are currently stuck outside the country. They are living in dehumanising conditions; their lease agreements have elapsed, they do not money to sustain them, they do not have food and cannot access healthcare because of the different legal regimes in the countries where they are.

Many countries, especially drawing from the East African region, have been able to repatriate their citizens. Rwanda did it, Kenya also successfully made an attempt to repatriate some of her citizens from abroad. I speak mainly for the young people who do not have anywhere to turn to. They are stranded; they are struggling. 

I am aware that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs made arrangements for them to register their details with the different foreign missions but nothing has been done for close to a month now. They are stranded, Madam Speaker. Our countrymen are stranded out there and we need to do something more assertive –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Which particular countries?

MR OLANYA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to my colleague is that the lockdown got our king, Rwot David Onen Acana, in London. Right now, our king is in London. We really pray that the Government does anything possible to make sure our king returns to the Acholiland. Thank you, Madam Speaker. That is the information I would like to give to my colleague.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude, hon. Adeke.

MS ADEKE: Madam Speaker, as you had prompted, we have close to 70 students stranded in the United States of America. We have some stranded even within East Africa; there are some Ugandans who are stranded in Tanzania and some who are stranded in Rwanda. Actually, some of their contracts of employment already elapsed and they are stranded. To date, nothing has been done. 

Madam Speaker, it is my prayer that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Prime Minister and Government generally should assure us and make arrangements for repatriation of our nationals who are living abroad. If they are not repatriated, they remain at risk. They are willing to come and even be quarantined for the 14 mandatory days until they are deemed safe to join their people. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let me invite hon. Amoding. Her issue is equally similar. I will then make a ruling. 

3.20
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thought I would give hon. Adeke information but thank you for the opportunity that you have given me to raise it elaborately.

Madam Speaker, over 30,000 Ugandans are working in the United Arab Emirates, having been taken by different companies. When this lockdown started, many of them were given letters of redundancy, meaning that they no longer have employment opportunities in that country.

Many of the Members of Parliament here have their constituents who went to these countries in such a way and many have been calling and informing us of the situation in which they are living. As we speak now, a majority of these people have been camped in what they call hostels or camps. They were paid their salaries of March and were told that by April, they need to go back to their countries and their countries need to pick them up. That has not happened because our borders have been closed for most of April. 

Madam Speaker, these young people and many other young Ugandans who are working in this country are living without sufficient monies to take care of their upkeep in that country. A majority of them have become infected with COVID-19 as we speak but the challenge they now find is that they are not getting treatment; they are recovering naturally. 

Madam Speaker, I have details of individuals who are having this challenge. The situation right now is very alarming and they have requested us to raise this matter before the House –(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, the information from me to my colleague is very clear. As we are talking about the boundaries outside Uganda, let us not forget about Uganda itself. There are several people who have been locked down in Kampala.

When we talked about 14 days, they thought that was a hill. When they now talked about 21 days, I do not know what thing is better than a hill. After that, we are saying 14 days again and they are in Kampala. You came for a certain small thing in Kampala and you are locked down in a guest house and you cannot move.

Even before we record the first death due to COVID-19, we might record cases of death due to hunger. People are really suffering. What is Government doing to fix the situation? Much as we are locking them down, how do we help them to survive? 

Many of them are asking for the contacts of hon. Ecweru because they want to go and survive there now. The situation is appalling. People can bash Members of Parliament but the situation which is boiling is about to erupt. That is the information that I wanted to offer to you. It needs to be fixed.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, conclude.

MS AMODING: Madam Speaker, one of the prayers that we have by those Ugandans – I know that there are Ugandans who are locked down in this country, but that is a matter for another discussion. Let us not forget the Ugandans who are in foreign countries who do not even have a relative to go to. 

Madam Speaker, their situation is alarming. Somebody is living in his camp and he is not getting treatment from that government. We are going to receive people who are dying from that kind of situation because our country is simply silent about Ugandans who went in search of better pasture out of the country.

My prayer, therefore, is that the Minister of Foreign Affairs perhaps organises a way of airlifting these people out of those countries, so that they come back and maybe get quarantined in this country. They cannot find any other means of assistance wherever they are. Madam Speaker, we have seen many countries do this. Germany recently took their citizens out of here. America airlifted their citizens back to their country. Why can’t Uganda do the same for its citizens wherever they are caught up in this lockdown? I pray, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have been receiving several letters from Ugandans in different countries who are stressed and stranded. I have been sending them to the national taskforce but I have not got any answer. 

I think it is important that the Minister of Foreign Affairs comes here and tells us whether he has a plan to bring those people home or manage them from where they are. Every day, I get letters. It is a very serious situation. The minister should come and brief us next Tuesday. Thank you.

3.25
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance about the plight of former Kampala City Council (KCC) workers. 

Many workers were laid off by the then KCC and indeed, they went to court so that they can have their terminal benefits. Justice Lydia Mugambe ruled in their favour and the Government did not even appeal. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development earmarked Shs 100 billion to compensate these ex-workers of KCC.

Madam Speaker, it is now four years down the road. Many of them have died and those who are still living are living in a very miserable state. Because this money is there in the finance ministry, they are now asking why it is taking all this time for this this money to be released, yet there is a court ruling about it. In fact, there was also a presidential directive.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that these people who are still living and those who died should really be paid, so that the benefits can go to their families that are living a very miserable life. That is my prayer.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here. Can you tell us why the ex-KCC workers have not been paid?

3.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I seek your permission to go and crosscheck on this matter and come back tomorrow to brief the House.

THE SPEAKER: That is a Government assurance. Let us go to item No. 3.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

REPORT BY THE TECHNICAL TEAM OF THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY ALLEGING THAT SOME MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS IN UGANDA HAVE INADEQUATE FACILITIES TO TRAIN AND GRADUATE MEDICAL AND DENTAL PRACTIONERS

3.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I make the statement, allow me to make a comment on your communication where you asked very good and interesting questions about learning through the media. 

First of all, I would like to thank you very much for the concerns. That shows me that you have a lot of interest in the learning of our children; that is a very big encouragement for us in the ministry. 

You are aware that in an effort to fight the Coronavirus, schools were closed before the academic term could be concluded according to plan. Aware that learning has to be continuous and the students had been sent home, the Ministry of Education and Sports came up with a programme that will enable our learners to keep revising and learning. We are doing these through a number of ways including FM radio stations and televisions. We are also using online media for those who have access to the internet.

Of course, we are aware that there are some parts in this country where people do not have access to FM radios, television or the internet. That forced us to come up with self-study materials, which were organised by very experienced educationists. We have been dispatching them through the offices of the CAOs and the RDCs, who send them to the sub-counties. The sub-counties then forward them to the LCI Chairpersons, who are responsible for passing them on to our learners wherever they are. 

Madam Speaker, the beginning was not very easy. Why some media stations and not others? As the Ministry of Education and Sports, we want to reach every learner wherever he is, either through the FM radios or the other means I have talked about. At first, we used the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) but currently, we are talking to the management of all the FM radios because we know some learners listen to these particular FM radios and not the others. We hope by the end of the week, we will have been able to get in touch with every radio station. 

The radio stations you talked about in Kamuli and Mpigi will be clarified. I would like to appeal to my colleagues that in case you know of an FM radio – (Interruption)

MR NOKRACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this time. I would like the minister to clarify to us what arrangement they have for special needs education through the media. As a former a trainer of teachers, I know for sure that this kind of teaching discriminates children with special needs. For example, we have children with visual impairment who need brail materials and someone to help them learn. 

They need teachers who can transcribe from the normal format to a format that they can understand. There are also children with hearing impairment. They cannot listen to the FM radios. What arrangement do you have for them? The country would like you to be very clear on this. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, why don’t you let the minister to finish making the statement, and then I will ask you to –

MR AGABA: I am sorry, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking is related to what hon. Nokrach has presented. The learners with impairment on one side, the minister should clarify whether this programme is a continuation of the curriculum that the students were covering before the lockdown or it is a programme intended to keep the children busy in this time. 

If it is a continuation of the curriculum, it means by the time they go back to schools, they are expected to be ahead of where they ended. Therefore, the learners who did not pay attention to it due to the inaccessibility to FM radios will have a problem. If it is intended to keep their minds alert, we will be happy to know and thank you for it. 

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, we have made arrangements for every learner from primary up to the end of the education system. When I say every learner, it means even those with disabilities – (Interjections) ­– that is why I am saying – I am going to explain; listen. We have prepared even for – 

Frist of all, I wanted to begin with answering the question on why some FM radios and not others and I think I have done that already. On the time allocation, this depends very much on the management of that particular FM radio because we came in when the time slots had already been booked. However, we have been assured that as time goes by, some of these FM radios are going to adjust their schedules to air our educational programmes during the time when the students are fully available. 

This will require the support and participation of the parents. We have come up with guidelines that will help the parents to know what to do when the students are being engaged because the most important teachers at this time are the parents and family members. Consequently, we have also come up with a programme that prepares them.

Madam Speaker, on the inadequate materials, as I said at the beginning, we had wanted to prepare self-study materials for only those who did not have access to FM radios and TV. We had printed a few copies but we have discovered that this is something, which is very popular and everybody is looking for it. We are now investing more in the production of these materials. 

Are the learners learning something new or are they revising? This programme is intended to help them revise what they did in the past according to the curriculum. In that regard, we are not teaching anything new. They will be taught new things when normal school learning resumes. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to go to the statement. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow him to make his statement and then you will speak later. 

DR MUYINGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a statement about a report by a technical team of the East African Community alleging that some medical and dental schools in Uganda have inadequate facilities to train and graduate medical and dental practitioners. 

The third joint inspection of medical and dental schools and teaching hospitals in Uganda was carried out by a team of technical health experts from the National Medical and Dental Practitioners Regulatory Council in the East African Partner States from 10-14 February 2020. This followed a directive of the 19th Ordinary Meeting of the East African Council of Ministers of Health, which was held in Nairobi from 28 October to 01 September 2019.

The National Council for Higher Education (NCHE), as the national accrediting agency, was also invited and participated in the inspection, which was aimed at establishing conformity of universities to the standards and guidelines governing medical and dental schools in the East African Community.

The main findings of the inspection included:
    a) Understaffing;
    b) Inadequate infrastructure;
    c) Inadequate equipment and supplies and;
    d) Underfunding.

The recommendations made by the inspection team to the different institutions included:
    1. Uganda Christian University of Dentistry was recommended for closure.
    2. Suspension of admissions until recommendations are fully implemented and a joint re-inspection by the East African Community Partner States is done to confirm that compliance has been carried out in the following four universities;
    i) Uganda Christian University School of Medicine
    ii) Makerere University Dental School
    iii) St Augustine International University, and
    iv) Busitema University Medical School.
    3. Kabale University School of Medicine to ensure that new admissions are only undertaken upon implementation of the recommendations that were given.
    4. Gulu University Medical School was asked to address all gaps identified and recommendations made.
    5. Islamic University in Uganda’s Habib School of Medicine met the minimum requirements for training of medical students.

Madam Speaker, these were intended to improve the quality of medical and dental training in Uganda so as to ensure that graduates from the respective institutions are eligible for reciprocal recognition within the East African Community Partner States.

The accreditation of medical and dental schools in Uganda is done by the National Council for Higher Education in collaboration with the Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council.

The National Council for Higher Education in collaboration with the Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council also monitors the respective medical and dental schools in the country; the most recent exercise having been done in 2019. Areas that require improvement are always communicated to the universities.

Following receipt of the inspection report on 18 February 2020, the National Council for Higher Education invited the leadership of all the affected universities, individually, to discuss the findings and chart a way forward. The meetings were also attended by the Chairperson and the Deputy Registrar of the Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council.

The concerned universities were given up to 06 March 2020 to provide written responses to the findings made by the Joint East African Council Inspection Team as some of the findings were not accurate.

Furthermore, each university was requested to submit a roadmap for all areas of improvement to ensure full compliance with the standards and guidelines governing medical and dental schools.

The National Council for Higher Education, in collaboration with Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council, will study the responses from the concerned universities and determine the appropriate course of action. We hope that the outcome will not include stopping of new admissions or closure, which is always a measure of last resort.

It is noteworthy that public universities present their challenges with regard to understaffing, inadequate infrastructure and underfunding to Parliament through the parliamentary Committee on Education and Sports when they appear before the committee to defend the annual ministerial policy statement.

Accordingly, Parliament is aware of the current challenges at medical and dental schools in the country in so far as it relates with public universities. 

Uganda currently has only 10 medical and three dental schools. The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends a doctor to patient ratio of 1:1,000 for medical doctors and 1:4,000 for dentists. Uganda has a doctor to patient ratio of 1:60,000 for medical doctors and 1:125,000 for dentists. This is a clear indication of an acute shortage of professionals in medicine and dentistry.

The existing schools produce about 500 doctors and 25 dentists annually. It is against this background that the National Council for Higher Education has emphasised a spirit of nurturing our schools rather than closure as a measure of first instance when evaluating a five-year programme.

Notably, newly established programmes require time to put in place requisite facilities, equipment and staffing. This can be approached progressively given that not all facilities are needed at the same time. For example, in the case of dental schools, not all equipment like dental chairs is required at the beginning of the course.

As highlighted above, these medical schools require high investment in staffing, infrastructure and facilities as well as equipment and supplies. There is, therefore, an urgent need to make adequate investment in the affected schools to ensure that their graduates are not only recognised within the East African Community Partner States but they are also positioned to offer world class healthcare to our people.

The medical and dental schools - both public and private - are training health workers for the entire country and as such, should be supported to train competent doctors and dentists. To this end, Government, owners of these training institutions, the private sector and all Ugandans of goodwill should join hands to ensure that the existing 10 medical and three dental schools are nurtured to their full potential.

The Ministry of Education and Sports is doing its best, within the available means at its disposal. However, we appeal to Parliament to appropriate more funds to the universities so that they can address the shortcomings highlighted by the East African Community team of health experts. The National Council for Higher Education also requires more resources so as to enhance its staff capacity to monitor and ensure compliance to set standards by our institutions.

I urge Members to remember that these are challenges of our country as it evolves to its financial independence. We should, therefore, take this report in good faith and provide sustainable solutions where possible so that we can all overcome these problems.  

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. We will just take four members. 

3.48
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you very much for raising this issue in your communication. I had also planned to bring a question earlier on to ask the minister to answer it.  

Madam Speaker, the House needs clarification on this issue of continuity in education; the ministers should clarify to CAOs and TCs. The first letter to the CAOs and TCs for this kind of education was on 17th April. They had already engaged some radio stations and UBC TV and UBC Radio had already started broadcasting. 

However, on the 24th April, they wrote to the CAOs, the town clerks and the KCCA Executive Director saying that they had engaged UBC to be the official broadcaster to relay this to the communities in Uganda. They also said that UBC would select the radio stations in the respective areas where they don’t have signals. 

Madam Speaker, allow me tell you that in Lira District, two radio stations had already been picked and teachers had already started teaching. I heard the minister say that they have realised that UBC does not reach some parts of Uganda and they are now going to engage other radio stations; this is confusing. Let the minister come and clarify what they are exactly doing. 

Secondly, the teachers that have been selected to teach are only from Kampala schools like Namagunga, St Mary’s and so on. What about the rest of the teachers, upcountry? 

The subjects that have been selected are only sciences. What about the students doing arts subjects? What is their fate? Why is the ministry discriminating against them? 

In the ministry’s programme, lower classes like primary one and two have been left out. I wonder what the ministry thought about these. 

My last question to this ministry is: will our students seat for the Uganda National Examinations Board exams given the fact that other students started on the 27th? 

Madam Speaker, their timetable said 27th April but today is 6th May and the minister is just saying they are going to engage other radio stations. Those who are learning on UBC TV and Radio are benefiting but for us, upcountry, UBC Radio never reaches there. There are also other pupils that do not have access to television – the rural electrification is on-going – due to absence of power and other factors. How are pupils in those villages going to benefit? 

The minister should make that clarification so that all the students and pupils in Uganda benefit. It should not be selective. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if we could also touch on the issue raised by the minister about dental and medical schools. 

3.52
MS SYLIVIA AKELLO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the presentation. However, my area of concern, like hon. Joy Atim has just said, is that almost 70 per cent of the learners in Otuke do not have the opportunity to even attend to radio programmes because people do not have radio sets in Otuke. How are they going to learn? 

Secondly, you have considered teaching using radios using English but you have forgotten that you have a thematic curriculum, where learners in rural schools are being taught in their mother tongue right from primary one to primary four. How are they going to catch up with the English language that is being used? 

The third issue is about giving examination scripts and notes to districts to be distributed by LC1s to parents. I was in Otuke on Tuesday and that was the day they delivered them to the district. What funds have you put aside to facilitate the LC1s in doing this work? Please remember very well that they have no transport means. Most of the LC1 chairpersons have not got bicycles. How are they going to deliver all these scripts from the district to various sub counties and villages? 

It is not only that, Madam Speaker, but most of the parents themselves are illiterate. If the parents cannot read and write, how are they going to teach the children? 

Madam Speaker, we have just changed the curriculum. Most of the teachers are almost not aware of its content. If the teachers do not know the new curriculum, how are they going to engage senior one students with the new curriculum, when they are not even aware of it? 

As a ministry is responsible for research, have you researched properly and realised that the means that you have used will cater for all the students or learners in Uganda equitably or you are already setting standards of certain groups of people to learn and others remain the same? I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.55
MS CAROLINE KAMUSIIME (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukiga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the minister for the statement presented. My concern is about the materials they distributed in the districts, for example in Rukiga. The materials we got could not even cover one sub county; I think they were about 100 copies of past papers. 

Secondly, my sister raised the issue of the mothers. Some of them do not know how to read and write. How are they going to help our students back in the villages? 

Madam Speaker, as the ministry comes up with these plans, they should at consider the hard-to-reach areas. One of my sub counties in Rukiga District, Buchundura, does not have radio stations. My prayer to is that the minister should go back and look into their plans – (Interruption)  

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, the cost of power has gone up; it is very high. A unit for domestic consumption is now at Shs 1000. During one session, I loaded 50,000 and I got only 56 units. Where are the people in the rural areas going to get the money to pay for power, even when they have a TV or radio set? There is a problem. That is the information. 

MS CAROLINE KAMUSIIME: Thank you for the information, my brother. He is even talking of power. For example, in Rukiga, we do not have power at all. It is very hard for some people to even buy these local lights. Honourable minister, I think you should reconsider this programme in order to take care of our people. 

Madam Speaker, allow me talk about Mparo Health Centre IV; I have talked about it before. I thank the minister – (Interjections) - yes; they allocated us with – (Member timed out.) 

3.57
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement, especially on dental schools. 

In 2017, when I was Chairperson for the Committee on Education and Sports, there was a report that we brought on the Floor of Parliament indicating that we had been to Makerere University Dental School and a number of issues were supposed to be addressed, given the fact that the East African Community team had wished to close Makerere University by the end of October 2017. We brought a report on the Floor of Parliament and we urged Government or the ministry to do something about that institution before it was closed.

Madam Speaker, among the findings of the inspection team was understaffing, inadequate infrastructure, inadequate equipment and supplies. These are the findings that we made as a committee and we asked the ministry to address these immediately before the closure of the institution.

To my surprise, Makerere University Dental School is again among the institutions that have been earmarked for closure because they have been asked to suspend admissions until recommendations are fully implemented and a joint re-inspection by the East African Partner States is done. 

Something must be wrong with our ministry because if we made these observations in 2017 when the dental school was bound to be closed at that time and nothing has been done to date, then the minister should explain why they have taken all this time. We have monies that are apportioned to private institutions yet our own Government institutions have lagged behind and are bound to be closed, especially the dental school yet we do not have many dental schools in this country. I would like to thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Connie Nakayenze raised a very important point. I hope the minister will be able to tell us; from 2017 to 2020, what happened?

4.00
MR JAMES NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also welcome the minister’s statement. However, let me refer to one fact; years ago, I was the minister responsible for information and broadcasting and it was during my time that we merged Uganda Television with Uganda Radio and it became the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation. The purpose was to do what other nations do around the world, namely to have a national broadcaster. When you have a national broadcaster, there are strategic programmes that you don’t assign other radio or television stations. Matters of national importance are normally handed over to a national broadcaster. Our intention then was that we would have a national broadcaster.

Sadly, Madam Speaker, that has not happened because what we needed then was for Government to invest heavily in the national broadcaster, UBC, which has not happened. The consequence of that is what you see today, namely that as a sovereign nation, we do not have our own platform from which we can promote our strategic interests. That is a lesson for Government to ensure that we invest in UBC. If you don’t and you depend on broadcasters that are essentially profit making, you are consigning this nation to waters that may not benefit us in the long run.

Madam Speaker, first, Government should wake up and invest in UBC. If it had, we would not be having this problem of lack of capacity and inability for the Ministry of Education and Sports to reach out to the nation.

Secondly, the minister has talked about patient to doctor ratio. We are 50 years old as a nation and the idea that this ratio is dismal really casts terrible and serious doubts on our willingness to really invest in those strategic areas that we need. After 57 years, we should be able to have a patient to doctor ratio, which is not among the worst. This is an example, therefore, that Government should take a leaf and invest heavily in ensuring that this ratio improves.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will see you on another paper.

4.03
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Privatisation came with pain and you find that Government does not cater for its own. People who work in Government have their private institutions including schools and radio stations. You may even find Government property in these private institutions.

Honourable minister, if the entire country does not access these education materials then intentionally, Government wants only a few people to pass such that they keep some regions uneducated. I would like to request the House to agree with me that radio or television learning be suspended until – 

Madam Speaker, in Netherlands they said it is a dead year and there is nothing. Why is it that only a few people – That is why you find students performing well only in Mukono, Wakiso and some other districts. Honourable minister, tell us whether you don’t want the whole country to grow at the same rate.

Honourable members, I request that we stop this issue of – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with my colleague, hon. Waluswaka, that we suspend this programme. As we have heard from Members, not every part of this country is covered. The other day the President said that we can lose one term or a year. I tend to agree with him. 

Madam Speaker, I missed school for three years but here I am. We don’t know when COVID-19 will end. We were locked up in the war and it was not only me. People who were in the war zone - even those who were in Luwero - will bear me witness. Why would we want to divide the nation - because those who have will benefit but those who don’t have will not benefit.

Look at the children in Ik constituency in Karamoja and those deep in Kisoro. Those in Vurra deep down there - where will they learn from? Those on Mt Elgon, where will they be able to access this? Hon. Nsaba Buturo has just told us that we don’t have a national broadcaster that reaches every point. Even if we had, does every home have the capability to acquire a radio? Unless we want to have a country that belongs to the haves and have nots - 

Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with my colleague that this programme should be suspended.

MR WALUSWAKA: Finally, Madam Speaker, regarding food supplies, Government said ‘metropolitan’. Even for education, it is indirectly for Kampala Metropolitan. Therefore, I think that COVID-19 has come to benefit people in the urban areas. Members, let us stand on our feet. If our people have not got the food, at least they should get education at the same level.

Madam Speaker, while we are suffering, ministries are getting – (Interruption)  

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The minister has indicated to us that these study materials are for revision purposes. He has told us that they are not teaching anything new but they are for purposes of revision. He has also informed us – (Interruption) – that they had underestimated the need. 

If the minister has realised that they need to reach everyone, is it in order for the honourable member to come here and suggest that they cancel the programme?

We have children who are seated at home doing nothing. If there is any opportunity for them to get engaged, we must make sure that everybody is reached but not to cancel or suspend the programme. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the point of order there. I think you wanted to contribute. Please conclude. 

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, although he wanted to contribute, they are in areas where there is network and the minister can reach them. 

Finally, when you go to these universities, there is a tendency of money just being eaten when there is nothing on the ground. Honourable minister, I do not know whether you just cushion – the private students pay a lot of money but I think management simply eats it. 

Let us stop this, Members. The minister will just declare that there is no suspension of exams because they have been studying and our villagers will not pass. Thank you. 

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, from my observation, for us in Busoga region – this is a region that has been struggling and fighting to make sure we improve but the Government has a deliberate effort to continue leaving us behind. 

I have just been sharing with hon. Kulayigye. We were arguing. He said that every home has a radio - (Interjections) - He said he is sure every home has a radio. This is not true. Such misleading information is why the ministry is coming up with such programmes. 

If the ministry has a lot of money, we have schools where students are studying from under trees; let them sink that money in structures for these schools as we stop that programme. 

That programme is to the advantage of students around like hon. Nsamba’s. Our people are disadvantaged and suffering the other side. They will continue like that and when exams come, their schools will be promoted that they performed well. They will have first grades because they were advantaged here. 

I support that the programme is halted until everything is clear. (Applause)

4.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERAL DEVELOPMENT) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I happen to have been a member of the East African Community Sectoral Council on Health and was chairperson of that sectoral council of the ministers in the Year 2018/2019.

I would like to state that this joint inspection committee was put in place way back in 2009 by the East African Community Inter-University Council so that the standards for training the doctors are all at per within the region. 

This joint committee has about 21 members drawn from the different boards and councils within the East African region and those standards and guidelines were agreed to by the deans of the medical and dental schools within the East African region. 

I would like to inform this House that during my time in the Ministry of Health and attending the EAC council meeting on health, we suspended quite a number of universities. Actually, some were even closed for not meeting the standards and guidelines that were set and agreed on. 

For example in 2016/2017, we suspended the University of Dodoma, the St Francis University College of Health and Allied Sciences. There was Ifakara International Medical University. This one did not meet the criteria and was completely closed. Kampala International University also had challenges. 

I would like to state that during the last sectoral council meeting, which I attended before I was moved to the energy sector – the meeting was held on 28 October – 01 November 2019 in Nairobi. The recommendations were made as stated by the minister; that no new admissions should be done by Makerere University Dental School. 

The Republic of Uganda was urged to direct the National Council of Higher Education (NCHE) and the Ministry of Education and Sports to redistribute the newly enrolled students and urge the Republic of Uganda to direct the NCHE and Ministry of Education and Sports to prepare a mechanism of training for the existing students in order for them to meet the minimum requirements stipulated in the EAC regional guidelines. 

The information that I would like to give is that when a decision is made by the EAC sectoral council, it is incumbent upon us to implement those recommendations. Failure of which, it will have an effect on the standing of our doctors who will have qualified during that time. 

As my colleague, the honourable minister stated, Makerere University Dental School needs a lot of support because they had issues of staffing and of infrastructure. I am glad that some funding was received and some infrastructure put in place. 

However, they need to put in place all that was recommended by the EAC sectoral council and this requires funding. They were supposed to have come back during this time but unfortunately or fortunately because of COVID-19, they have not. 

I would like to urge that the ministry is given funding so that they can fulfil all the recommendations that were made by the EAC sectoral council. (Interruption)

MR AGABA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I have been struggling to catch your eye because I was able to access the reports that we are talking about. 

When we heard that there was a recommendation to close Makerere Dental School, every Ugandan got concerned because Makerere is the epitome of academic excellence in this country, in Africa and all over. 

The joint East African team of medical boards came for the first time to inspect the medical and dental schools in the different countries and they made recommendations. 

The second time they came, they made the report that the minister is talking about. They were tougher because they had made the first recommendations and then they came to see whether their recommendations were attended to or not. 

Where they were not attended to, they were tougher. That is why they recommended that Makerere – even after they had admitted students for dental school, they recommended that they be redistributed to other dental schools that were accredited such that they reorganise themselves internally.

Hon. Nakayenze made a point that earlier, her Committee on Education had received a report that highlighted some challenges facing Makerere Dental School and they were given funding. This time round, when they came for the second time, the team was tougher and that is why they made those drastic recommendations. 

I have some details of the report and I could cite two of them for the benefit of the Members. When the team came, one, they would look at the previous recommendations that were made, two, they would look at the status of implementation as reported by the dean or the Vice-Chancellor, three, they would make observations and, four, they would make recommendations. 

However, most of their recommendations are that the university must comply fully with the recommendations that were made before. All through, they were talking about employing adequate staff for the dental department to bring the academic staff-to-students’ ratio to 1:4. This has not been done. 

I like the recommendation by the minister that they should be given money to recruit the staff and also departmentalise the dental school such that each unit in the dental school has a department and a head, who is a PhD holder – there are details. I thought this report should come through so that we know where to start from. Thank you.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, the first inspection took place in 2010/2011. The second inspection was in 2015 and of course, given the previous recommendations which were not fully implemented, they had to become tough. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. I want the minister to respond. However, I want to know who can give us a census of radios in Uganda? Can we ask hon. Nabakooba to give us a census of the radio stations in Uganda so that we can see whether, really, Ugandans are getting these programmes?

DR MUYINGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. These are our children. You all know what happened when they went home without anything to do: they were idle; they were getting into problems. I have already told you that this programme of learning during the holidays is enabling students, first of all, to be busy and, secondly, to revise. This is a programme that has just started. Like anything that starts, of course there are weaknesses here and there. 

We are very committed, as a ministry, to address all the concerns you have raised this afternoon. The good news I have for you is that parents who have already benefitted from this have been sending messages of appreciation – (Interjection) – Madam Speaker – (Members rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: Allow the minister to speak.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, we are monitoring everything that is going on. Before I came here, I was in one of the rural areas in this country and the information I got is that some got the materials but they are asking for more. 

I have already told you, Madam Speaker, that our aim is to make sure that each and every learner accesses these self-study materials. This means that with or without a teacher and with or without a parent who understands what is going on, a child from Primary One up to Senior Six will be able to sit down and learn – (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow him to conclude.

MR GAFABUSA: Madam Speaker, just to seek clarification on what the minister was saying, I know the Ministry of Education and Sports can accurately know the number of learners by school because they are registered there. However, the Ministry of Education and Sports cannot know how many learners are in each village because even children of St Mary’s Kisubi and Namagunga are across the country. 

Therefore, in terms of distributing the self-learning materials, how do you know how many learners of which class are in each village, honourable minister?

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, we have got data in our ministry – we have data from UBOS – (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I come from Kalungu West Constituency in Kalungu District. Our city now, Masaka, is headed by an RDC called Herman Ssentongo. Ssentongo, just three days back, on radio, stated that he was given only 400 copies of papers yet he has over 80,000 students and he was wondering how he was going to distribute these materials. 

Secondly, when I saw the First Lady in front of the honourable minister, she stated that we should provide these materials through RDCs yet districts have District Education Officers (DEOs) who should run this programme. Is the minister really in order to come on this Floor to tell Members of Parliament that they have provided useful materials to students yet they have gone through people who are not educationally competent to handle these materials, running away from District Education Officers and more so, he being a person running schools, where private school teachers are crying of not having anything to eat?

THE SPEAKER: Let him explain why he chose RDCs instead of the DEOs. (Laughter)

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, this is one of the activities that fall under the fight against COVID-19 – (Interjection) – whenever something goes to the district, there is that taskforce which is under the chairmanship of the RDC and at that level, people work as a team. This team involves not only the RDCs but all the technical experts, including the District Education Officers and inspectors of schools. So far, things are going on well. The only problem was inadequacy, which we are addressing.

Madam Speaker, I told you that we started with radios and went to TVs. We realised that there are those who cannot access these facilities. That is why we brought in experts who have designed self-study materials and these will reach everybody very soon, Madam Speaker.

About the universities, we, as Government, are committed to providing the best for this country. We are devising all means possible to ensure that our universities prepare the best for our citizens. I submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, minister, go to the second paper. However, I do not know; when you say you are ready to provide for all the children, in Kamuli, with 18,000 students, we have 2,000 packs only. Please, go to the next paper.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE OMISSION OF THE HISTORY OF BUNYORO-KITARA FROM THE HISTORY AND POLITICAL EDUCATION SYLLABUS IN THE CURRICULUM ISSUED BY THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

4.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is the statement about the omission of the history of Bunyoro-Kitara from the history and political education syllabus in the new curriculum.

Madam Speaker, it is not true that the history of Bunyoro-Kitara was omitted from the history and political education syllabus in the curriculum of the new lower secondary education.

Our ministry appreciates the central role of history and political education in the preservation of our culture and indeed the development of our nation.

We rolled out the new lower secondary curriculum in February 2020 at the beginning of the new academic year for senior one students. As we progress with implementation, I am glad to provide response to members on issues such as the one raised by hon. Mukitale Stephen on the omission of the history of Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom from the syllabus. 

Madam Speaker, the new lower secondary curriculum puts emphasis on competencies that learners will acquire in each subject. This has been emphasised across all subjects. The idea is to highlight what learners can do in order to learn. We call this “learning how to learn”, which enables learners to get a deeper understanding of the concepts to be learnt.

In order to acquire these competences, the new curriculum proposes a methodology, which is learner-centred and inquiry-based, with a focus on use of discovery learning approaches. With this method, under a topic titled “State Formation in East Africa”, learners are expected to discover all the pre-colonial societies that existed in East Africa, including Bunyoro-Kitara, the Nilo-Hamites, the Karimojong, Bakiga, Batooro, Bagisu, Basoga and all other societies. The examples given were supposed to stimulate the learners into discovering all the others. We believe that when they discover on their own, they will learn and understand better, as opposed to being spoon-fed with all the information. In other words, rote-learning is discouraged in this new curriculum.

This new approach requires learners to look for information and contribute to the teaching and learning process by use of an inquiry-based approach and research, among other methods.

Madam Speaker, no society in Uganda has been left out in this new curriculum, as learners are asked to discuss factors that led to the growth and expansion of both pre-colonial kingdoms and decentralised societies, including the Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom.

To address the concerns of Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom, a corrigendum to include all societies as examples has been written and will be circulated to all schools to give further guidance.

It should be noted that the syllabus document is a framework and does not normally give the details. Details of what is to be learnt, is normally captured in the textbooks, which will indeed carry Bunyoro-Kitara, as one of the examples. This request has also been submitted to all publishing firms through their chairperson's office for them to include that content in the textbooks.

Madam Speaker, allow me, at this juncture, to lay on Table a copy of the history and political education syllabus, which I have been referring to. I beg to lay. (Member rose_)

Madam Speaker, there are other issues that have been raised by other colleagues, like hon. Mpuuga Mathias, who wanted to know why history, local languages and agriculture are electives. I will begin with agriculture.

Agriculture
At primary school level, agriculture is compulsory; it is taught under the themes from P.1 to P.3. While at P.4-P.7, it is built into “Integrated Science”, which is a compulsory subject at the primary school level. The topics taught include: keeping of animals and growing of perennial crops in P.4, keeping small animals in P.5, keeping cattle in P.6, then agroforestry in P.7. 

This exposure - in addition to the science they learn - gives learners enough background at their formative stages to appreciate agriculture and enable them to choose it as an optional subject at the lower secondary level. The goal here is not to overload children with too much to learn, while still taking cognisance of the basic education that is offered.

History
At lower secondary school, history is a compulsory subject under the name, “History and Political Education”. The concepts learnt from lower primary are integrated into literacy, and at upper primary, it is integrated in “Social Studies” and this gives again a background on history concepts where senior one history and political education is linked. The learners at all these levels are exposed to different topics on the History of Uganda, as indicated in the syllabus at both primary and secondary level.

Local Language
To address the issue of local language, the National Curriculum Development Centre (NCDC) introduced the use of local language as a medium of instruction from Primary 1 to Primary 3, while at Primary 4 to 7, local languages form part of the primary curriculum and are compulsory. The context varies with the regions where the schools are located and the language readiness in terms of the requirements for the language to be taught.

The teaching of languages at this level, gives learners adequate exposure for seven years, to be grounded in the local language, which normally is also the language spoken at home. This enables them to take an informed decision to offer it at lower secondary where languages are electives.

Information and Communications Technology (ICT)
ICT has been incorporated in all the subjects as an enabling tool to facilitate access to information outside the classroom. Schools which have the facilities will also be able to pick ICT as an elective subject.

From this submission, I would like us to appreciate that we are not able to teach all subjects despite their relevance because our children would be overwhelmed. It is because of this that the curriculum is designed with time-limits and adequate scope, depth and sequence, taking care that the children exit a given level with the most critical concepts, skills and attitude.

The content planned by NCDC has to also fit within the available school time. The desired vital information is selected, taught to learners - sometimes in a spiral nature - such that you take care of the levels of difficulty vis-à-vis the age of the learner to avoid teaching children things which are above their age. Some information is taught at primary and repeated at secondary, in different complexities but in related contexts.

Hon. Elijah Okupa raised the issue of Nilo-Hamites and Luo Migration. I would like to refer him to the same explanation, which I gave, when I was talking about Bunyoro. When you look at that topic of “State Formation in East Africa”, which has a package of pre-colonial societies both the centralised and the non-centralised, especially bullet No.3, which you will see when you open the new syllabus. This is very well explained.

These provide for all societies that existed in the pre-colonial East Africa including Nilo-Hamites and the Karimojong people - see page No.17 if you checked. Luo migration is handled in detail including its significance and the impact in East Africa. 

Hon. Elijah Okupa and hon. Theodore Ssekikuubo, the topic on history and political education of Uganda has not been recreated; they were saying that it was. That is not true because the same topics are being taught today; they have only been re-organised in the new curriculum to fit in the new teaching approach.

The theme for senior three is about Uganda and it runs throughout the year. I have already laid a copy of this syllabus on the Table. 

Implementation of this curriculum is now at a critical stage and so, we call upon all Members of Parliament to support the ministry’s effort so we can together make this project a success. I beg to submit.

4.38
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you so much for giving me the opportunity to speak to this matter. I also thank the minister for his responses. My problem is about the sketches of the curriculum he has been referring to. We were not properly oriented to understand how it works. That is why all these questions are coming up every other day.

When we begin to think that it is only some names that must appear in a curriculum, problems begin to crop in. I am wondering why the President keeps talking about only sciences yet the Ministry of Education and Sports is ignoring that by ensuring agriculture does not come out clearly as a science subject. As an MP, I have that problem. 

I would like the minister to tell Parliament whether agriculture is a science subject or anything else such that we all get to know that you put it there just for the sake. 

Secondly, while we talk about ICT being elective yet at the same time globally, everybody is talking about the information age; I do not know what type of country we are preparing in this type of arrangement. 

Thirdly, I would like the minister to do a simple analysis of this curriculum – it shows the strength, weaknesses and challenges they have gone through -I am worried learners in this country may not get a proper - (Member timed out.)

4.40
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his response. I agree with the minister that in primary schools, pupils learn agriculture. However, it is only at secondary level that you begin seeing the future of a student.

In the lower primary it is the teacher giving the pupil knowledge but when they go up, they begin learning on their own.
Agriculture is the backbone of Uganda and so, we don’t want children to take it as an elective because at the end of the day they discourage themselves from agriculture. 

The minister knows that we used to go to schools where there was competition on planting food and a child would go back home and ask their parent for a piece of land to plant tomatoes. That is one area that you might have to revisit.

Honourable minister, you are promoting sciences but also treating ICT as an elective subject, how are the children going to search for information? 

Even for Bunyoro-Kitara, when are they getting this information? I thought it would be through the ICT model that pupils would begin learning on their own.

Aren’t we again going to see pupils in some parts of Uganda doing better than the others, because if they do not have electricity, an ICT laboratory - it is up to them? Is that how we are going to educate our children in Uganda? 

When examination results come out, there is a region that is always down and you have never bothered to improve it; I mean eastern region. Do you just plan up there and impose? Do you ask people questions -(Member timed out.)

4.43
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the minister was presenting, the question - especially the one of hon. Biraahwa on Bunyoro-Kitara – on whether or not Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom was omitted, I expected the answer to be, yes or no.

However, the minister opted to go through shortcuts and after he said that Bunyoro-Kitara was not omitted, he went ahead to say that they had submitted a corrigenda list, which tells me that Bunyoro-Kitara was omitted.

He went ahead to explain that among the pre-colonial societies, Bunyoro-Kitara, Teso and so on, were included and that the children should discover for themselves.

We have always been taught about Gipir, Labongo and their other brother, Gifol; remember they were triplets though he is never talked about. We came to discover a lot about Gifol because Luo migration was expressly included and taught in the syllabus.

Teso and Bunyoro-Kitara should be expressly put - all the pre-colonial societies, especially the kingdoms of Uganda, should be expressly included in the curriculum.

You are bringing curriculum to overhaul the knowledge regime of a country to cause a paradigm shift to indoctrinate our children. That is okay but that must be based on realities that did not exist in our syllabus before. I think the minister is being dishonest and if he says he is not, let him quote pages where - (Member timed out.)

4.45
MS HARRIET BUSINGE (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank our Minister of Education and Sports for quite an elaborative response, which I feel still lacks something. The Bunyoro question still stands. Why isn’t the history of Bunyoro-Kitara kingdom well stipulated in the new curriculum that, “Look here, we are going to handle Bunyoro’s history. We are going to learn about Omukama Kabalega.” Members know that Bunyoro has the richest history ever and we do not want our children to miss it. 

Madam Speaker, I have never seen the people of Bunyoro offended and insulted like when they realised that their history had been scrapped off the curriculum. I have seen my King, the Omukama of Bunyoro-Kitara kingdom rallying the Members of Parliament from Bunyoro. I have seen our Prime Minister moving to the National Curriculum Development Centre to ensure that our children, the coming generation, do not miss out on the rich history of Bunyoro-Kitara.

Honourable Minister for Education and Sports, I do not want to be a prophet of doom but I can assure that if that issue is not rectified, we are going to see another rebellion. Bunyoro schools will not teach that history. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.47
MR PATRICK KASUMBA (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Eduardo Galeano, in his book “Open Veins of Latin America”, had this to say: “A country that forgets its history is like a human being who has lost his memory”. Why should we forget about the history of Bunyoro yet 95 per cent of us in this august House have either benefitted from the history of Bunyoro or, in one way or the other, we are connected to Bunyoro Kingdom?

Honourable minister, when you are entering this Parliament, at the gate, you will find several emblems: Buganda Kingdom, Bunyoro Kingdom, Busoga Kingdom - Why are we changing goal posts today? What is wrong with Bunyoro-Kitara?

The question here is, why was the syllabus of Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom omitted? In a bid to justify the omission, the honourable minister has laid an addendum on the syllabus and he is saying that Bunyoro-Kitara history will be learnt through political education. Why are we marginalising Bunyoro-Kitara?

What perturbs me, Madam Speaker, is that when the Government is running for minerals in Bunyoro-Kitara, no one is talking. When you are running for Bungoma Forest, you run very fast. When we are talking about history, now we are being marginalised. What is wrong with Bunyoro –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I have just scanned through the document that the minister laid on the Table and kept referring to. On pages 17 and 19 where they are talking about the culture and key ethnic groups in East Africa, the only ones mentioned are Buganda, Ankole, Karagwe, Kikuyu, Nyamwezi, the Masai, the Tonga and the Acholi. They then go ahead to mention the Bantu, Luo and Ngoni migration. There is nothing specifically here about Bunyoro-Kitara. There is nothing on the Ateker, which comprises the Karimojong and Iteso.

Can the minister clarify –

THE SPEAKER: Order, order!

MR OKUPA: Can the minister specifically tell us where it is mentioned in this book? This is the book he laid on the Table, Madam Speaker.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, let us put records clear. A curriculum is laid out work of what is going to be taught but there are books used to teach. Books have teachers’ copies and students’ copies. Once the curriculum does not bear that then the books will not have them.

If you say you are making an addendum, how do you get a students’ copy and you give it an addendum? The answer is that in the books they are going to use to teach, there is nothing like Bunyoro history. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR KASUMBA: Thank you very much for that information. I will also take information from hon. Abala – (Interruption)

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, this type of marginalisation is embarrassing the country. It is an embarrassment to us and the information I would like to give you –

THE SPEAKER: Is that from Ateker?

MR ABALA: I am from Ateker and it has been left out. Ateker has been left out and for us, as members of Ateker, we are not in agreement. We are not supporting it, we are saying, no. That is the information I want to give you, my brother, that Ateker has been neglected and is being abused in this case. 

The mere fact that Ateker is not part of it means that it is being abused by saying, “You are useless; you have no value”. I thank you.

MR KASUMBA: Madam Speaker, in the interest of Bunyoro, I will also allow information from hon. Chekamondo.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have taken over my work.

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you look at the whole thing and the history, the Sabiny are not there. When you look at Bunyoro-Kitara and all those other areas that they have left out, there are minerals there. Maybe there is an intention to leave out the history of these people and take over all their minerals. Therefore, I am against it. Thank you.

MR KASUMBA: Madam Speaker, I would humbly pray that we disallow the minister’s submission so that he goes back to the round table with his team – (Applause) – to find a way of emphatically incorporating the history of Bunyoro into the syllabus. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.53
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister is emphasising ICT. As we speak, very many students are doing courses online but to my surprise, we are spending not less than Shs 12,000 a day for our sons and daughters to have Mega Bites (MBs). This is because the Ministry of Education and Sports failed to plan with the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance to make sure that they provide hotspots so that our children can access the internet.

When you go to some areas like Mukono Municipal Council and other areas where they have internet, you find the youth crowded there. It is my humble request that the Ministry of Education and Sports deals with the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance and creates hotspot centres where children can access internet. You cannot emphasise ICT when accessing internet is still a problem. I thank you.

4.54
MR JACOB OPOLOT (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the minister for the submission. Unfortunately, I do not know what could be happening - it seems we are mixing a number of things in the response. Are we trying to say that a curriculum is the same as a syllabus and is the same as instructional materials? The content and description of each should be different. I would have expected that distinction in the explanation to the House.

I would also like to inform this House that in our engagements as a Committee on Education and Sports, in the consultations during the development of this curriculum, we raised these issues and we were assured that they will not be specific on pronouncing which subjects and whatever. 

If you are going to talk of the history of East Africa, Uganda or wherever and you again go to an extent of highlighting a few then you are excluding some. Even when you think you are giving examples, one will always ask, “Why did you use this example and why not the other?” Madam Speaker, what I would like to say here is that whether we are talking about the history of the different tribes, we must talk about each tribe being considered in this country. We will not be fair to think that one tribe is more important than the other. 

I, therefore, appeal to this House, and the Ministry of Education and Sports, through the National Curriculum Development Centre, to ensure all tribes and their histories are treated equally. I am what I am because of my origin. Thank you.

4.56
MS FLORENCE NAMBOZO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was just about to add that I did not hear anything about Bugisu. For clarity and identification of culture, you cannot fail to talk about circumcision in Uganda. As a result, Bugisu must be included in that history.

Thank you, honourable minister, for the good report. I will, however, add the following, as a teacher. First of all, the teachers in the private schools are crying. They have seen you are part of the national taskforce for COVID-19. They do not, however, have food because they are not paid when they are not at work. 

Secondly, the DEOs – at least in Sironko, I found my DEO is part of the COVID-19 team. I do not think the RDCs should receive the education materials because that is a misplacement. 

Thirdly, honourable minister, as we go through this pandemic, and as a country, the ministers have to work in tandem. In the post COVID-19, we need to have a few visible structures that we shall look at. For example, while we talk about the teaching materials not being enough, I do not think they have reached Mt Elgon. 

Honourable minister, is it possible for the ministry to equip every district with a printing machine to print more of these revision exercises to save other places from missing out. For example, you know Sironko has not had good performances. It is not fair, if other districts, because of access to TVs and FM radios, are getting these learning materials.

Then lastly, before the lockdown, I went round my district and I discovered that most of the school structures are not in good state. My prayer is that before the lockdown is lifted, if it is possible for us to talk to the DEOs, these structures should be uplifted so that as our children go back to schools, there are better infrastructures in place for their learning. Thank you.

4.59
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for the responses he has given us. 

Madam Speaker, my understanding is that a syllabus is a guideline, which will help the teacher pick what is to be taught to the students, and that is what will be examined. If anything does not appear in the syllabi, it will not be taught nor examined. 

That is why we are saying we have very many tribes and kingdoms in Uganda. All their histories should be taught. If Bunyoro is not put there, like the whole West Nile is left out - the Agofe, Elini Kakwa, and Ali Kenyi - This history is very important that our children of Uganda should know; the whole world should know. I urge the minister to include these tribes in our syllabi and curricula. 

Regarding the thematic areas to be taught, it is a good idea to teach in vernacular because at the beginning, when a child comes from the village, definitely, he does not know English. He can be taught in vernacular. English, however, must be a subject so that by the time he reaches primary three, he knows the language. 

I think thematic curriculum is very important, but we need to include all the languages instead of selecting a few. We need to teach the children English Language so that they improve on their fluency. Otherwise – (Member timed out.)

5.01
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. These cultures are our heritage, and I do not know why the minister comes here to beat around the bush in trying to explain the matters of Bunyoro. Honourable minister, I know there are technical people who sit at the ministry, and they try to ignore matters to do with culture. Our least expectation was to see you come here to say, “Honourable members, it was an omission, and we are making sure the history of Bunyoro is included in the curriculum.” 

By the way, you should tell us other cultures and histories of the country that you are still adding on the list because we need every culture included. Every tribe has its own history. I think you can do better than trying to convince us that the history is there, when in actual sense, it does not exist. 

Madam Speaker, on the matter of teaching our children in local languages, it is high time we did an assessment. It is because not all the teachers who are recruited to teach in these schools, especially the urban schools, know the local languages. So, urban schools end up teaching in English Language because the teachers they have do not necessarily know Luganda. It is possible they are from other areas. 

Madam Speaker, recently, we offered a child help. This child was in primary five, but when we brought her to an urban school, she could not read. The school had to demote her to primary one. That is the dichotomy we have. In the rural area, she was in primary five, but when we brought her to urban schools, she had to go back to primary one, which was very unfortunate. 

It is high time we assessed thematic curriculum. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Ouma, honourable minister, as far as I can recall, vernacular teachers were phased out, and we no longer have them. Who is teaching the thematic curriculum?

5.05
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The problem we have is that people sit in Kampala here and make decisions without consulting Ugandans. 

Honourable minister, regarding these materials you are talking about, I have just been consulting the District Education Officer (DEO) of Namayingo who said that they reached yesterday. They are stranded on how they are going to transport these materials to the islands. 

Your reason was that students are just trying to make revision. As a teacher, I also understand what revision is and what it adds to a student so it is very important.

Lastly, on the issue of Bunyoro-Kitara; my colleague talked about it. The question was that why was Bunyoro Kingdom omitted. Indeed, you talked of a corrigendum. The history of Uganda is very clear. I like the history of Bunyoro-Kitara because when you omit it, automatically it means that we are making Ugandans not to understand their history. 

Even the National Resistance Movement that was started by Yoweri Kaguta Museveni must have got their examples from the Kingdom of Bunyoro-Kitara which resisted the whites. Therefore, why are you omitting those people who resisted the whites and made us to understand what resistance is, from the history? I think that is not good. Where in Uganda can you be and not understand Kabalega of Bunyoro and the role he played here like how he organised the army? 

I think it is good to say that it was a mistake and you are going to make some changes. Let me allow information from my friend then you can summarise and I go away. Thank you.

MR AGABA: Thank you, my colleague for giving way. The information I felt I should give is that I think even our arguments get mixed up when we argue for Bunyoro and Bunyoro-Kitara. The two are slightly different. 

Bunyoro-Kitara is the history of the interlacustrine region. It is the bigger region: Toro, the mountains in the Rwenzori the other side or even Buganda. In the north, there is Chope among the Alur. That is part of Bunyoro-Kitara.

This Bunyoro is here – it includes even Busoga. Bunyoro-Kitara gave emergence to many kingdoms. You start from the Bacwezi, the Batembuzi and the Luo-Babiito. You are now going north.

Madam Speaker, why people insist that it should not miss is because it summarises the history of the region. When you select one or two tribes, you miss out on the others. 

I thought this is important to put clear on the record. It is better we take the bigger one. In the peopling of Uganda, different tribes can be seen but from the bigger perspective of Bunyoro-Kitara.

5.10
Mr Ismael orot (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. If you look at the development in the world, countries that have moved very fast like China, Japan, India and so forth dwell so much in maintaining their culture. That is why other countries have even failed to steal their technology.

Therefore, on the issue of this bigger kingdom, for example, the Ateker group of people used even to manufacture guns. If you go to details of Bunyoro, you can be surprised to see that it was King Kabalega who fathered Jomo Kenyatta who became a great leader. You realise that this kingdom is very important in our history.

When I was growing up, there were textbooks in Ateso in Teso teaching us about Speke, the first European to discover the source of River Nile as if there were no Basoga around that river at that time. They could teach us also about Sir Samuel Baker so we are very much empathetic about this issue of culture. Thank you.

5.11
Ms rukiya chekamondo (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the paper he has presented. 

First of all, there is need to revisit the thematic education. Our own teachers, even the owners of the language today do not know their languages. We can see this when there are activities where they need translation. If you find a teacher today, they speak two words of a language and three in English.

Therefore, we should revisit the thematic education and see whether it is really benefiting the people of this country.

Secondly, there is the issue of sign language. He was saying that materials have been sent out but given the language the radios use, those children who are deaf cannot be helped by these radios. Only the televisions can but not everybody has one. 

What plans does the minister have for the children who are disabled and use sign language? There are those who do not see or talk but the materials given need to be seen and read. Also, the parents who are handling this do not know the sign language. How are they going to help these children?

I would like also to inform the honourable minister that right now, for Kapchorwa in particular and Sebei Sub-Region in general, the materials you are talking about have not even arrived. Given the terrain of the region and other areas of the like where you may even fail to climb and take the material, what time will these children benefit from these materials when areas where the systems are okay, they are already learning?

When you look at the radio coverage system in Kapchorwa, radios do not even pick Ugandan stations. It picks Kenya. Therefore, how are we going to help rural areas where you may find people, may be picking the radio from Rwanda or are like us who pick radios from Kenya?

I feel this system should be revisited. I remember one time when the Ministry of Education and Sports had their own interest, they changed the whole syllabus and curriculum to benefit a few children of the people who were in the ministry. If it is also an intention of having a hidden agenda for your own children, this must be revisited until we see to it that we get something that benefits Ugandans. Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable members, on the issue of radio reception in Kapchorwa, I have reported almost seven times on the Floor of this House that the people of Kapchorwa are not able to listen to Uganda radios. I have even written letters but nobody has taken interest.

I would like the Minister for Information to come and tell us when they are going to rectify that. Each time I go there, that is what they tell me.
 
5.14
Mr Geoffrey macho (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for his report. However, many times, I say that some of these reports are forced on ministers to give.

If you analysed the minister’s report very well, you would find that Bunyoro-Kitara is intentionally being omitted from the politics of this country. I would like to tell the people from Bunyoro Sub-Region who are here that this is intentional. Some of us picked interest to become leaders when we read the history of Kabalega. In fact, sometimes I wish I were the grandson of Kabalega because he was a very strong leader.

Some of us who keep crossing to Kenya, people there believe that even the family of President Uhuru Kenyatta has a background from Bunyoro-Kitara. Some of our great grandfathers used to tell us that the kingdoms we have –

The Speaker: Honourable member, you are on a slippery ground. Leave that area. 

Mr Macho: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The chiefdoms we used to have like the Wanga chiefdoms in western Uganda, had a copy from this great kingdom of Bunyoro-Kitara. 

I, therefore, request the minister to do something about it as quickly as possible to build confidence in the people of Bunyoro-Kitara and Uganda at large. 

At the same time, we also request that we have chiefdoms in our homes so that our grandchildren and children get to know the culture. We need our chiefs in our areas – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is almost curfew time; so please conclude.  

MR MACHO: We need to be included in the curriculum of this country. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, we have a saying that, “Any tree is always nurtured from the nursery bed.” On the issue of thematic, we are talking about pre-primary but we have forgotten the early childhood foundation, which is nursery school. We have not given the private sector an opportunity to have their own curriculum - so there is gamble and play. Minister, how are the children in nursery school in this country learning in this situation? – (Interruption)

MR GAFABUSA: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give you and the entire House, specifically the minister, is that if you leave out the history of Bunyoro-Kitara, then it means you have completely left out the history of the midwestern and Rwenzori regions because even Toro is from Bunyoro. 

When you go to Bwamba, Rwenzururu, you will notice that all those communities originate from Bunyoro. Therefore, by leaving out the Bunyoro-Kitara history, that means – (Interjection) – yes, all of us have a starting point from Bunyoro. 

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, I am at pains to give a point of order to my honourable brother and neighbour but my people are watching. I think it would be extremely unfair to my community for me to allow a colleague to distort history. 

Madam Speaker, it is crystal clear where the Rwenzururu originated from. I would rather that my brother focuses on realities than distorting history because we know that the king of Bunyoro decided what is and has an understanding of his own kingdom in Toro. That was the origin or the genesis. 

Is my honourable brother in order to distort history that is as crystal-clear like it is? I would rather that we debate and allow ourselves to focus on things where we have sufficient information. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, as the Shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs, I say it cannot be your Parliament to get us into a diplomatic challenge where we are sucking in the history of other countries. It cannot be a sitting presided by you, Madam Speaker, and I ask you that, if it pleases you, you expunge contributions from colleagues that have a lot of distortions of history, especially those stretching to our neighbouring countries. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is almost curfew time and we have to leave. The staff have no transport and they have to walk. 

5.21
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the Minister of Education and Sports was presenting a statement on the new curriculum, the justification they gave us was that the current curriculum we are using was developed during colonial times. 

However, it is surprising that this new curriculum is excluding some communities, which to me, is discriminatory. It is like we still have the colonial mentality because the colonialists did not have interest in some communities at that time, and yet most of our communities had their own way of life and their style of leadership. It is unfair for us to now concentrate only on those areas that had kingdoms. 

Madam Speaker, take a look at communities like those among the Karimojong - and Pokot for that matter. Although, we did not have kingdoms, we had clan leaders, who held the people together until now at this level where we are. If you went to Karamoja and Amudat in particular, you would find that, although, we have the LC system, the LCI cannot work alone in the village without the clan leaders. In fact, the clan leaders are even more listened to. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, it is very important to have all the communities of this country. That is why I would request that communities like the Karimojong, the Pokot, the Ik and Sabiny should also be included. It should not be a by-the-way to say that there will be – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have very little time because we are to leave. The staff do not have transport. There are no buses and so they cannot drive their cars and have to walk. We need to finish by 5.30 p.m.  

5.23
MS ANNA ADEKE (Independent, National Female Youth Representative,): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One of my favourite authors of all time called George Orwell said, “Whoever wants to control the future should control the past.” I see that the systematic deletion of Bunyoro-Kitara from the curriculum is a systematic deletion of some ethnic communities from the history of Uganda. 

We need a conscious population. The effect of deleting of Bunyoro-Kitara means that we are raising children who are not politically conscious about the heterogeneous nature of Uganda. They are not conscious about the multi-lingual and multi-tribal nature of Uganda, which makes us who we are. 

Madam Speaker, I must honestly say we are sitting on a bed of thorns. Our country has so many tribal and ethnic sentiments that drive everything, even development. 

Therefore, we are watching. We will not allow the Government, the minister or whoever is in charge of re-writing the curriculum to delete and risk our population to being a totally non-politically conscious population and also risk many communities that have been deleted; the Iteso are not there.  

This is actually a wake-up call to all of us that every Ugandan, as long as you claim to be one, must appreciate that we are heterogeneous in nature. There are many tribes; we coexist and all have a right to equal development, equal access to resources – (Member timed out.)

5.25
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The omission of the history of Bunyoro from the syllabus of this country is a great mistake. 

Madam Speaker, I am a history teacher and I taught it in A’ Level and O’level. Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom provides a line between the Bantu, Nilotes and Nilo-Hamites. By removing it from the syllabus we are trying to keep out - like my honourable colleague said, we are not developing a conscious population. Without Bunyoro, you cannot talk about Tooro. You cannot talk about what the President is ever singing in this country that we are one tribe. It is only through Bunyoro that people from the north interacted with Bantu. The creation of kingdoms we are talking about started because of Bunyoro and the influence of the Luo. This brings me to a point where sometimes, some leaders talk about rolling back the Luo migration.

So, we should be aware of this. It has been mentioned by many leaders in this country that they are rolling back the Luo migration. How does it come? It is intentionally done, honourable minister; it must be put back. We need all the tribes to be recognised in this country. We are a nation because we are from the different tribes. I beg to submit.

5.27
MR STEPHEN BIRAAHWA (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, I would like to congratulate and salute all Members of Parliament for having discussed this matter. As a person who believes in national dialogue, unity in diversity and regional balance, I am happy that this question, which you allowed me to raise as a matter of national importance, has been debated with the whole Parliament unanimously getting concerned. 

Madam Speaker, remember when I raised it, I said that I am speaking for the interlacustrine region. I am speaking for the Great Lakes. I am speaking for Lango, Acholi, Busoga, Buganda, including our people who attend the epango with you from Kenya, Tanzania and DRC. However, remember I warned that the spirit of Kabalega is not happy with the new curriculum. So, don’t be surprised; the moment you fought it when Parliament had said “no” education institutions have closed.

Therefore, from a spiritual angle, I request we take advantage of the COVID-19 lockdown to revisit this curriculum, so that by the time the lockdown is lifted, you answer the questions. Parliament took the whole day discussing the curriculum. You implemented without listening to us. What has happened? COVID-19 has now stopped us. Can we start a national dialogue with the curriculum? I am a son of a headmaster and I am an educationist.
If you want the future of a country, it is through the education system. Minister Muyingo is my teacher and a good friend, and an educationist like me. However, I want to inform him that if we don’t give the right skills, we shall not get what we want.

I would like to request, as a matter of urgency and as we discuss all these challenges of COVID-19; as we look at social economic matters - that can the agenda of revisiting the education curriculum – the challenges, which were very well elucidated by Parliament, which were abandoned - God has decided and we can turn that challenge into an opportunity; let us revisit the curriculum.

What I would like to hear is: the National Curriculum Development Centre working with all other agencies in the education sector, in a more sober mood than they operated last time. Some people were driven by other interests; others were service providers, they wanted to print materials but we have realised as a country that we have a problem.

On the question of learning on radios and televisions, I have been talking about the question of regional balance; the question of every part of this country being looked at as an entitlement. Can we make sure that the money we gave to the Ministry of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance allows every citizen of this country to partake of what Government is giving either by television or radio or any other means? 

Madam Speaker, I would like to once again, thank you and Members of Parliament who now have, in unison, agreed that it is not only about Bunyoro but about all of us.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the minister by now must be aware that this House does not agree with the deletion of Bunyoro-Kitara from our history. We are not satisfied with your explanation when you say they are going to discover. 

5.31
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to say one thing that the honourable minister should also revisit the people who work for us. I see there is a bit of incompetence or they want to do things in a hurry to the extent that they leave out substance. 

So, you revisit your technical staff, you have heard what has been said here. This is all what I wanted to observe. We already made an observation earlier that it was not quality work; do that. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I just want to read from your book, on page 19, where you say, “Let learners brainstorm and compare the centralised and non-centralised states they are familiar with in East Africa…” Which are these? After that you say, “To guide learners to understand the organisation of the following societies; Buganda, Ankole, Karagwe, Kikuyu, Nyamwezi, Masai, Tonga and Acholi…”

So, you have even narrowed down where they should search. We are not satisfied, minister. We want Bunyoro-Kitara reflected properly in the curriculum and others. (Applause)

5.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to make two things very clear. One is that the Ministry of Education and Sports attaches a lot of value or importance to the history of each and every group or tribe, society – (Interjections) - listen to me, hon. Ssewungu, please. Not even a single tribe or society’s history will be lost. 

At the beginning, I said what I laid at the Table is what had been prepared. All what has been said here is going to be captured. 
We have already prepared a corrigendum and sent it to our printers. When they are developing the text books, all these groups are going to be captured. Nobody and not even Bunyoro-Kitara is going to be left out. Bunyoro is so important; you are like any other tribe; no tribe is going to be left out.

THE SPEAKER: What is the timeframe for that?

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, give me two months and you will see a difference. Another thing, I would like to agree with hon. Abala that we need to find time and get oriented and have a retreat and talk over more about these issues. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, it is 5.30 p.m. and we need to leave so that staff can go home too. They don’t have cars or buses. So, we give him the two months to give us the updates. Okay, honourable members, House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00.p.m. 

(The House rose at 5.35 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 7 May 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)
  


