


Wednesday, 2 May 2018

Parliament met at 2.09 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. You will recall that we had a debate on item No.6 on the Order Paper and there were some issues that arose that required clarification. I indicated that we will have a meeting with the Auditor-General and the Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee to find a way of harmonising the position so that we go on one page on what we intend to do with that report on unqualified opinion.

Therefore, at three o’clock when this matter will come up, I have requested the Auditor-General to come and explain from the Bar to the august House what those words mean; what their implications are and what Parliament can do about them. After his statement, he will leave and then we continue discussing the report and take a decision accordingly. Thank you.

Honourable members, when you have matters, you rise. Member for Nakapiripirit?

2.13
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue I am rising on is of national importance and is about the sudden death that happened to someone from my constituency. He went with his wife to Budaka for medical attention. I think they were seeing a traditional doctor. In the course of their stay there, assailants came and killed the husband and also raped the wife.

As we speak now, the body is being transported from Budaka and is being taken to Nakapiripirit for burial. Fortunately, around eight people have been arrested by the District Police Commander (DPC) of Budaka. We really want to see how this issue can be handled so that justice is meted out to the assailants who killed the man from Nakapiripirit.

2.14
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My condolences to the bereaved family. The honourable member has told us that the DPC Budaka is already handling the case and that so far, eight people have been rounded up. I think this is the process that the Police employ when such a case happens. What hon. Obiga Kania has to do is to make sure that Police quickly do their work so that the culprits are netted and that justice is served.

2.15
MR FRED MUDUKOI (Independent, Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. On 27 April 2018, there was heavy rain in Butebo that washed away one of the most important bridges between Kidongole in Bukedea and Butebo Sub County in Butebo district. It is unfortunate that after the downpour, two pupils tried to cross the bridge but because of the running water, they died as they attempted to cross the bridge from Kidongole Primary School in Bukedea to Butebo district. 

This problem has affected the economic and social activities between the people of Butebo and Bukedea. Most of our children from Butebo are studying from the other side of Bukedea in Kidongole Primary School. However, because of this problem, they cannot cross now. For that matter, therefore, it is a very big problem and a big concern. We have two markets; one in Kanyum and the other side of Kidongole. These are two important markets that serve our people but it is becoming very difficult for our people to cross from Butebo to Bukedea and vice versa.

I pray that the concerned ministry comes to rescue the situation and intervene in the current situation. We are affected economically and socially. Otherwise, we are missing a lot. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, first of all, I would like to bring an apology from hon. Monica Azuba and hon. Gen. Katumba Wamala who called me this afternoon that they have been called to State House for a meeting. Hon. Aggrey Bagiire is out of the country. This State House meeting has been called by the President abruptly.

However, I would like to advise the District Engineer of Butebo District to write a report about the incident to the centre, so that the Minister of Works and Transport can see what we can do quickly to improvise transport to that place. 

Whenever something like that happens - because we have qualified people at every district - they are the ones who are supposed to visit the site first; do an assessment quickly then inform the centre to see how we can combine with the district to improvise for transport, as we work out a programme which can solve the problem permanently.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. However, honourable members, the incident happened on the 27th and this is the first time that this matter is coming up or have you raised this matter with the ministry concerned? (Interjections) This is the first time? What have you been waiting for?

MR MUDUKOI: It happened last Friday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you raise the matter with the ministers concerned? I mean it is an emergency.

MR MUDUKOI: Yes, we have written and I handed in the report today.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Friday, there was Monday, yesterday and today. The thing is we need a rapid response to some of these things instead of waiting until there is a Parliament sitting and then you raise the matter.

MR MUDUKOI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.19
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On Friday, 27 April 2018 at night, the disaster-prone district of Bududa had thousands of its residents displaced and their lives furiously disrupted by multiple landslides. These landslides have occurred in 12 villages and as we speak now, schools and places of worship are full with homeless and helpless wanainchi.

Mr Speaker, their gardens have been submerged, including livestock and infrastructural developments like roads and bridges devastated. A pupil was swept away by flood waters because of the landslides that caused the river banks to burst. She was just saved by a whisker; she is currently in Bududa Hospital. It is fortunate that she did not lose her life. 

In this particular landslide, because of our aggressive sensitisation as leaders about the cracks which were there earlier, most of the people had relocated and had even evacuated their families. Otherwise we would have lost lives.

Before I make any prayers, many questions are bound to be asked but the basic would be: That we, even authorities, the line ministry know that every other year, whenever heavy downpours come and as they are still pounding, Bududa gets landslides. Most of the internally displaced persons (IDPs) are hopeless, helpless and homeless. What is the ministry doing to mitigate the situation?

Secondly, what other alternatives do they have in place to - because the people are willing to relocate? These are the prayers I would like to make:

    1. That even in this budget of 2018/2019, it is disgusting that there is no allocation to address the emergency relocation and eventual settlement of the people of Bududa given the misappropriation of what was meant to resettle them in Bulambuli. My Prayer is that some due consideration be made to make an allocation for resettlement of the people who survive these landslides.

    2. At least the authorities should have effective machinery in place to ensure an expeditious relocation of the people as we talk. At least some relief in form of non-food items should be availed to these people because as we speak now, these schools are still running. Therefore, they are there at night but during day, they have to relocate elsewhere.

    3. Given the challenge that we have suffered twice - because the way the ministry behaved, having misappropriated Shs 24 billion that was meant to relocate the people, I am sorry to say this is a form of disaster to the IDPs in Bududa. Could the people be compensated and they go looking for wherever they would secure or procure land rather than waiting in vain?

The architectural and structural plans are very good to look at but can you imagine that up to now, even in Kiryandongo, people have not been resettled? Only 100 housing units have been constructed out of the 603 households. These are 10 years down the road. Therefore, it would be better for these affected persons to be compensated then they can move and purchase land wherever they wish.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, is the –(Interjections)- yes I will take the information but let me make a last prayer. That, Mr Speaker, you prevailed over the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to make a statement after he made his own request that the debate -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please.

MR NAMBESHE: The refugee debate; you remember that he was supposed to come with a statement on the misappropriation of the Shs 24 billion meant for the relocation and resettlement of the people of Bududa in Bulambuli. However, up to now, this minister has fizzled into thin air and is very elusive that I have tried to visit him in his office in vain. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

2.25
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, hon. Nambeshe has raised many issues, some of which will require the line ministers to come and explain. However, most importantly, what is needed to be done now is to make sure that we take relief to the people. This is the urgency of the matter. I will again ask whether an assessment has been done.

Every district has a disaster committee chaired by the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) and all the leaders at the district such as the LC V chair, the RDC, are members. Once a disaster strikes, the -(Interjections) - can I finish this sentence, please? - the first thing to do is for that team to visit the place then communicate spontaneously to the centre so that we can provide relief.

The other issues of misappropriation of money meant to buy land to resettle people; anybody who misappropriated this fund must be brought to book. I am from the Office of the Prime Minister and I have interacted with the Permanent Secretary over this matter and the Permanent Secretary says they procured land.

Therefore, if hon. Nambeshe has information about this, please give me that information. Somebody must be brought to book; whoever misappropriated these funds meant for buying land to resettle people must answer for it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you taking clarifications?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I have finished.

2.26
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. I would like to draw Government’s attention and in particular the Ministry of Health to intervene concerning a strange illness that has so far killed seven people in Malaba in the last one week alone.

I urge the ministry to act expeditiously because we do not know what the sickness is. However, the rate at which people are dying is alarming. I don’t know but it is suspected to be an outbreak of cholera for which we call upon the ministry to move very fast to investigate the situation before it finishes our people. The rate at which they are dying is indeed alarming. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I see the Minister of Health is here.

2.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank my colleague for raising this matter. However, I also hail from Tororo where this challenge is currently. I received this information from concerned people over the weekend and just to inform the House that samples were picked from these affected people who had been taken to Tororo Hospital.

Samples were sent to Mbale and the central public health laboratory. I would like to confirm that the strange disease that is being talked about is indeed cholera. What happened is that we had a lot of rain over the last week and Malaba being what it is, the water table is quite high and the faecal matter mixed with rain and all those drinking water from the springs and other water sources are affected.

Therefore, as we speak now, the district health officer together with the entire team are handling the situation. The Water Guard tablets are being distributed to all the families within Malaba and the population is being urged to ensure that they drink properly boiled water. They have asked for other supplies from the Ministry of Health and this is going to be delivered, hopefully, this afternoon, the IV fluids and so on. The situation is being managed. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, in the distinguished strangers’ gallery this afternoon are members of staff from the National Assembly of Zambia. They are on a week’s benchmarking visit to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda with the finance and human resource departments. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

MR KYEWALABYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rule 42 (6) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda states:
“A Minister shall not take more than two weeks to respond to a question from a member.” 

On the 9th of January, I sent a question for oral answer to the Minister of Health but up to now, the minister is still dodging to answer the question. I have health centres II which are not operational for over eight years now. I raised that question but every time I see the minister here sitting comfortably without answering my question.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How else do you want her to sit? (Laughter)

MR KYEWALABYE: Mr Speaker, given this rule, I wonder if it is procedurally right for us to sit when the ministers are not answering our questions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have made this point that honourable ministers should respond to these questions quickly so that you avoid these situations of urgent questions, which sometimes are not urgent but Members feel frustrated when the questions are not responded to. They therefore adopt this method of “urgent questions” yet there are formal points that can deal with matters in a more formal way. Honourable Minister of Health, where is the answer to this question? I am not against you sitting comfortably; that is okay. (Laughter)

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I never dodge questions from colleagues but I think I must have skipped this. I would like to apologise to hon. Kyewalabye that it was not brought to my attention, otherwise I should have long responded. 

However, allow me to inform the House that we have had challenges regarding operationalisation of the health centres II. The speed at which districts constructed these health centres did not match the speed at which government had revenue to have them operational. Even when we stopped the districts from proceeding with the construction without looking at the element of human resources’ wages and medical supplies, the districts still went ahead. That is why about three years ago, we withdrew the Primary Health Care (PHC) development funds that we were sending to the districts. 

Our appeal to them has been that you have health centres III that either lack staff accommodation or are not complete. Instead of constructing a health centre II that will remain a white elephant, please first ensure that the health centre III has staff accommodation and also, most importantly, has all the wards. 

I would like to inform the House that what we are doing in the next financial year is to ensure that all sub-counties that do not have health centres III get them. That is catered for in the next financial year using the World Bank loan. 

Secondly, we are also going to focus on all those health centres III, that are there by name but when it comes to functionality they are not, to ensure that we have them functional by having the relevant wards. Some of you know that some of your health centres III have one ward where the men, women and children are all accommodated. 

What we shall do for Mayuge is to ensure that if a health centre II was constructed and there is health centre III in that sub-county, we shall upgrade those ones and that is our focus for now. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, do we now take it that your question has been answered?

MR KYEWALABYE: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we then wait for the formal answer so you will have a supplementary question?

MR KYEWALABYE: Okay.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

REQUEST TO PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO $75.82 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT (IFAD) TO SUPPORT THE NATIONAL OIL PALM PROJECT (NOPP)

2.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a request by government to borrow up to $75.82 million from the International Fund for Agricultural Development to support the National Oil Palm Project.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and it is referred to the appropriate Committee on National Economy. I urge the Committee on National Economy to look at the letter that was also written by the President on the subject to verify that this particular request conforms to what the President had directed. We have all received copies of the letter. 

Can we alter the Order Paper to accommodate the laying of the statutory instrument by the minister? 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) REGULATION, 2018

2.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a statutory instrument, the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Regulations, 2018.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, you know the background to these particular regulations regarding the amendments that we have presented. The Budget Committee had a difficulty handling the supplementary requests that had been sent to it because the requirements were that all these requests must first comply with three requirements; first, that the particular spending was unavoidable, un-absorbable and unforeseeable; all of them put together. The opinion of the Budget Committee says that when they apply all the criteria, none of the requests would meet the criteria. It does not make sense to apply the criteria together because if the matter is unforeseeable, why must it first be unavoidable or un-absorbable?

It could not have been the intention of this House to pass a law of this nature; so we requested the ministers to make the necessary improvements on the body of laws of this country that cannot lead us into absurdities in the way we do business. Therefore, this is the correction that has been done. Thank you. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO CORRECT AN ERROR ON THE RECORD OF THE RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE REQUEST OF GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO UNITS OF ACCOUNT 28.328 MILLION EQUIVALENT TO $38,400,000 FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (ADB) AND UNIT OF ACCOUNT 41,462,000 EQUIVALENT TO $56.12 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND (ADF) TO SUPPORT THE MULTINATIONAL: UGANDA/KENYA: KAPCHORWA-SUAM-KITALE AND ELDORET BYPASS ROADS PROJECT

2.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to correct an error on the record of the resolution of Parliament on the request of Government to borrow up to Units of Account 28.328 million equivalent to $38,400,000 from the African Development Bank (ADB) and Units of Account 41,462,000 equivalent to $56.12 million from the African Development Fund (ADF) to support the multinational: Uganda/Kenya: Kapchorwa-Suam-Kitale and Eldoret Bypass Roads project. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the motion. Is it seconded? (Members rose_) Yes, it is seconded by Member for Kibuku district, Member for Rubanda, Gomba East, and West Budama South. Honourable minister, would you like to speak to your motion? Does it require a justification to the motion?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we did present a request to Parliament to borrow Units of Account 28.328 million equivalent to $38.4 million from the ADB and Units of Account 41.462 million equivalent to $56.12 million from the African Development Fund to support the multinational: Uganda/Kenya: Kapchorwa-Suam-Kitale and Eldoret Bypass Roads project.

This request was submitted to the Committee on National Economy. It considered and passed the request without adjusting any amendments on the figures. However, when it reached the level of the resolution of Parliament, we found out that these figures had been adjusted which has created difficulty to the Bank. Therefore, we have come back to correct this error which we think can be corrected without going back to the normal request of the loan and the committee can testify to this. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is what happened and actually there is only one aspect and on the equivalent amount not the substantial amount. Why it is important is because Cabinet in its operation approved its request in United States dollars only.

However, the borrowing is dictated by the lending agency, for example, this particular one from African Development Bank is based on Units of Account. Therefore, there should be correspondence on the amounts from United States dollars to the currency that the money is being lent in. Therefore, this is what happened in this case.

The request that was submitted to Parliament was to the equivalent of $38.4 million. When the matter came back, what was recorded is $38.349314. Therefore, this created an alteration on what was approved by Cabinet, which is $38.4 million.

Therefore, because of this, it is not necessary to go through Rule 219 for Parliament to reconsider what it had passed - we are not reconsidering but just correcting an error on the record because the amount remains the same in units of account. Even the second one which is in the same currency has not been changed.

The only figure that is changed is in relation to the first borrowing, which should have been $38.4 million but has been recorded as $38.349 million.

When you look at the report of the committee, there is no alteration. Part of the report of the committee - if you look at page 10, actually confirms the figure of $38.4 million but other places it is $38.349 million. Therefore, that is the correction we are going to make and I do not think this should attract a debate. Can I put the question so we finish with this matter?

2.46
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, that is a serious matter - even if it is a decimal point, it is a serious matter. The reason I am raising is: Who made the error? Did we borrow in units or in dollars? If you borrow in units, it does not matter. The unit, which applies at any time, is the one they apply because they can say 1 unit is equal to $1.3. Therefore, that one is not a big issue for us. They will multiply it and get it.

The most important thing to understand is: Did we borrow the money in units of accounts or in dollars?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The loan request is in units of accounts and that is what we approved.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Is that one right.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, it is correct. There is no problem with that one.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If we have that as right, the rest is just their system. It is like exchange rate at the time they sign the contract; they will tell them: “You borrowed 34 units of accounts”, whatever will be applicable, is what we can apply. It is like that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Can I now propose the question? 

I now put the question for the adoption of this motion for a resolution of Parliament to correct an error on the record of the resolution of Parliament on the request of Government to borrow up to units of account 28.328 million equivalent to $38.4 million from the African Development Bank (ADB) and units of account 41.462 equivalent to $56.12 million from the African Development Fund (ADF) to support the multinational: Uganda/Kenya: Kapchorwa-Suam-Kitale and Eldoret Bypass Roads Project.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I had a procedure issue. Mr Speaker, the minister in charge of finance always comes here claiming that we are funding our budget locally. However, there is no day I have sat in Parliament and not heard him say he wants to borrow. At this rate, I do not know where we are headed? If we do not curtail the appetite of the minister in charge of finance to borrow, I would like to tell you that we are mortgaging this country at the fastest rate. 

Therefore, is it procedurally right for the minister in charge of finance to tell us that we have capacity to fund our own roads from domestic resources yet he is borrowing day in and out mortgaging this country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think that is a procedural matter; you should have just asked the minister directly why he says the things he says and does the things he does? However, that moment now has been lost. Thank you. 

MR KAFUUZI: Mr Speaker, I am concerned and I would like to understand the criteria which the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development uses to determine which road to borrow funds for when other roads in other constituencies also require such work and no loans have been taken? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Again, that is not a procedural question. Therefore, the chance is lost.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE INQUIRY INTO MANDATORY INSPECTION OF MOTOR VEHICLES IN UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion was received, a report presented and debates carried out. There were gaps and the Attorney-General was requested to give an opinion. 

I have also received a request from hon. Denis Sabiiti whose name, he claims, has been mentioned in the report and he needed to make some clarification in relation to how his name has come to be mentioned and why it should not have been mentioned. Therefore, I am going to let hon. Sabiiti speak for about five minutes and then we go to the substantial matter that was referred to the Attorney-General.

2.52
MR DENIS SABIITI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Committee on Physical Infrastructure investigated the procurement of mandatory motor vehicle inspection and made some conclusions about my role when I was working at the Ministry of Works and Transport as an assistant commissioner of safety and inspection and later on, as commissioner transport regulation.

The conclusions are six and I will tackle one by one, giving facts about what happened. The first one was that I, Eng. Denis Sabiiti, dropped the idea of two service providers and instead included one service provider in the contract. I joined the Ministry of Works and Transport in 2002. This procurement had started in 2001. There were policy decisions which were made by the Top Management Team (TMT) of the Ministry of Works and Transport.

The Top Management Team of the Ministry of Works and Transport consisted of three ministers, the Permanent Secretary, two directors and the undersecretary, totalling to seven people. All the others were just technical officers who would be called to contribute or give some information or clarification and that was the reason I appeared in the attendance of those meetings.

Mr Speaker, the policy of two service providers and one service provider were decisions that were taken by TMT. In the ninth meeting of the TMT on 11 September 2007, when the TMT was considering the concept paper, they adopted a decision to have two service providers. A copy of these minutes was laid during the reading or presentation of the majority report. 

Subsequently, TMT in its 15th meeting of 10 November 2008, when it was reviewing this procurement, they rescinded their decisions to have two service providers and instead opted for one service provider. This minute was laid on Table by the minority report. It is clearly stated that TMT rescinded that decision and opted for one service provider. 

The second issue, is that I revised the bidding documents to eliminate all competitors of Societe Generale de Surveillance (SGS). Honourable members, you very well know that one of the core principles of the Public Procurement and Disposal Act is value for money and you can only achieve value for money if there is competition. 

What happened is that when TMT was again reviewing this procurement in its 15th meeting, it instructed that experience in this procurement is necessary. However, they also noted that the Ugandan companies do not have this experience. Therefore, they took a decision that in the statement of requirements, experience must be stressed. 

However, for companies in Uganda which do not have experience, a window period was put that they should go into joint ventures with foreign companies which had this experience. That was put in the statement of requirements as per the law by the user department under which I was. 

The proposal and disposal unit included the requirement of experience in the solicitation document under item evaluation, methodology and criteria. These documents were approved by the contracts committee, the Public Procurement and Disposal Authority and the Solicitor-General. Definitely, it was not me who did this –(Interruption) 

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is the honourable member in order to continue telling us stories where there is no evidence, when he had time to present all that before the committee which investigated? He was given time but now whatever he is telling us did not appear in the committee findings. Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is an honourable Member of Parliament and if there are adverse statements about him in a report of this House, he has a right to make some responses to them. That is why we have accorded him the opportunity to do this. 

I would only urge him not to explain things that are self-explanatory. Let him speak mainly to the main topics and explain briefly. If you lose the Members’ concentration, then nobody will follow what you are saying. Please.

MR SABIITI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me go to the third item. The third item was that I connived with the SGS staff. This is both in the majority report on pages 27 and 30 and in the minority report on pages 10 and 11.

This was a subject of a court process and the court pronounced itself on this during the administrative review of 2010 and I have a ruling dated 25 January 2012 which I wish to lay on the Table as evidence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was it not part of what was presented by the committee?

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, this was not laid on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let the records capture that. Please proceed, honourable.

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, the fourth item was that I approved a due diligence team and a due diligence report as an appointed chairman of the contracts committee, where I was the chairman between 2013 and 2015. I have minutes to show how the decision was arrived at by the contracts committee and it is in accordance with the procedures as contained in the PPDA statutory instrument No. 7, 2015, regulation 13 (5). These minutes are dated 10 February 2015. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR OBOTH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think you had offered very valuable guidance to our colleague. We can all get into what he got into but I wonder how useful tendering in minutes is yet he was the chairman. I believe those minutes are signed by him and the secretary. When we go into tendering them in now, I do not doubt our capacity - is the Member proceeding well by not adhering? He is giving unnecessary details. 

The truth is the only thing which does not contradict in the world. The truth is yesterday, tomorrow and forever and it does not matter how much you say or how you say it; just speak the truth as it is. Is he proceeding well by being more technical that it would need the committee again to review the documents? He should either deny he was party as chairman or – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you would save this House a lot if you stated the findings of the committee, the recommendation of the committee and responded to it directly. It would help your case.

MR SABIITI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The approval was by contracts committee and not by me because the rules governing the operations of the contracts committee are very clear. I can even direct you to where they are. 

Mr Speaker, item five was that as commissioner of transport regulations, I forwarded a contract to the Solicitor General in disregard of the evaluation committee and this is in the minority report on page 11.

This contract was awarded in July 2010 and then there were administrative reviews which meant it was suspended up to November 2014. During the suspension, this House amended the section 74 of the Procurement Act, prohibiting negotiations except in said cases. 

Number six was that I was offered a contract by SGS as an incentive. This is on page 30 of the majority report and page 12 of the minority report. Mr Speaker, it is true I was given a consultancy contract but I had already left the Ministry of Works and Transport –(Interjections)– can I give you details? Can I now lay these documents on the Table? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we will not have time to look at those documents. We are going to take the decision after your speech. Just make your case.

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, those are the six areas where I was mentioned as having played a role in this procurement. In conclusion, the decision to privatise motor vehicle inspection was taken before I joined the ministry. My attendance of meetings was as a technical officer not as a member of the Top Management Team. I was neither a member of the evaluation committee nor a member of the contracts committee during the approval and award of this contract. 

Therefore, I do not know what wrong I committed in this procurement but from the facts I have presented, I believe I did no wrong in this contract. It is up to the House to look at the documents and take the decision. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is out of courtesy to the Member, to be able to be given the right to speak when there are statements that are advanced to the Member. That is why hon. Sabiiti had to make this statement because the recommendations from the committee are pointing directly at him. Therefore, we can only be fair if we listen to him directly as the body going to take the decision. Thank you.

Honourable members, substantially the matter that was before us and was pending was the statement of the Attorney-General on this matter. 

3.09
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker and honourable members, on 17 March 2015, the Government of Uganda, through the Ministry of Works and Transport entered into a contract with SGS in order for them to develop, install, commission and operate motor vehicle inspection services for a period of five years.

In fulfilment of the obligation under the contract, SGS put up infrastructure and commenced inspection work as per the contract. 

On 29 June 2017, the Rt. Hon. Speaker of Parliament, as a result of two ministerial statements and two matters of urgent public importance on the subject of mandatory vehicle inspection, referred this matter to the parliamentary Committee on Physical Infrastructure. The mandate of the committee was to appraise Government on the policy of motor vehicle inspection, examine the procurement of SGS and the details of the contract as well as the advancement of recommendations for the regularisation of vehicle inspection as a road safety strategy. 

At the conclusion of the inquiry, the committee came up with the following recommendations; that: 
i. 	The cost of inspection should be significantly reduced to make it more affordable and equitable to motorists.

ii. 	A multi stakeholder supervisory team comprising the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) and Uganda Police Force should be constituted to cater for the multi-dimensional nature of vehicle inspection and to incorporate air quality, standards and enforcement. 

iii. 	The Auditor-General should be involved to audit the vehicle inspection exercise and focus on value-for-money, physical performance and financial performance.

iv. 	A master test centre should be established for key quality control strategy and ensuring that the vehicle inspection results are independently verified for accuracy and reliability. 

v. 	A crash data system to analyse accident reports and store the information for future use in policy formulation be established.

vi. 	There was need to streamline revenue payment procedures in conformity with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and 

vii. 	The public should be sensitised on road safety. 

Mr Speaker, the committee, in its majority report, concluded that it fully supported the motor vehicle inspection project as a strategic tool for improving road safety and stemming road carnage. 

A minority report was issued and the conclusion of the report was that the motor vehicle inspection, as a governmental intervention to improve road safety, is a public good whose delivery should not be blighted by profiteering, especially by the private sector. 

The minority Members, therefore, recommended the immediate disbandment of the arrangement with SGS through termination of the contract and a re-establishment of motor vehicle inspection under the Uganda Police Force.

Mr Speaker, the Attorney-General was tasked to advise this House as to whether it is legally viable to terminate the contract for the provision of mandatory motor vehicle inspection services with SGS, and if so, what would be the consequences?

Mr Speaker, we have studied both the majority and minority reports. We have scrutinised the contract between SGS and the Ministry of Works and Transport. We also listened to the debate by Members of Parliament. We now wish to advise that according to the express provisions of the contract, the contract could only be terminated on the following grounds: 

1. 	Repeated failure by SGS to fulfil its obligation under the contract. 

2. 	If SGS gives offers or promises of any loan, fee, reward or advantage of any kind to any employee of the Ministry of Works and Transport, provided that there is reliable and invincible information about such offers or promises. 

3. 	Fraud on the part of SGS. 

Mr Speaker, from our scrutiny of the contract, those were the three main grounds upon which the contract could be terminated – (Interruption)

MS ADEKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is our practice in Parliament that all the documents presented to us are uploaded on the iPads. We are receiving a legal opinion from the learned Attorney-General about the viability of the termination of this contract. I have my iPad here but I cannot access this legal opinion. We have to subject this legal opinion to scrutiny since we have access to the contract. 

Mr Speaker, are we proceeding properly to just hear the Attorney-General enumerate to us the different consequences of terminating this contract without being able to read? We need to keep this on the record to know if the Attorney-General misadvised this House or if he rightfully advised.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Member raises two issues that are distinct. The first one is that this Parliament should scrutinise the opinion of the Attorney-General. The second one, which is more procedural, is whether we can proceed without having this document uploaded on the iPads. 

Honourable, did you submit this document early enough to the Clerk? 

Honourable members, the process of uploading this document is on and you will have the record but right now we can listen to the Attorney-General. (Mr Nandala -Mafabi and Mr Rukutana rose) - Both of you, please, I am still ruling on the procedure. There is a second aspect of this ruling that I must make. 

The second question raised by the Member is whether Parliament can scrutinise the opinion of the Attorney-General. (Laughter) I would rather the courts of this country scrutinise the opinion of the Attorney-General and not us.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you. Mr Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is that whenever there is a contentious issue in this House, it is hon. Rukutana who comes as the Attorney-General. I do not know if it is because he is bold enough to speak bad things and yet we approved hon. Byaruhanga, as the Attorney-General. 

The other time, we said it should be the Attorney-General to respond to this issue and not the Deputy Attorney-General. Are we proceeding well, Mr Speaker - (Laughter) - without the substantial Attorney-General here? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I rule on the procedure?

MR RUKUTANA: Can I raise a point of order because it will guide the Speaker’s ruling? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I rule on this point of procedure because it came earlier? Honourable members, there are two constitutional provisions. One is Article 119 and the other is Article 119A. Article 119 creates the Office of the Attorney-General and Article 119A creates the Office of the Deputy Attorney-General. Article 119A (1) reads: “There shall be a Deputy Attorney-General who shall be a minister appointed by President under Article 114 with the approval of Parliament”. So, both offices are created. There is the Office of the Attorney-General and the Deputy Attorney-General.

If I state anything to the contrary, it would be suggesting that the Deputy Speaker cannot preside over the House - (Laughter). Here you have the Deputy Attorney-General and the Deputy Speaker. What do you expect the Deputy Speaker to say? Proceed.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much, for that very wise ruling on the matter. I have told you, according to our scrutiny, the three instances upon which the contract could be legally terminated. I would like to proceed as follows:

Although both the majority and minority reports of the committee state that the timelines for payment of the consideration fees were not adhered to, the committee acknowledged that such payments were actually made and received belatedly by the Ministry of Works and Transport. 

Our advice on such a matter is that such a receipt would tantamount to acquiescence in law, with the result that the ministry's right to terminate the agreement basing on the delayed payments was waived. That ground is therefore no longer available to the Ministry of Works and Transport and therefore, to Government, because they paid and the money was received albeit belatedly. Now, the ministry is stopped from relying on that as grounds for termination.

The minority report alludes to an all-expenses paid trip to South Africa by a company known as Workshops Electronics from 7th -10th November 2016 for a one Ronald Amanyire and another trip by a team comprising of Nyamaizi Immaculate, Muwonge Anthony and Eng. Lukoma Fredrick Basaalirwa. The view expressed in the minority report was that these trips constituted gratification to the officers for their roles in assisting SGS to secure the contract.

By any stretch of imagination, we could not get evidence connecting the alleged trips to SGS to qualify them as gratification to the named officials.

The minority report further states that a one Eng. Denis Sabiiti, the then commissioner, transport regulation and chairman of the contracts committee that awarded the contract resigned as commissioner in the Ministry of Works and Transport and joined SGS as a consultant, earning US$ 3,000 per month. 

Whether the said obligation is true or not, we do not find any justification to impute fraud on the part of SGS for the alleged employment. If Eng. Sabiiti had resigned his office as alleged, he was free to be employed anywhere, including at SGS. In any event, the alleged employment was past the conclusion of the contract.

The minority report further states that the contract is void for not having been drawn by the Attorney-General as required by Article 119(4)(b) of the Constitution. However, the majority report notes that while non-compliance with Article 119(4)(b) of the Constitution would vitiate the contract, the said contract was subjected to the clearance by the Attorney-General under Article 119 of the Constitution and according to the majority report, it was therefore valid.

We agree with the observation by the majority report that having been cleared by the Attorney-General, the contract is valid. In practice, the Attorney-General's Chambers do not draw all the agreements. Officials from the Attorney-General's Chambers may participate in the negotiations and drawing of the agreements but the line Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) draw the agreements and subject them to the scrutiny and clearance by the Attorney-General, whose role is to ensure that they are in compliance with the Constitution and do not infringe on any other provisions of the laws of the land. The policy consideration of any agreement is the mandate of the line ministry, not the Attorney-General.

Therefore, once the Attorney-General has cleared the agreement, he has discharged his mandate and the agreement is valid and so was this agreement between SGS and Ministry of Works and Transport, in our opinion.

The question remaining is whether this agreement could lawfully be terminated by Government. Mr Speaker, I would like to point out that clause 7.8.5 reads, “In the event that this contract is terminated by the Government of Uganda or the Ministry of Works and Transport for any cause; except as provided in this contract before the expiry of the term herein provided or any extension or renewal of any such a term, the Ministry of Works and Transport shall pay to the provider at law or in equity, in respect of the termination of the contract, 75 per cent of the value of the total investment made by the provider or one 100 per cent of the expected income of the provider from the services, whichever is greater being the cost of demobilisation.”

Mr Speaker, it is worth noting that clause 7.8.5 is very much skewed in favour of SGS, especially since the variables being referred to in the event of termination, which include total investment made or expected income of SGS, whichever is higher, are all within the knowledge and control of SGS and not the Government of Uganda. It would therefore be a potentially costly event to terminate the contract, especially without cause.

Our considered opinion is as follows;
We have not found any cause that would legally entitle the ministry to terminate the agreement without being in breach. If it purported to terminate the agreement, Government would be exposed to colossal damages, pursuant to Clause 7.8.5 of the agreement, which could be in hundreds of millions of dollars.

It is our considered opinion, therefore, that rather than termination, the Government should opt for engaging SGS for renegotiations, wherein all the recommendations of the majority report would be addressed. 

The renegotiation would be in line with Clause 7.6 of the agreement, which provides and I quote; “The contract can be terminated or amended, based on the mutual agreement of the parties.” 

We so advise. Our advice is that rather than termination, which will subject Government to colossal payment of damages, we engage with SGS, renegotiate and embody all the concerns of the committee of Parliament. I so advise.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you will recall that we had debated this matter. It was only that aspect because the decision was whether to terminate or to renegotiate. I think the Presiding Officer then referred this matter for the opinion of the Attorney-General, which opinion has now been rendered to this House. 

Therefore, we can have a short intervention; either have points of clarification with the Attorney-General and then we take a decision. I will start with the Member for Ayivu, hon. Benard Atiku. It is not a debate; it is point of clarification.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have just heard from the Deputy Attorney-General that in their considered opinion, they support the majority report. However, from the report of the committee, the majority members of the committee signed the minority report, which in my opinion became the majority report. Can he clarify to the House what he meant that they have gone with the majority? Is it that they have followed the minority report or the majority report with few members or minority members who appended their signatures?

Last but not least, he has opined that as Government, they would welcome the idea of reviewing or renegotiating that contract, yet the entire contract actually – If you remember very well where the debate arose, it was because the public was being forced to go into these facilities that SGS had constructed for inspection of their vehicles, yet we know that as per the law, it is the Inspector of Vehicles (IOV) in every district that is entitled to inspect vehicles and declare whether they are road worthy or not.

Therefore, wouldn’t it be also clear for him to tell the House or the public whether it will be ideal, for instance, for members to decide whether to go to IOV or to the SGS? According to what I know, it is the IOV who has a legal mandate in terms of vehicle inspection. (Applause)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the Attorney -General to help us understand whether in that contract allowing us to terminate the contract if SGS breached the contract.

According to what the Attorney-General stated, it seems Government does not have any area we can base on to terminate. When the minority report was read here, areas were pointed out, to the extent that SGS had not even committed any amount of money as per the contract. They only paid the day they were asked to come and appear before the committee.

Mr Speaker, SGS breached a contract of conniving with workers of Ministry of Works and Transport and got the security guarantee before the time they were supposed to be given that guarantee. 

SGS was supposed to be supervised by Ministry of Works and Transport but there was no single report submitted to what performance SGS had put on the ground for all the time. It only had an office of one person who has just come in and it is the same person who was given a ticket to go to South Africa to transact and deal with SGS. Which evidence do we need to have SGS terminated? Can the Attorney-General really tell us? (Applause)

MR AKAMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the Attorney-General; while interpreting clause 7 of the contract, did the Attorney-General take trouble to calculate and tell us exactly that they based on the amount that we have so far established that SGS incurred?

The Government is bound to lose this amount of money because from the report, it appears that SGS has not incurred any costs ever since it started. It is riding on Ugandans’ monies so it has nothing to lose. I propose that the Attorney-General clarifies whether indeed there is any coin that SGS has invested in this country, in regard to that contract. Thank you.

MR KAMUSIIME: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My concern is about clause 7.8.5 that provides for the termination of the contract. The Attorney-General has talked about the consequences of terminating a contract and I wonder whether he took trouble to read through this, as the one who is tasked to advise Government before we assent to such agreements. Did the Attorney-General understand the consequence of such high costs of terminating a contract? 

MR EITUNGANANE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the Attorney-General regarding SGS because I remember around 2013; the same company was blacklisted by the Government during inspection of goods. Was there any due diligence carried out before the contract was awarded to SGS? Thank you.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is a time a businessman came up with a plan to develop Constitutional Square and there was a national outcry that it should not be done. This Government was forced to compensate that person for his designs and for Government refusing to give him the contract. This is continuing here. Look at the legal contradictions in the preceding clauses of the agreement, as espoused by my brother -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, we are not debating. Please raise the clarification.

MR ANYWARACH: Our learned friend is saying the negotiations endanger us because SGS is on the better side. However, as he was concluding, he reached a clause that said we can renegotiate or terminate the agreement. How then will that be possible? What kind of legal contradiction is that? You claim that the agreement is strictly in favour of SGS and that we will be injured if we terminate but again you are saying, Government can enter into any agreement with SGS under the same agreement in the last clause that you mentioned.

The clarification I am seeking is: Doesn’t this generate legal contradictions and isn’t there a vested interest being protected here? Thank you.

MR MBABAALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am in agreement with the Attorney-General that we need to renegotiate the contract. When he was reading, I did not hear of any local content being considered. Above all, we need to know the repatriation of dividends against local content.

When we talk about local content, we are not talking about employees only. We are talking about shareholding as well, whereby the shares will be floated on the stock exchange and Ugandans can also buy. Therefore, I am of the opinion that renegotiation of the contract will be the best answer. I rest my case.

MS KATUSHABE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the Attorney-General to clarify whether the police, as the institution mandated to inspect vehicles, was consulted and if they agreed with you to go ahead and sign the contract. 

Secondly, the Attorney-General said that most parts of the contract were handled by the line ministry and yet we know that all contracts are drafted by the Solicitor-General, who is under the Attorney-General’s office. Did you see that this contract benefits Ugandans? Thank you very much.

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence. I would like to know from the Attorney-General whether we are safe. Do we really need to have your office continue being in existence? (Laughter) Are you helping us, as a country? You have reached the extent of telling us that everything lies in the other entities such as the ministries. Why are you there? 

You should be the one to scrutinise and protect the interests of Ugandans and close all the loopholes in the agreement instead of leaving people to resort to attacking the likes of the small Sabiiti. You are supposed to have done all the scrutiny and closed all the loopholes. Therefore, are we safe, Attorney-General?

MR OBOTH: I think that question is very disabling on my part. However, the Attorney-General, in his opening remarks, said that they had listened to the debate and read the reports from both sides. One would wonder, if the Attorney-General had only a set of facts without listening to the debate, would his advice be different?

We believe that the law is a living organ. Even if you listen to the debate here, if a wrong is pointed out, you have to apply the facts to the law and advise accordingly. When he said that, I asked myself, “Did the debate influence him?” I believe that is not true but I would like to get clarification from him. 

Honourable Attorney-General, you know I worked in that office. When I came to Parliament, the first thing I did, within three months, was to chair a committee that was investigating the agreement signed between Government and Umeme. I realised that we needed to do a little more; we should customise our agreements and make them reflective. 

Just like what you asked, are we safe? I know that you will respond to us, but in your view, do you think this agreement is the best deal for Uganda? 

MS ADEKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the learned Attorney-General about on whose side he really is. I have read the report and on page 4, the Attorney-General says that they would not, by any stretch of imagination, link the favours that were given to the officials to SGS.

Learned Attorney-General, without stretching your imagination, did you even consider the evidence that the minority report had? In one of the addendums, Amanyire is said to have signed for materials that were supplied by the company, which paid for his travel. Did you even bother to read the minutes of the committee because in those minutes - I personally attended the committee proceedings - Amanyire admitted to being funded to go to South Africa by SGS people.

Learned Attorney-General, did you consider all this? At least you should have mentioned it in your report that we have read that the committee minutes indicate that Amanyire says this but we do not believe Amanyire when he says that he was funded by SGS. You should have been very clear.

Therefore, give us clarification on this issue. Did you consider the overwhelming evidence that indicated and connected the officials who travelled at the ministry to having received funding from SGS? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the Attorney-General respond to this then we take more. 

Honourable members, I alerted you earlier that we invited the Auditor-General to make some statements. That office is busy; we invited him for 3 o’clock and it is coming to 4 o’clock, so on top of the hour, I will adjust the Order Paper by pausing this and allowing the Auditor-General. Thereafter, we will come back to this issue.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, the first concern was that the members who signed the majority report also signed the minority report and the impression was created that the same number or even more of the members of the committee signed the minority report as opposed to the majority report. To the best of my knowledge, what was discernible from the record was that the majority report was signed by 14 members and the minority report was signed by nine members. In any event, the issue to us as the Attorney-General’s office was not how many signed the minority report or the majority report but the facts as they were in the report. 

Secondly, there was a concern that the public was being forced to subject themselves to inspection and that this inspection should have been done by the Inspector of Vehicles (IOV). That is a policy matter although to my knowledge, not as Attorney-General, I know that the Inspector of Vehicles inspects motor vehicles which have been prone to accidents –(Interjections)– Not for this role. 

Thirdly - (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, some of us are dealers in vehicles. From 2010 to 2017, any vehicle imported into Uganda must be inspected by the Inspector of Vehicles in order to pay taxes. If you do not attach the IOV report, Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) does not accept that, that vehicle is fit to be on the road. Is the Attorney-General in order to mislead this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, honourable, do you want to help the Speaker? Proceed, the microphone is on.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, as far as the law is concerned –(Interjections)- the policy - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have allowed the Member.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: This man is the one who signed the contract. (Laughter)

MR BYABAGAMBI: The policy of inspection of vehicles lies solely with the Ministry of Works and Transport. However, the ministry can delegate that function to another Government organ. 

Therefore, initially, the inspection of vehicles was delegated by the Ministry of Works and Transport to the IOV and that is how the function was delegated. Later, the Ministry of Works and Transport took back their function. It is the same as vehicle registration, which is the mandate of the Ministry of Works and Transport but delegated to URA. That is the information I would like to give.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, those of you who will start speaking on the microphone before you have been allowed to speak will never speak. I have said it many times that it confuses the record of Parliament because those going to transcribe the records will not understand what is going on. A Member is making a statement and you are inserting something that is not coherent with the statement. Please, respect the guidance from the Speaker.

If you call for order, we will listen even when you are not on the microphone. I have not heard a voice here that cannot be listened to without a microphone –(Laughter)– and the mere fact that you are using a microphone does not make your point stronger. I have said this many times and I am going to get upset when another Member does it. 

Do not use the microphone before the Speaker allows you to. You can raise your point of order or information without using the microphone. Let us agree on this, as far as principle is concerned. So anybody who has breached this and was entitled to raise either a point of order or information is now disentitled. 

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, another concern was whether in interpreting clause 7, we calculated the exact amount Government would incur in case of termination of the contract. I would like to put it to this House that our mandate, as Attorney-General, is not to look into the cost of termination but rather the legality and the effect. What we saw is as I have quoted in my response. 

The cost implication is a matter of policy and belongs to the relevant ministry. I am advising because I am supposed to look at the agreement and legally advise, from the word and import of the agreement, what would happen if there was termination. The same applies to whether there was due diligence carried out.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Learned Attorney-General, you said on the record that if this contract is terminated without cause, Uganda would lose millions of dollars. Why are you now shying away from making that statement? (Laughter)

MR RUKUTANA: By saying that, we looked at the obligations of SGS - what they were supposed to put in place. According to the contract, they were supposed to put in place so many stations across the country to carry out their activities. Those stations, in our estimation, would cost millions of dollars but we did not go into the specifics. 

I am saying that the same reasoning goes to due diligence. We look at the contract as is presented to us. We were not privy to carrying out due diligence before the contract was awarded. 

There was a concern that there was contradiction because we talked of termination and renegotiation. Mr Speaker, we interpret the documents as are presented to us and we give our justification depending on the express provisions of the agreement. We saw the effect of termination and the provision for renegotiation as advised and I still maintain that if we terminate, we shall pay costs and damages. 

The same goes for local content in the agreement. I told you that policy considerations of whether the agreement contains local content in the body of the provisions of the agreement is the mandate of the line ministry. Issues of local content, in our view, could be addressed when the parties go back to renegotiate the agreement.

The other issue was whether the police was consulted and whether they gave a green light to sign the agreement. The consultations that were carried out did not come out from the body of the documents that were given to us. Rather, it is a presumption that with such an agreement, all the stakeholders are consulted. We only looked at the documents as were provided to us. 

A Member asked whether we are safe and whether we need to have the Attorney-General’s Chambers closed. I can assure this House that you are very safe with the office of the Attorney-General. We have ably advised and guided Government on all legal matters and the sky has never fallen down because of lack of our advice. I assure you that we shall continue to advise Government as far as the legal aspects of any decisions are concerned.

Hon. Oboth asked, if I had not listened to the debate, would my advice be different? My advice was based on the documents as were presented to me. I said we scrutinised the minority and majority reports and we listened to the debate. Both the minority and the majority reports had provisions relating to law. The debate had content, which also had an element of the law. Balancing all the three, we came up with a report, which I have given you. Legally, that is the mandate of the Attorney-General.

Lastly, I was asked on whose side I am. I am on the side of the law. I was not privy to the proceedings of the committee. We only derived our opinion from the agreement and the documents that were presented to us. We were not even privy to the proceedings before the committee. We interpreted the documents that were provided to us and as I said, we listened to the debate on the Floor and came up with this advice.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we will pause this debate and call the next item so that we can deal with the issues that I already communicated about. Immediately after that, we will resume.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON ENTITIES WITH UNQUALIFIED OPINION FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when this matter came up and there were issues raised by Members, I informed you that we would interact with the Auditor-General and come back with some guided opinion on what should happen.

We indeed had this meeting and honourable members, the rules allow us to take expert opinion on matters of this nature; we have done it before. Therefore, I am going to invite the Auditor-General to address this House from the Bar on the specific issue of unqualified, qualified or whatever word and what the implications are in the work of this august House, so that we know exactly what to do with the report that is before us from the Public Accounts Committee. Please allow the Auditor-General to come in. I did not see a rostrum provided for him to speak - oh, it is there. Thank you.

Mr Auditor-General, there are issues that came before this House in relation to a particular motion for the adoption of the report of the Committee on Public Accounts. The particular motion is: “Motion for the Adoption of the Report of the Public Accounts Committee on the Report of the Auditor-General on Entities with Unqualified Opinion for Financial Year 2014/2015”. 

This matter, as I briefed you earlier, attracted debate and we needed to understand properly what the implications of these things are. Indeed, we had a meeting with you and we agreed that today, you would brief the House so that we have a guided debate on this matter and take decisions that are proper. I now invite you to address the House on those aspects.

4.04
THE AUDITOR-GENERAL (Mr John F.S. Muwanga): Mr Speaker, thank you for according me the opportunity to address the House and give clarity on some of the matters, which were raised in our annual report of 2014/2015 to Parliament on the central government, ministries and statutory authorities, in particular regard to matters, which touch a heightened level of unqualified audit opinions while wasteful expenditures persist.

As mandated by Article 163 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and amplified by the National Audit Act, 2008, I am required to audit and report on the public accounts of Uganda.

The Office of the Auditor-General undertook financial audits of the entities therein in that report. I stress the word “financial audit undertaken” in order to avoid confusion with other types of audits, which can be undertaken such as value for money audits or indeed forensic audits.

When a financial audit is undertaken, the Auditor-General provides an opinion as to whether the financial statements are a fair representation of the financial activities of the entities audited. If indeed the financial statements are a fair representation of the financial activities, the audit opinion that would be issued is called an “unqualified opinion” or sometimes casually called a “clean opinion”. 

This unqualified opinion does not tell the whole story other than to confirm that the financials are fairly presented and comply with international standards and reporting guide issued by the Accountant-General of Uganda. An improvement in the number of unqualified opinions obtained from year to year is therefore only an indicative pointer of a likely improvement in the financial reporting by Government ministries and statutory authorities.

The casual use of the word “clean opinion” can be misleading to give the impression that there is no dust. Indeed, the opinion by itself does not tell the whole story. Therefore, there is a need to read the entire audit report of each entity to get the whole story.

The individual entity audit reports will capture and elaborate, where relevant, on such issues such as: One, emphasis of matter, which are matters to be brought to the attention of the reader of the accounts; and two, “other matters”. In order to obtain a full understanding, the whole report on each of the entities must be read in its entirety. If indeed, in the final analysis, a well-informed decision or set of actions are to be undertaken, it is insufficient to consider the opinion only on its own.

For purposes of clarity of information, kindly note the following descriptions of emphasis of matter, other matters and key audit matters. I will start with “emphasis of matter”. An “emphasis of matter” paragraph refers to a matter appropriately presented or disclosed in the financial statements, which in an auditor’s judgment, and is of such importance that it is fundamental to users’ understanding of the financial statement.

The “other matter” paragraph includes findings relating to matters relevant to the users of the report but not presented or disclosed in the financial statements. These usually include control weaknesses, governance matters, service delivery issues and non-compliance with laws and regulations.

Following very recent developments, international audit standards now require the disclosure of key audit matters. Key audit matters are those matters that are, in an auditor’s professional judgment, of most significance in an audit. Key audit matters are considered at the planning stage of an audit and their outcome may influence the opinion that is found on the financial statements of the entity. Irrespective, however, of whether the key audit matter forms a basis of qualification or not, it must be reported on.

Referring back to the issue of a clean opinion, which I touched on earlier, please note that a financial statement may contain billions of shillings of wasteful expenditures and if those expenditures are appropriately captured in the financials then an unqualified (clean) opinion will be given. A classic example of wasteful expenditure is nugatory expenditure such as interest charges, as evidenced. If one recalls and looks at the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for that year, Shs 12 billion, which was released as supplementary expenditure, was appropriately disclosed in the financials and hence, did not attract a qualification.

Wasteful expenditure should not be confused with mischarged expenditure which, if material, will warrant an audit qualification.

Mr Speaker, please permit me to refer you to pages 46, 47 and 48 of my annual report for the year ended 30 June 2015, where I have reported on the Government's consolidated statements. For the benefit of time, I will not read the report verbatim but I shall instead comment on some of the contents under the various headings, which will put into context the matters which I have deliberated upon.

On page 46, I have stated that I conducted the audit in accordance with international standards of auditing, amongst other issues. On page 47, I stated that the consolidated statements were qualified on the basis of mischarge of expenditure - Shs 73 billion and unaccounted for advances of Shs 52 billion. A qualified opinion was issued as the amounts in both instances were material and not properly disclosed in the financial statements.

On page 48, I have talked about emphasis of matter and also other matter. I have also clarified that in compliance with section 24 of the Public Finance Management Act 2005, Shs 465 billion, relating to classified expenditure, is to be audited separately and a separate audit report issued.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, a financial audit can be supplemented with other types of audits in order to obtain a more informed understanding of the activities of an entity. The first type can be a value for money audit, sometimes referred to as a performance audit. 

A value for money audit is an independent examination of whether Government’s undertakings, systems, operations, programmes, activities or operations are functioning in accordance with the principle of the 3E’s - economy, efficiency and effectiveness. In other words, expenditures are being applied in a least cost basis to undertake an activity in the most efficient manner to create the greatest possible impact, like in service delivery.

The second type of supplementary audit, that is audits which supplement the financial audit, can be undertaken as a forensic audit. This refers to a practice of lawfully establishing evidence and facts that are to be presented in a court of law. In other words, in a forensic audit, with the issues that you get, you can proceed directly to court.

Mr Speaker, I again thank you for according me this opportunity and I reassure you of our commitment to work with Parliament in enabling you fulfil your constitutional oversight obligation over public funds. I have also committed three full-time members of my staff to be permanent parliamentary liaison officers to work closely with you. Please, kindly continue to relate with them and my door is always open to you. For God and my country. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Mr Auditor-General, I just have one question and then we will release you. By us talking about entities with unqualified opinions, it does not mean that the entire operations of those entities were clean. It means there are aspects which this Parliament should take interest in and also take decisions on the way forward on some of the issues that you have raised in other parts, other than the financial audits.

MR JOHN MUWANGA: That is absolutely correct. In other words, a clean opinion does not tell this whole story. There are other factors, which have to be looked at. For example, when I talked about wasteful expenditures, those are interest charges and they should be looked at and questions should be asked why. You will not get a qualified opinion if indeed that wasteful expenditure is properly captured in the financial audit. One would need to do another type of audit maybe to bring out some of these other issues if indeed one is to reach a conclusion. Therefore, your interpretation is absolutely correct.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Auditor-General. We receive this very well and we release you to go and carry out other audits and advise us on how to move with other matters. 

Honourable members, that was the Auditor-General. When this matter comes up, I think we will have a good debate. I am sure the chairman will now be able to help us take appropriate decisions on those issues that remain outstanding on the unqualified opinion of the Auditor-General. Thank you very much. Can we go back to other matters? The Attorney-General had finished the first round of questions.

MR KAFUUZI: I was raising a point of order, so I guess I was on point. I was raising a point of order when you paused -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, it is not there now. Do you want to debate? If you have no debate -

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the Office of the Attorney-General on his opinion. He said that there is a Traffic and Road Safety Act, which states that its objective is to regulate vehicles and issue certificates of fitness for the road. Government’s policy today is that we import second-hand vehicles and one has to pay US$ 200 before these vehicles come into the country. 

By drawing that contract, did you take that policy matter into consideration that SGS, which does not manufacture vehicles in Uganda, and depending on its last record - SGS was given a contract to import goods into the country and it messed up. It was dismissed by Government and this is on record. I am seeking clarification whether the person who drew that contract considered those matters.

MR OBUA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Attorney-General, if tomorrow you find me de-campaigning this contract and instead asking the people of Uganda to move to the offices of the Inspector of Vehicles created under section 4 of the Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998, would you think that I would be acting in contravention of any law of this country?

Secondly, under Article 119 of the Constitution, one of the functions of the Attorney-General is to draw and peruse agreements, contracts, conventions, by whatever name called. That is in the Constitution. The Attorney-General stated on record that for this particular contract, the office of the Attorney-General cleared it. Attorney-General, would clearance in your opinion be construed to mean drawing and perusing through contracts such as these? Thank you. (Applause)

MS RWABUSHAIJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Attorney-General mentioned, in line with what was captured in the minority report, that taxes were paid after the commencement of the committee investigations. Can he clarify what the implication of people paying after they have been questioned is? Isn’t that also part of manipulation of the process? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think that was explained. The Attorney-General said that by Government accepting the money late, they agreed to the irregularity, so we cannot cite it as a problem.

MR OCHEN: Mr Speaker, the Attorney-General stood on the Floor of Parliament to assure this House that his office had cleared this project. However, later on, when he was winding up his submission, he said that there was need to review. 

We would like to find out from the Attorney-General to whom he had left that task to, which he is now talking about, and what was his intention in not addressing that specific part at the time when he was clearing the project? Thank you.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. If the Attorney-General had seen this agreement before, what advice would he have given to the Ministry of Works and Transport? I would like to find that out from the Attorney-General. We know that the role of the Attorney-General is to advise Government. If this is a bad agreement, what are you going to renegotiate for? 

Secondly, it is glaring in this country that SGS has been blacklisted. The minority report also pointed out that people have been bribed, including giving them jobs. Didn’t you think that this was something, which your office should have investigated? How about the outcry of Members of Parliament in this House and the public at large? Now you come here and you give your advice. Is that the right advice you would have given on this contract? Still on the side of SGS, what are you going to renegotiate for?

MR AOGON: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The matters we are talking about involve issues of facts and law. The Attorney-General is here to advise. I am therefore seeking advice in form of clarification. 

Learned Attorney-General, if Ugandans today decided to take their vehicles to the IOV for inspection and shun SGS, would it construe a breach of contract? I need you to answer that. If I personally kept my vehicle away from SGS and instead took it to the IOV and showed evidence that it had been checked by the IOV, does it tantamount to any breach of contract? Thank you so much.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When you are dealing in business, there is what is called a cost-benefit analysis.  It is on the basis of the cost-benefit analysis that one will decide whether to go into business and either make a profit or loss. Now, Attorney-General, you said you love Ugandans, did you look at the cost-benefit analysis and see what Ugandans are going to benefit?

Two, we have an average of about two million vehicles. Two million at Shs 108,000 is about Shs 360 billion, if we took them all to SGS. Now, Shs 360 billion is paid in one year. The investment SGS has put in, is it equal to or even a tenth of what they are going to collect from us in the five years?

Finally, supposing all Ugandans parked their cars or supposing we decided to say, if we meet you, you ask us and we fight; what would you do? What would you do if we refused to take our cars to SGS because we are saying Government colluded with that company to cheat us? 

MR ARIKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Article 119 (4) of the Constitution is very clear on the role of the Attorney-General. It is becoming a practice, probably maybe even part of the law in this country, that every time there is scrutiny of a contract, the Attorney-General comes here and warns, “Oh! If you try to get out, you will pay. Umeme, oh!  If you get out before, you will pay.” (Applause)

Mr Speaker, if the only thing our lawyer, the legal advisor of the Government of Uganda, can do whenever we want to have recourse to these contracts is to tell us, “dare not, you will pay”, what then is the role of the Attorney-General in advising and provision of legal services to this Government?

The second thing I would like to ask the Attorney-General is: Yes, indeed he talked about investments that have been made by SGS, would he like to confirm to Parliament whether or not SGS has set up all the stations that it was supposed to set up in this country?

Finally, learned Attorney-General, would you like to tell Parliament whether or not, after your opinion, we should not recommend termination? If we decided not to take your advice, would Parliament have broken any law? Thank, Mr Speaker.

MR MUGOYA: Mr Speaker, allow me to use this phone. (Interjections)– I am seeking permission and for your information, my sister, the Speaker is the custodian of all our rules. So, with your permission I have only an issue to do with – Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What I am going to say pleases those who were calling me to order. 

I do not have the report with me but the majority report and even the minority report point to one fact: the conduct of Mr Sabiiti. The evidence from Ministry of Works and Transport is to the effect that this contract was virtually engineered by none other than Mr Sabiiti. It was pioneered by none other than Mr Sabiiti and above all, it was Mr Sabiiti – in the words of the Minister of Works and Transport – who carried this document and handed it over to the office of the Attorney-General. I would like to find out from the Learned Attorney-General whether the maxims of actus reus and mens rea do not apply in this case. (Laughter) I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the official languages of this House are English and Kiswahili. Actus reus and mens rea are not necessarily English words. (Laughter)

MR MUGOYA: Mr Speaker, allow me to translate the legal maxims into the ordinary English language. I was trying to find out from the Learned Attorney-General if the conduct, which is the actus reus, and the intention, which is the mens rea, were put together, he cannot draw an inference that engineer Sabiiti is actually culpable in this matter or is responsible for whatever we are grappling with as a House?

MR OTHIENO: Mr Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. I have few clarifications to seek from the Learned Attorney-General in regard to the recommendation he has given the House. 

One, I would like to know whether the Attorney-General considered the futility of the recommendation he is making to the House, considering that the issue of negation is provided for in the contract and it is very categorical. The terms under which negation can take place are provided for in that contract and they are very categorical. 

Attorney-General, did you ever consider the futility of the recommendation for renegotiation, which you are giving to the House, knowing very well that, that provision is in the contract and it is very categorical in terms of negotiations relating only to price rise and not even binding that SGS has to accept? In the same regard, I would also like to know whether he considered that forcing SGS to the negotiating table would not amount to a breach of contract for which the country would pay severely.

Furthermore, I would like to find out from the Attorney-General something in line with the payment. He has told this House that if this contract is terminated, this country will pay dearly. Honourable Attorney-General, did you consider the implications or the cost that this country would incur if the Government failed to provide the number of vehicles for inspection to enable SGS make profits? Remember that it is provided for in that contract that Government must provide a sufficient number of vehicles that can make profit sense for SGS. The same contract says that in case of failure, automatically Government would compensate SGS –(Member timed out) - Just one minute, Mr Speaker. I beg.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you take all the time, when will the other Members speak?

MR OTHIENO: Mr Speaker, the other thing I would like to know is whether the Attorney-General considered the implications of having the contract signed by Mr Sabiiti, his immediate resignation after signing the contract, and the provision in that contract that the contract should never be made known to anybody apart from Sabiiti and SGS.

Lastly, did the Attorney-General consider the fact that Workshop Electronics is the official supplier of all the testing equipment used by SGS? This is important because he has told this House that he did not see any connection. Mr Speaker, those are the clarifications I am seeking.

MR NIRINGIYIMANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Attorney-General has told the House that by renegotiating, the Government can save some of the colossal sums of money lost to SGS in the said bad agreement. The clarification I would like to seek from the Attorney-General is: At what point did you realise that we can save money on behalf of Government? Was it at the point Members raised issues or it was at the point where you were scrutinising the documents before you?

Secondly, since your office was involved in scrutinising the validity of these documents and all other people, in the process of generating these documents, could there have been some mishaps? Don’t you think your office is liable for any mishap in the process, other than the other people, because you are the clearing house of Government documents?

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I seek clarification from the Learned Attorney-General. In case procedural mistakes were made, doesn’t that mean that the contract is invalid? Secondly, is your opinion as Attorney-General binding?

MR BAGOOLE: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I have two issues to raise. Mr Attorney-General, we have been told that there is some pre-inspection fee paid at the source; for instance, if the vehicle is to be imported from Japan, somebody pays pre-inspection fees and the inspector from Uganda is just there. In your opinion, did you consider the issue of wasteful expenditure because Ugandans pay more than twice? Somebody first pays when the vehicle is in Japan and again pays other fees to SGS when the car arrives in Uganda.

Basing on the answer you are about to give me, do you think there is no serious reason why I may suggest that whoever was involved in drawing the agreement should be investigated in a forensic manner?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I would like to reiterate what I said at the beginning. The mandate of the Attorney-General is not to delve into policy issues, for example regarding agreements. Our mandate is to ascertain whether the agreements are not in breach of our Constitution and other laws. Issues of policy implementation and consequences are matters of the implementing ministries, departments and agencies.

Most of the questions you are asking me should be directed to the Ministry of Works and Transport. As far as we are concerned, there was nothing in the agreement that breached any provisions of the Constitution or other laws of Uganda. There is nothing that was against or what we would consider an illegally binding article against any law. Bearing that in mind, I am going to respond to a few of your observations. 

Looking at the agreement and the evidence put before us, and further bearing in mind that we were not in the committee neither were we involved in the negotiations of the agreements, we only examined the provisions to ensure consistency with the Constitution and other laws. I would like to respond to a few questions, which are not of policy nature –(Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, hon. Hamson Obua made it clear when he quoted Article 119 of the Constitution. I am going to be specific and I will cite Article 119(4)(b), which says that the functions of the Attorney-General shall include the following: “(b) to draw and peruse agreements, contracts, treaties, conventions and documents by whatever name called, to which the Government is a party or in respect of which the Government has an interest.” 

Actually, if you peruse an agreement and you were not part of drawing it up, you are at fault. Mr Speaker, the Attorney-General for that matter is proceeding to portray that he does not know his constitutional mandate. Therefore, is he in order to proceed in such a manner that attracts us to proceed under rule 90 of the Rules of Procedure or on a vote of censure since he does not know what to do? We have many competent Members from both sides of the House. In fact, if the President wishes, he could pick from this side as well. Does his manner of proceeding not attract Parliament to proceed under rule 90 of the Rules of Procedure and should he be heard? 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Whether you want to proceed under rule 90 or whichever rule, that is a matter you can form an opinion on because it is a provision of our Rules of Procedure and we can activate it any time. However, there must be a basis.  

On the constitutional matter you raised, I wish you had read it further and looked at clause (5). The last time I read it, it said that sometimes the Attorney-General receives documents negotiated from elsewhere but ascertains their quality, authenticity and legality by using Article 119(5). Honourable member, would you like to refresh yourself with Article 119(5)?

MR ANYWARACH: Article 119(5) reads thus: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, no agreement, contract, treaty, convention or document by whatever name called, to which the Government is a party or in respect of which the Government has an interest, shall be concluded without legal advice from the Attorney-General, except in such cases and subject to such conditions as Parliament may by law prescribe.” 

I am wondering which law we have prescribed that allows agreements to be smuggled by any officials of Government and that such agreements shall be considered as what was prescribed by Parliament and then the Attorney-General takes responsibility. That is where the contradiction comes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Constitution is holistic. It takes care of every situation. Article 119(5) is clear; it foresees a situation where agreements are drafted and negotiated elsewhere. What is required of the office of the Attorney-General is to check its constitutionality. That is in the Constitution. 

All agreements where Government is going to be party will either be drafted by the Attorney-General or will not become binding unless the Attorney-General has approved them. Those are the two situations. In this case, the agreement was drafted elsewhere – Please, this will not be the first and last case. All Government ministries, departments and agencies draft their own agreements these days without even involving the Attorney-General. However, they bring the documents to the Attorney-General for perusal and confirmation to prove that they are legally proper documents. They only test is the legal soundness of the document.

Honourable members, this is what it is. We should not argue as if we are not looking at the law because that is what the law is. The question we should be dealing with is whether they exercised that power properly to peruse the document and took out those bits that were not proper. Otherwise, if the documents were not in conformity with the law, they should have sent it back and recommended that this particular agreement should be defined. Otherwise, you cannot say they must draft all the documents in this country. That is not constitutional. We are a constitutional institution and so, let us respect the provisions of the Constitution.

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise and exhaustive ruling. The Attorney-General, under Article 119 of the Constitution, can draw, peruse and certify that agreements are in conformity with the law. I have told you the practice is that the implementing agencies, with or without the Attorney-General’s participation, can draw agreements and bring them to the Attorney-General’s Chambers for certification. That is the law contained –(Interruption)

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Attorney-General told us that he did not see anything unconstitutional with the contract. 

However, if Attorney-General read that contract, he should have seen that, that contract imposes a monopoly regime in the vehicle inspection business in Uganda, which infringes on the economic rights of Ugandans and other players as provided for in Article 40 of the Constitution. Therefore, is the learned Attorney-General in order to start telling this House that he read the contract, perused it but that he did not see anything unconstitutional, when he knows very well that Article 40 of the Constitution provides for economic rights for Ugandans? 

If he saw or he did not read, let me now tell him that the contract he is saying he did not find any problem with provides for a monopoly inspection by SGS and only SGS, excluding even established firms like Toyota Uganda, Cooper Motors and so on. Is the Attorney-General therefore in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if this agreement was unconstitutional or illegal, we would not be having this debate here. The committee would not have even looked at this issue because the matter would have been legal, dead and buried. If it is illegal, then why are we debating it?

The Attorney-General is saying that there was nothing legally wrong with the agreement and that is why they sanctioned it and told them that it is okay, they can go ahead. As to the other considerations, they were not part of the negotiations. Whatever the Minister of Works and Transport negotiated with these people, those were the terms they agreed upon, inter-party. Otherwise, as for the legality of that agreement - does it violate any laws of this country or does it violate the Constitution. The Attorney-General is of the opinion that it did not. Therefore, they sanctioned the agreement to go ahead. That is what he did and that is why we are here.

What we are now interrogating is: Where we have reached today, what should be the way forward, now that all these matters have been considered, all these concerns have been raised - issues of economic consideration, local content, competition. Is there cause to look at this agreement again or would that amount to reason enough to terminate the contract? That is why the arguments are being presented here.

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, I rise to offer feedback to the Attorney-General and state the problem we have. Having been a chairman, and together with hon. Ann Nankabirwa, hon. Betty Amongi, hon. Ajedra Aridru, hon. Elijah Okupa, hon. Aja Baryayanga and hon. Medard Sseggona, we looked at the Umeme agreement and realized that all the agreements were drafted by four foreign lawyers on behalf of the party contracting with Government. However, the role of the Attorney-General, the office where I worked for nearly nine years, was to peruse and advise clearly. We need to change this, honourable Attorney-General. 

Government draws contracts and is into business with many entities, but when you look at the contracts that we sign, they are bad agreements. If you remember, I asked the Attorney-General whether in his opinion he considered this SGS contract agreement as favourable. The Attorney-General that I know is a very clever man; he avoided answering that question, though I think he just forgot. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, you can now what that committee did. We said the agreements were not favourable that time and they called us names. Right now, the President of Uganda is making sure that what this committee and this House recommended is being implemented. We are doing this country a disservice because people are doing copy and paste. 

I used to customise some of the agreements that I personally handled. There is no reason why you should not put a clause that favours Government -(Applause)- and whenever I could do that, I would put at the end of it all, “Drawn by the Attorney-General’s Chambers.” The only problem is that you find some of these documents are voluminous, some are from the World Bank, dictated by the funders and all they want is the opinion of the Attorney-General, which opinion is drafted in the schedule. You find in – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude, honourable member. We need to find a way forward.

MR OBOTH: The only thing you would find is the opinion of Attorney-General being attached as an annex to the agreement. The Attorney-General by that time put his name and signature and we called that an opinion. 
We need to change the way we do business in this country. We need to be pro-active. We need to change that so that the Attorney-General’s office is involved totally, not simply perusing through this agreement. Perusing should mean drawing and modifying it to suit Government interests. Honourable Ajedra, you were there; I believe you will speak the same way as we used to. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to draw this to a close and we need to move properly. This is where we are. From what you are saying, there could have been mistakes committed by a, b, c, d from the Government side. The question is: Can you revisit those mistakes on SGS? Can it now become a problem of SGS where now you must terminate the contract? Would it justify that?

The agreement itself is clear on how it can be terminated. The circumstances are clear on how it can be terminated. Do we have the authority to create new situations where that agreement can be terminated because there is an agreement in place? Bad or good, the big question would be, is it illegal? Bad, yes and whatever good, yes, but is it illegal or is it legal? 

If it was illegal, like I said at the beginning, we would not be having this debate. We would have finished with this thing long time ago and gone with it. However, it is a legally binding document. You see, you cannot say a contract is voidable. You can say clauses or obligations under a contract can be voidable or can be fundamental. Otherwise, you cannot say that a contract is voidable because the conditions under which it can be terminated are in the contract and that is clear.

However, you are saying that in that contract, there are conditions that can be voidable but there are conditions that are fundamental, which you cannot tamper with in the contract. You cannot say the whole contract is voidable. On that, I would still have to find the law or authority that can justify that kind of position. 

If you are saying the contract is void, state what makes it void, but it is not void. If it was void, we would not be having this debate. It has been partly performed and therefore it has been executed. So, the question is: What is the option open to us?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Looking at the nature of the contract and listening to what the Deputy Attorney-General said, our attention in all this is anchored on the phrase, “Government interests encompassing public interests.”

Mr Speaker, you have guided this House and I would wish that once you have guided, we proceed as Parliament. We had a Committee of Parliament that interrogated this contract and surprisingly, they interfaced with all officials. What this Constitution envisaged is that before pen is put to paper by the Attorney-General, the contract must have followed the due diligence vis-à-vis the existing legal framework within the country and whether it is clear or not in any way affecting another existing law negatively.

Secondly, what are the public interests involved in this agreement? Thirdly, at what stage was the input of the Attorney-General required, from the process of drawing, concluding and endorsing this agreement? 

Now when we, at a later stage, come in as Parliament and the committee has ably done its duty, it now remains with this House; do we sanction? Once we say that we sever certain provisions in the agreement and retain others, it is very difficult at this stage because the fundamentals upon which it was built were faulty and they cannot be in any way maintained and sustained. It would require drawing a fresh agreement and for that matter you cannot, in any way, try to rehabilitate or amend the current one.

The only solution would be, let Government do clean work, terminate the agreement and get back to the drawing table and we shall begin from there as Government. That is where our interests lie as Parliament, on behalf of the people of Uganda. Should we shy away from our duty? That is the question we have today and my answer to that is no. As Parliament, this is the point in time where we must rise up to restore sanity in the office of the Attorney-General.

I would like the minister here to put up his hand and say that he is the one responsible and then the other processes of requiring him to account can follow from there. Otherwise, when he continues to support the same yet he does not want to put his foot down and own up, he confuses us. He is saying the contract is good but he does not want to be held accountable for the mess here. After all, he is saying he was not the one there at that point in time.

However, it is not too late to redeem ourselves and this country. We are saying, let us terminate because this was not a fair contract; it was a very fraudulent contract. That is why as Parliament we cannot sustain it the way it is, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, for my duties here as a presiding officer, the record will later say Jacob Oulanyah was presiding when this decision was taken. Therefore, I owe everyone an explanation because my name will be on it as well.

Honourable members, whatever mistake was made in this contract, there is a contract. I said whether bad or good, it does not matter at this stage because there is a legally binding contract. Yes it is. If we accept that fact, which is a fact, then we take the next steps. 

The concerns that have been raised are quite serious. Issues of public interest would have been a matter for the negotiating team and not the Attorney-General. It would have been a matter for the negotiating team because the agreement was brought to the Attorney-General already drafted to check its legality, which is his mandate. Therefore, we do not want to make a mistake. 

To give you a clear example, we had a contract here which was brought to this House and the recommendation of the House was to terminate it. The Attorney-General got up and said that based on the illegality that goes to the root of the contract, it means there was even no contract. Therefore, the advice he gave to the line minister was to go back and initiate a process of getting rid of this contract because in law, it did not exist. That was in relation to Kilembe Mines. Now, you are saying the same Attorney-General does not take care of interests of the people. He did that here on the Floor of Parliament.

However, in this one, his advice is that it is a legally binding contract. There is nothing legal to breach the contract. The best way to go about it is to find a way of telling them to back and deal with these matters again. That is what the Attorney-General is recommending. He is telling the parties to go back because this contract offends what we normally understand as public interests. Factor in all those concerns and then we will be okay with this contract. That is all he is saying.

However, if you say terminate it, there are implications like he has said. If you say, “go and look at it again, factor in all those things that take care of public interest and related things”, it will be okay with Parliament. That is where we are. It will not be I to make this decision pass without giving this clarification. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You are right when you say that your name will be on this. However, your name should be on the side of the people of Uganda not Government workers who are defrauding the people of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, the agreement was based on fraud from day one. The moment you carry civil servants to go and show them something and it is not Government paying but it is you paying, that is bribery and fraud. I had high respect for hon. Rukutana. I like him so much but for today, I have added something because if I left this office today and tomorrow I am employed in another office without an advert, it clearly shows that I was here but already working there. The moment I go there, it is a clear indictor that I have been pushing out information and now am going there to formalize everything and do the same. 

I have no problem with Mr Sabiiti. However, what I am saying is that in whole world, when you leave an office, you are supposed to take a minimum of three years before you can go to another. Mr Sabiiti carried a contract to hon. Rukutana, who cleared it immediately. After that when he retired, the contract he took was for the person who is immediately employing him. Mr Speaker, to say there was no conflict of interest, I fear hon. Rukutana.  - (Interruption)

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. The problem some of us have is that there is clear evidence that SGS, the company we are talking about, has ever contracted business with Government and Government terminated it through the same Attorney-General’s office.  This is a document they have brought to the Attorney General and he allows Government to do the same thing. That is where we have a problem. 

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you. Mr Speaker, the reason I am raising this is that there is only one reason you can do sole sourcing. Where there is a classified expenditure; where you do not want people to know, you can do sole sourcing under closed door but not with this one.

Initially, they had indicated that they wanted three bidders before it became two and eventually one. The Attorney General would not say that for fairness and public interest, advertise this contract so that we get the right person who would come with a fair price for the people of Uganda. 

SGS (French for General Society of Surveillance) was disqualified in Uganda that is when Intertek came in. It was done because they had done a bad job and that they had even audited it through the Ministry of Works and raised a bill of 50 billion. They were saying where is the audit report? He knows it has been in the Auditor-General’s report. A company which has a very bad name, blacklisted and the Attorney General who disqualified the contract with the Ministry of Works is the same person clearing the same company - (Interruption)

MR OTIENO: Thank you, hon. Nandala. The information I would like to give you is that knowing their background in Uganda, when this company was bidding for this document, they did not use their name as SGS Uganda but they fronted another company in that bid. It is not SGS that signed the contract, they are two different companies. They knew their background that they had a very bad trail. The records are very clear that the company that bid was SGS Uganda not that one.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you can see for yourself that this deal from day one is full of corruption and we can justify that it is fraudulent. The moment something is fraudulent, it means it is a bad contract and it is inherently incurable.

MR OPOLOT ISIAGI: Thank you, my colleague for giving way. The information I am giving is based on what he has been saying. Automatic termination comes in once there is unethical conduct such as fraud without the fear that we shall be paying a lot. Therefore, we should base on that and terminate the agreement.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, it is very clear. For the first time we would like to see the judges of the High Court who will go against the people of Uganda. I would like to warn the people who are cheating the people of Uganda that you can steal other things but not such an item of public good, wanting everybody to take his car to only one person whom you have given so that he collects money without any hindrance because he has given you only a half a billion or a billion so you make the people to lose about a trillion or 1.8 trillion. I do not agree.

Mr Speaker, I would like to plead with you; we can tell you we are going to go with you down. All of us in the House today have agreed plus the Rt Honourable Deputy Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I do not have a vote. (Laughter)

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Nandala Mafabi for giving way. I would like to give a brief piece of information that as we were looking at this, I made a recall of our contract law. It states that a contract which shows any element of vitiating factor can be nullified. Vitiating factors to contract are those factors, for instance, which will cripple or invalidate the contract. They are named as:

    1. Mistakes
    2. Duress
    3. Misrepresentation where we find these things of fraud
    4. Undue influence and illegality are the determinants of the invalidity of a contract.

Therefore, in all these we see all these playing; illegality is even more when you compare with the Traffic Act that we have. We see it totalling to an illegality because between the Inspector of Vehicles and SGS, which one takes precedence? When you see Article 40 of the Constitution on the economic right as hon. Nandala Mafabi was saying is actually violated –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, you will get your time. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I recall the law which says that before a person would get a license the licensing officer was the one to inspect the vehicle. I do not think we have even amended the law. That is why you remember that at that time, it was mandatory for the police to inspect your vehicle before you could get a license. We reminded the police that it is the licensing officer to inspect that is when cars ceased to go to the IOV’s office. 

However, if we have decided to bring this, the only person who would now license the vehicle is the one to inspect it. The licensing officer in this respect is Uganda Revenue Authority (URA). I would like to tell you –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I need you to wind up what you are saying so that we can see how to move.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The practice just here on Port Bell Road is that when you buy a brand new bus and you want to put it on the road, you take it to the police for the IOV to inspect after which, it is transferred just to the next door to the Ministry of Works and Transport where the transport licensing board sits to get the license for you to be able to operate on the road. That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I would like to plead with the Members of Parliament. The people who are working for Government, on the other side, the Executive have done a job which is not in the interest of the people of Uganda. The Constitution of Uganda says that anybody who does something contrary to the interest of the people of Uganda will first of all be held liable for the crime committed because he has made the people of Uganda to suffer. 

At the same time, if it is a contract which you signed which is bad, we shall deal with it. We task the ministry of works as the service regulator - but for now as parliament, I would like to ask Members of Parliament that we agree that this contract is bad and it has been fraudulently drawn, we terminate. (Applause)

5.18
MR GABRIEL AJEDRA (NRM, Vurra County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the debate and I am not going to argue about the legality of the contract. You have pronounced yourself on that. The issue that is here and from the little contract laws that I know, we have three options available to us as Parliament. That is in case the contract is in force, first, you either allow the contract to run its course and by infliction of time, it will terminate or since there are provisions - I have not read the agreement; there are provisions in every contract for negotiations, renegotiations. 

The third option is to terminate as honourable colleagues have said. In addition, I am not here for termination or anything. In all the options as you know, there is going to be a cost to Treasury and to the country.
Now, when you are making a decision, for those of us who have been managers, you have to do a cost benefit analysis of that decision that you are going to take. I think it is only proper that we do a cost analysis of all the options so that at the end of the day, what is best for the country is what we shall go with.

Mr Speaker, allow me to conclude. One of the problems we have in this country is the fact that - (Interjections) - I need protection, Mr Speaker. In many jurisdictions, there is the person who tests and inspects vehicles - that is the licensing officer he was talking about. 

The person who inspects that vehicle, licenses it and the person who enforces are different. You cannot have the same person as in the previous case where you have the police inspecting the vehicles and issuing what we call road worthiness. The police are there for enforcement purposes- their work is not for inspection.

Therefore, it means that that inspection role must be outside the police and that is where the Minister of Works and Transport comes in. They are the people who set the policies, give guidelines and the ones who present what we call standards. In many jurisdictions, that is what happens.

I can tell you as an example that in Botswana, where I worked, under Ministry of Works and Transport, we had what was called the “licensing authority” and their role was to inspect every vehicle every year and the payments would be made to the revenue authority - they did not receive the money and the police enforce the law. 

Therefore, we have a situation where we have a dual role being played by some agencies in Government and that is the root cause of the problem where we are finding ourselves in – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member does not have a right to speak. He has used the microphone before I allowed him. (Laughter)

MR AJEDRA: Therefore, Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I think we need to look at our laws- they are the root cause of our problems in this country. If you look at all these problems, they are because of the dual roles as I said, played by agencies. You cannot be the policeman, investigator, be the judge and be the Supreme Court. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, from the look of issues, this is a decision we cannot take now. We will take this decision tomorrow. However, for purposes of understanding where we are, I hear the word “fraud” being used. Fraud is not such a word that you use casually. Fraud is one of those things that require strict proof. Let me give you two examples: In land transaction, for example, the certificate of title is supposed to be conclusive proof of ownership. That ownership can only be impeached by fraud, which fraud must be strictly proved.

I remember a case where a judge introduced a concept of constructive fraud where he said, yes, a certificate of title is conclusive proof that you should know and if it is transferred to you and you had no knowledge of such fraud, it cannot be visited on you.

However, the judge then said that if for fear of learning the truth you did not investigate the title, then fraud could be imputed on you. In other words, it is a strict area that we need to interrogate.

In another area where there are allegations that a signature has been forged and it is proved that such occurred - one judge humorously said that where there is forgery of somebody’s signature, the space where the signature appears should be treated as if it was empty but it requires strict proof.

Then the third aspect, which I want you to go back and reflect on is who determines that there is fraud. Who determines the question of fraud? Can we or should it be the courts of law. If there is fraud, can this Parliament establish fraud or should it be another arm of this Government to establish strictly that there is fraud in which case those things can be done. 

Therefore, let us be careful how we use the word “fraud” in articulating our issues and how we conclude on this matter.

Honourable members, I will defer further consideration of this matter to tomorrow 2 O’clock where probably we will be able to take a decision if we are properly constituted to take a decision. Next item.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON ENTITIES WITH UNQUALIFIED OPINION FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we were receiving the articulation on this matter from the chair of the committee and some matters arose and we paused his presentation. I am certain he is ready to proceed with his presentation of his report.

5.27
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Gerald Karuhanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to present the Public Accounts Committee report of the Auditor General on entities with unqualified opinion for Financial Year ending 2014/2015.

Mr Speaker, there are 20 entities that had unqualified opinion of the Auditor General for the Financial Year 2014/15 and I will give a brief on each entity considering that our report is quite voluminous.

The first entity is the Judiciary and in this financial year, the first issue for the Judiciary is:

    1. Accrued expenditure commitments on rent

Contrary to section 23(1) of the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA), 2015, that prohibits the accounting officer from entering into a contract, transaction, or agreement that binds Government to a financial commitment for more than one financial year or which results in a contingent liability, audit noted that Shs 7.4 billion accrued on rent. More so, the multi-year expenditure commitments were not authorised by Parliament.

The committee noted that: 
1. 	The accounting officer deliberately breached the established commitment control systems as enshrined in Section 23 of the PFMA, 2015. 
2. 	The rental liability/spending of the Judiciary is spiralling and unsustainable for the country.
3. 	Delayed payment of rent was as a result of poor planning which may lead to possible eviction of the courts, causing embarrassment to the country.

The committee recommends:
1. 	The Permanent Secretary and Secretary to Treasury (PS/ST) should reprimand the accounting officer for failure to execute his obligations in accordance with the provisions of Sections 78 and 79 (1) (m) of the PFMA.
2. 	The accounting officer should as a matter of urgency follow up this matter within three months from the adoption of this report. 
3. 	The Auditor-General should verify validity of the rental commitments and report to Parliament within one month from the adoption of this report.

    2. Budget performance - unimplemented activities

Although the Judiciary received 100 per cent of its approved budget (Shs 87.1 billion), audit noted that total payments amounted to Shs 87.04 billion resulting into unutilised amount of Shs 119 million.

This caused non-implementation of some planned activities mainly disposal of appeal cases in the Supreme Court and Court of Appeal and disposal of suits in the high and lower courts.

The committee observed that: 

1. 	While the Judiciary states that it is underfunded, its absorption capacity remains low due to reported understaffing in some departments and courts which hampers utilisation of released funds. For instance, the accounting officer explained that unimplemented activities majorly arose due to the lack of headship in the first three quarters of the financial year and this affected work in the Supreme Court. 

2. 	The committee noted that as at January 2016, two Justices of the Supreme Court, two Justices of the Court of Appeal and 16 Judges of the High Court were appointed though belatedly.

The recommendations are: 

    1. The Executive should prioritise recruitment and facilitation of the Judiciary for efficiency and effectiveness in delivering their mandate. 
    2. The balance of Shs 119.3 million which was unutilised should be accounted for. 
Mr Speaker, the third issue under the Judiciary, is staffing gaps and I would like to appeal to Members to peruse through that. 

Directorate of Public Prosecutions

Non-deduction of withholding tax from rental payments to NSSF 

Contrary to the provisions of the Income Tax Act, the directorate paid a total of Shs 1.7 billion to National Social Security Fund (NSSF) for rent during the financial year. However, six per cent withholding tax amounting to Shs 103 million was not deducted and, therefore, not remitted to Uganda Revenue Authority. The accounting officer submitted that NSSF had been exempted from withholding tax in the Financial Year 2013/2014 which was however, not renewed in Financial Year 2014/2015 as required if the exemption is to persist, and continued paying rent without deducting withholding tax with the belief that NSSF was still withholding tax exempt.  

Observation

The non-deduction of withholding tax was an act of negligence on the part of the accounting officer which attracts interest, penalties and also undermines revenue collection.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the Uganda Revenue Authority should recover Shs 103.9 million from NSSF within one month from the date of adoption of this report.

Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs

    1. Escalating contingent liabilities for court awards and compensations. Mr Speaker, the Auditor-General noted that Shs 4.3 trillion was recorded as contingent liabilities in cases against Government as at 30 June 2015. The contingencies increased by Shs 34.7 billion from the previous year’s position of Shs 4.295 trillion. 
	The contingent liabilities comprise of cases that have been filed against Government pending hearing and cases before courts of law.
 
    2. Outstanding court awards, compensations and other liabilities Audit noted that the outstanding amount in court awards, compensations and other liabilities had accumulated to Shs 479.2 billion by 30 June 2015. The bulk of this figure was comprised of unsettled court awards and compensations which amounted to Shs 477.7 billion, while the other liabilities amounted to Shs 1.52 billion having accumulated over the last four financial years. 
	It was further observed that some of the cases attract interest ranging from six to 40 per cent per annum on the court awards. As a result of the delay to payments, several amounts have doubled and Government continues to lose money due to accumulated interest on the principal amounts. 

    3. Budgeting for court awards and compensations 
	The Auditor-General, noted that court awards and compensations have continued to accumulate over the years yet budget allocations and releases have not improved to cover the obligations. 

    4. Inadequate records management
	Members, you could refer to that.
    5. Inconsistencies in payments selection criteria 
Mr Speaker, the observations of the committee are as follows: 

    i. The committee noted that the ministry did not possess an organised list of claimants because upon request it was never availed. 
    ii. There is lack of clear policy and legal framework on procedure and criteria of paying court awards and compensations. 
    iii. Court awards are not paid as expected on first-in-first-out basis hence occasioning arbitrariness and unfairness in handling compensations. This arbitrariness is the main cause in the astronomical rise in the amounts through accumulated interest. 
    iv. The committee observes that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has in cases of mandamus taken it upon itself to pay claimants against established procedure and usurping the mandate of Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. The committee is concerned that the PS/ST has taken it upon himself to unlawfully re-negotiate these awards and effect payment exposing the whole process to potential risk of corruption and outright abuse of office.
Recommendations

The committee recommends that:

    i. The ministry should maintain an updated list of claimants including the status of claimants, amounts due and date of accrual.
    ii. The committee reiterates the 2014 resolution of the House in relation to Government compensation to Haba Group of Companies in February 2012 that a legal framework be promulgated to provide for the fund, procedure or criteria on payments of court awards and compensation.
    iii. Government should provide the list of claimants and a schedule on how to expeditiously clear the Shs 477.7 billion within three months from the adoption of this report.
    iv. Court awards and compensations should be decentralised to the respective MDAs for easy monitoring and subsequent pay off.
    v. The record management systems and department in charge of compensation should be streamlined and restructured with a view of improving efficiency and productivity.

    6. Defence of Government cases by the Attorney-General

Mr Speaker, audit revealed that in some of the Uganda Human Rights Commission (UHRC) cases, the Attorney-General did not file a defence or failed to appear and defend cases filed against Government. 

Information obtained from UHRC indicated a sample of cases from Masaka sessions where cases against the Attorney General were concluded ex parte despite summons being issued, served and received by the Attorney-General.

Mr Speaker, there are a number of cases but in the interest of time, I will just mention one. In the case of AP v. Attorney-General audit noted that the Attorney-General did not appear to defend Government and no clear reason was given. The accounting officer stated that the state attorney at the time was instructed to write an explanation for his failure to attend court by his supervisor, there was no evidence on file that this explanation was given.

Mr Speaker, it is very apparent and it is an issue that is so prevalent that the Attorney-General certainly needs to fix.

The Committee observed that:

    i. There was professional negligence and weak supervision of state attorneys by the director of civil litigation in the ministry.
    ii. The high rate of failure of representation and loss of cases is an indicator of possible connivance between state attorneys and claimants.

Recommendations

    i. The Director Civil Litigation Department should be relieved of his duties for gross neglect of duty in accordance with the Public Service Standing Orders of Uganda 2OlO.
    ii. The state attorneys implicated in neglect of duty should be subjected to disciplinary actions.

    7. Inadequate Information flow to Attorney General from other Government agencies.

Honourable colleagues, in the interest of time, eight and nine which is on delayed approval of the ministry’s proposed macro-organisational structure, please read on page 20 and 21.

The next entity is Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities

    1. Outstanding International Obligations

Audit noted that the ministry is indebted to two international organizations namely, Lusaka Agreement on Cooperative Enforcement Operations (Shs 4,959,569,305) and United Nations World Tourism Organization (Shs 661,180,605) in unsettled annual subscriptions totalling to Shs 5.6 billion.

The accounting officer explained that this was due to inadequate funding at the time but submitted that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had already captured the details of the obligations in the domestic arrears now pending settlement.

Observations

It was noted that unpaid subscriptions may prevent Uganda from participating in tourism related activities organised by such organisations and may lead to suspension of membership from the same.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development settles the arrears and the accounting officer implements this within three months of the adoption of this report.

    2. Unbudgeted expenditure

Audit noted that during the year under review the ministry undertook various unbudgeted for activities related to the East African protocols at Shs 190,262,052.

This was an unauthorized expenditure contrary to Section 22 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and the committee held the view that the accounting officer acted with impunity.

Recommendation

Pursuant to Sections 78, 79 and 80 of the Public Finance Management Act, the accounting officer should be held personally liable for contravening the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

The next entity, Mr Speaker, is Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives

1. Mischarges

Audit noted that the ministry charged wrong expenditure codes to a tune of Shs 919,795,830 representing four per cent of total expenditure. The accounting officer explained that this was due to the persistent underfunded key activities, which led to accommodating of critical activities from within the available resources say; engagements in trade negotiations, that require mandatory attendance. 

2. Outstanding Payables

Audit noted that although the ministry disclosed outstanding payables totalling to Shs 9.2 billion as at 30 June 2015 in the financial statements, Shs 4,322,188,283, about 46 per cent has been outstanding for the last three years and Shs 7,753,799,155 related to outstanding annual subscriptions to international organisations.

3. Nugatory Expenditure of US$6,925.

Observations

    i. The committee found the submission of the accounting officer inadequate citing poor and unrealistic budgeting to cater for these activities since they are annual and are usually communicated in advance.
    ii. There was a deliberate abuse of parliamentary powers over appropriation by the accounting officer for causing unauthorised reallocation of Shs 919,795,830. This was a mischarge which is criminal and punishable under the sections 78, 79 and 80 of the Public Finance Management Act.
    iii. Failure to settle international obligations is not only an embarrassment to the country but also denies the country privileges under the treaty.

Recommendation

    1. Pursuant to Sections 78, 79 and 80 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the accounting officer should be held personally liable for contravening the provisions of the Act.

    2. All contributions to international organisations should be managed and directly paid by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development within three months of the date of adoption of this report. This totals up to Shs 9.2 billion

4. 	Failure to approve Ministry policies

Review of the ministerial policy statement for the year 2014/2015 revealed that the ministry had planned to develop a number of policies for the efficient functioning of the ministry's business. However, most of the policies, for example, the Uganda Development Corporation Act and many others, had not yet been finalised and were still in draft form by the time of this report.

Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries

Mischarge of expenditure 

Audit noted that expenditure totalling to Shs 379 million was inappropriately charged to budget lines to fund activities that were not planned and without authority. The accounting officer admitted that they had charged Shs 379.6 million on wrong items.

The committee noted that this was contrary to section 22 of the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA), 2015 which provides for authorisation for any reallocation within a vote and that the accounting officer acted with impunity in usurping the powers of Parliament.

Our recommendation is that pursuant to sections 78, 79 and 80 of the PFMA, the accounting officer should be held personally liable for contravening the provisions of the Act.

Nugatory expenditure 

Interest paid to a construction company, particularly for Rwenjubu, Makukulu, Lyantonde and Dyangoma dams

It was noted that the construction company was contracted to rehabilitate five dams in August 2008 in Isingiro District, Lyantonde District, Rakai District, Mubende District and Kiboga District at a contract sum of USD 8, 095 million. The contract's starting date was 26 June 2008 and the expected completion date was eight (8) calendar months. Due to inadequate releases, the ministry could not clear all the balance on this contract, which attracted compound interest during the year under review of Shs 12.3 billion as a result of delayed payments of outstanding contractual obligations.

Mr Speaker, this is a very disturbing case.

Observations

    a) The committee observed that the accounting officer and the technical officers exhibited professional negligence by committing the Government to unconscionable contractual terms given the high interest rate chargeable. 
    b) The committee held the view that this was a collusion to defraud the Government. 
    c) Given the time lapse in effecting payment, the committee noted with concern a general failure by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to timely honour counterpart-funding obligation and this has occasioned wastage of public resources. 
    d) The accounting officer made payment without evidence of ownership of the land by Government. Further, the district local governments did not provide proof of ownership of the land. 
    e) The committee further noted that the accounting officer did not carry out the required due diligence prior to the commencement of the project. 
    f) The technical team was aware that the project would be delayed but did not take the necessary precautions to mitigate the delays. 
    g) The outstanding commitments were not reflected in the financial statements of the ministry. 
    h) The source of funds was an African Development Bank (ADB), loan consisting 76 per cent of the contract sum and 24 per cent Government of Uganda counterpart funding, thus the ministry paid interest on the loan without accomplishing the purpose for which it was obtained.

Recommendations

    a) The technical officers should be held personally liable for professional negligence. 
    b) The committee urges the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury (PS/ST) to ensure timely release of counterpart funding to the respective ministries that are implementing public projects. 
    c) The Attorney-General should save Government from its inability to settle counterpart funding obligations by disapproving such commitments by undertaking due diligence before approval of such contracts.

Interest payment to a construction company - Atar and Wangwoko dams 

A construction company was contracted to rehabilitate Atar Dam in Apac District and Wangwoko Dam in Kitgum District under the National Livestock Productivity Improvement Project at a contract sum of $2.7 million. Due to delays in payment of the Government of Uganda component of the contract due to inadequate releases, this has attracted interest for which the contractor is demanding $647,629.40. At the time of this report, interest element had accumulated to $367,049.49

Recommendations

    a) The PS/ST and the accounting officer of Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should be held liable for committing Government without a definite source of funds and causing an unnecessary loss of $647,679.40.

    b) The PS/ST, Mr. Keith Muhakanizi, the project manager and the then accounting officer should make good the loss of $647,679.40 occasioned by their negligence.

Failure to charge liquidated damages of Shs 1.2 billion

Dembe Liberty Ltd was contracted to construct a fish handling facility at Kiyindi and Lwampanga landing sites at a contract sum of Shs 11.087 billion on 11 December 2007. The contractor had been advanced Shs 2.4 billion. However, works were not completed within the agreed time and was extended for an extra 164 days. The contract was subsequently terminated without management charging liquidated damages amounting to Shs 1.2 billion as per clause 49.1 of the conditions of the contract.

Recommendations

    a) The accounting officer and the project manager should be relieved of their duties for gross misconduct in accordance with the Uganda Public Service Standing Orders.
    b) The accounting officer should refund Shs l.2 billion within 30 days from the date of adoption of this report. 
    c) The Public Procurement and Disposal of Pubic Assets Authority should institute a procurement audit and investigate the conduct of M/S. Spencon Services in relation to this contract with a view of blacklisting the said company. 
    d) The IGG should further investigate the procurement process for possibility of collusion.

Mr Speaker, the other issue is staffing gap which the Members could read. On the other ones of lack of accounting records and lack of operational regulations, I think we could also read. Let me move to page 35. 

Bukalasa Agricultural College

Contrary to the provisions of Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 that requires the institute to be under the direct supervision of the Ministry of Education and Sports, it was noted that it is instead supervised by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

Mr Speaker, this is an issue that needs to be addressed because there is a clash between the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries over Bukalasa Agricultural College. This should be sorted because it terribly undermines this institution.

The next issues include land, review of budget performance and agriculture. 

I will now move to the next entity, in the interest of time, considering that the rest of the issues can be read. 

Ministry of Information and Communications Technology

    i) Outstanding Domestic Arrears
Auditor's review of payables related to the ministry revealed outstanding domestic arrears as at 30 June 2015, totalling to Shs 2 billion, contrary to Treasury Accounting Instructions 2003. The accounting officer submitted that the anomaly was due to limited budget ceilings and inadequate releases but indicated that Shs 488 million had been paid on arrears thus reducing the amount to Shs 1.5 billion.

The committee recommends:

 i) 	That the PS/ST reprimands the responsible accounting officer.
ii) 	The accounting officer should adhere to the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 (PFMA) which now enjoins an accounting officer to commit the budget of the vote based on the approved annual cash flow plan.

The next issues are on budget performance and staffing gaps. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to move to the next entity which is on page 46, Ministry of East African Community Affairs.

Ministry of East African Community Affairs

i)  Mischarge of Expenditure

Contrary to the Treasury Accounting Instructions, a sum of Shs 47.1 million was charged on codes other than those for which funds were appropriated leading to mischarge of expenditure.

Recommendation

Pursuant to Sections 78 and 79 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the accounting officer should be held personally liable and the Inspectorate General of Government (IGG) should further investigate this habitual failure.

The next issue is on under staffing and non-disposal of grounded vehicles. 

The next entity is the Ministry of Water and Environment 

Ministry of Water and Environment

    1. Outstanding commitments

Contrary to Regulation 9(1) of Public Procurement and Disposal Authority Act, 2014, which requires an accounting officer to ensure that adequate funding is set aside before entering into a contract, note 26 of the financial statements revealed that the ministry had outstanding commitments amounting to Shs 28.9 billion of which, a total of Shs 3.002 billion, relates to the previous year.

Notable among the outstanding commitments are contractual obligations: Shs 15.6 billion, unpaid Value Added Tax (VAT) Shs 8.1 billion, National Forestry Authority Shs 1.1 billion and Bunyonyi Safaris Shs 355.2 million.

The accounting officer explained that contractual obligations were entered into based on the ministry's approved budget of Shs 185.5 billion of which only Shs 162.9 billion was received resulting into revenue shortfall of Shs 22.6 billion. 

Observation

The committee observes that the accounting officer in this particular financial year created unauthorised commitments of over Shs 25.9 billion thus violating the commitment control system.

Recommendations

    1. The committee recommends that the PS/ST reprimands the accounting officer for gross failure in meeting commitments.
    2. The accounting officer should also ensure that all outstanding payables are cleared on first call to avoid nugatory expenditure within the financial year.
Nugatory expenditure

(i) 	Bwizibwera Town Council water Supply Systems

Audit reported that the High Court ruling of 19 October 2009 awarded a total sum of Shs 1.4 billion to a private contractor for unpaid principal and the cost of the suit arising from breach of contract by the ministry and the ministry was ordered to pay interest on the principal at the rate of l2 per cent, per annum from the date of judgment till payment in full.

The committee observed that the accounting officer was negligent and did not pay the obligations for over 56 months, despite the provision in the Treasury Accounting Instructions that arrears take the first call.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should be reprimanded by the PS/ST for gross negligence and personally held liable for the sum of Shs 1.6 billion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairperson, are you about to finish?

MR KARUHANGA: Not at all, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You need to summarise those issues.

MR KARUHANGA: Let me move to the next entity, which is the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs had a number of issues and notable among them is the outstanding domestic arrears. The ministry was indebted to international organisations to the sum of Shs 33.06 billion as annual subscriptions and other outstanding obligations amounting to Shs 5.34 billion, bringing the total outstanding domestic arrears to Shs 38.40 billion, which must be handled expeditiously.

The next entity is the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity, which had a mischarge of Shs 67.7 million. The committee recommended that there should be recovery of the same from the accounting officer within six months from the date of adoption of this report.

The next entity is Uganda Management Institute. 
Audit noted that receivables worth Shs 309.7 million was collected out of Shs 7.6 billion that were outstanding at the close of the previous year. 

Mr Speaker, since we have this report, I would like to suggest that Members look at the other entities, which include the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, State House, Makerere University, Busitema University, Mbarara University of Science and Technology, Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and Ministry of Education and Sports.

In the interest of time, allow me to take the House to the following general conclusions of the Public Accounts Committee.

    1. That generally across the board, there was evidence of systemic failure in administrative responsibilities and management functions in the Ministries Departments and Agencies (MDAs) involved in the delivery of goods and services. This may be an indication for alertness in Government institutions. The committee, therefore, recommends that deterrent measures be implemented and more attention and support be given to the aforementioned institutions as well as other service providing institutions to prevent future occurrences of this nature.

    2. That Government officials lack the will to adhere to financial regulations and proper record keeping management. Therefore, the political leadership of MDAs should provide deterrent sanctions against officers found culpable of breaching financial regulations.
    3. The committee found out that key senior officials in MDAs who were given official responsibilities to supervise, monitor and manage the funds appropriated to the vote failed to do so. As a result, the committee recommends that those officers be severely reprimanded and this committee believes this will serve as a deterrent to other institutions entrusted with public funds.

    4. That recommendations relating to specific issues be given immediate attention and action taken as per the report.

    5. The committee recommends, therefore, that the law enforcement agencies carry out further investigations. The Criminal Investigations and Intelligence Directorate (CIID), Director of Public Prosecution (DPP), Inspectorate of Government (IGG), upon receipt of the Public Accounts Committee report should brief Parliament within six weeks upon actions taken to implement recommendations bordering on fraud and corruption.

    6. Finally, the practice of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development altering figures appropriated by Parliament in the middle of the budget cycle distorts the implementation of planned activities.

Mr Speaker, I thank you and the honourable members for listening to me. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and I thank the members of the committee for coming up with this report. Honourable members, I think the issues are clearer now and we need to find time and dispose of this matter, bearing in mind that these are accounts of 2014/2015. Would you like to lay them? Please, proceed.

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay at the Table the original copy of the Public Accounts Committee on the Report of the Auditor-General on Entities with Unqualified Opinion for the Financial Year ending 2014/2015.

I beg to lay, as well, the minutes of the Public Accounts Committee on the Report of the Auditor-General on Entities with Unqualified Opinion for the Financial Year 2014/2015.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the full texts of the report and the minutes of the meetings of the committee. 

Honourable members, as I was saying, these are accounts of 2014/2015. There are recommendations and the best way or ways is when they are long overdue like this is to forward them. Once we agree with the recommendations, we forward them to the Government side so that we later on find out what action they have taken on the recommendations that we have made, based on those findings. These are now of financial years that are long gone. The issues outside the financial audit that the Auditor-General explained and the issues that arise, which are beyond the financial audit of the Auditor-General says financial audits do not tell the whole story, so the whole story is now being told to us by the chairperson of the committee and other aspects that were not necessarily financial that we will have time to debate. 

However, I would like you to look at the recommendations and see whether we agree with them so that we do not spend time again going to them one by one. We adopt them and forward them to the Government to implement and come back to us under Rule 217 on action taken on the recommendations. These are accounts of 2014/2015. People could be going scot free while we take time doing this debate. Honourable members, we will pause this here. We will come back tomorrow, debate this and conclude. 

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we received a motion for second reading of this Bill but the mover of the motion was not able to justify this motion and has requested that she be given time to justify it. Given that it is a Private Member’s Bill, maybe we will also listen to the minister responsible for the sector and then we see if we can finish with this Bill tomorrow. 
Therefore, we are going to allow the mover of the Bill, the honourable Member for Bubulo West, to justify her motion for second reading of this Bill. I will then ask the minister to speak and then, we finalise this tomorrow because it is beyond six o’clock now. You have five minutes.

6.14
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You will recall that on 21 December 2016, Parliament granted me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2016.” The Bill sought to amend the Local Government Act (Cap 243), by replacing Part 12 of the Act with the proposals contained in the Bill.

The Bill was premised on the following defects that are inherent in Part 12 of the Local Government Act: 
    1. The Local Government Act does not define what amounts to “interim” councils, despite the word being used numerous times in the Act. The Local Government Act only considers an interim council to be the council of a newly created local government unit. The Local Government Act is only concerned about the composition of the interim council for the newly created local Government but does not take into account the fact that a chairperson of a local government unit, that is divided to create a new local government unit, was voted by adult suffrage and should, therefore, be availed an option of staying in the local government unit or moving to the newly created local government without election, as is currently available to councillors and Women Members of Parliament.

    2. The Local Government Act does not prescribe who will supervise or preside over the election of the interim chairperson. In other instances, it does only require the Electoral Commission to hold elections to fill the position of the chairperson of local government units and not all other elective offices.

Response to the committee report

I will have to rush through this. Mr Speaker, before the Bill was brought to Parliament, I consulted the Ministry of Local Government; I consulted the Attorney General. I wrote to them severally and to date, they have never given me their opinion. (Laughter) 

When the committee reported that the Bill was unconstitutional, I could not understand whether they even consulted the Legal Department of Parliament or even the Attorney General. There is no evidence that such took place anywhere. Furthermore, a proposal does not infringe any provision of the Constitution or for that matter, Article 1 (4) of the Constitution.

Article 1 (4) of the Constitution provides as follows, “The people shall express their will and consent on who shall govern them and how they should be governed through regular, free and fair elections of their representative or through referenda.”

That provision recognises that the people of Uganda have to consent to those that govern them. In this regard, the proposal recognises that article, considering that the electorate in the newly created local government was part of the electorate of the original local government that elected the chairperson at a general election. What has changed is the subdivision of the original local government but the electorate of the original and new local government units participated in electing the chairperson for a period of five years.

It would be unfair to require the chairperson, before the expiration of the five year term for which he was elected to be subjected to another election merely because he or she seeks to join the newly created local government, which hitherto, formed part and parcel of the electorate that elected him or her chairperson in the first place. Therefore, this proposal is not contrary to Article 1(4) of the Constitution as alleged by the committee. 

The observation

There are many other things but I am not going to read them because of time. The observation that there will be no Government savings by allowing a chairperson of an original local government unit to either join a newly created local government unit is answered as follows:

The committee's observations are misconceived since the certificate of financial implications indicated that there will be savings. I have read the committee report and have not found any analysis to the effect that there will be no savings. 

The observation that the proposal to grant an option to a chairperson of an original local government that is divided to create a newly created local government to either join the newly created local government or to remain in the original local government as creating two interim councils is answered as follows:
The committee did not appreciate the concept of interim councils as proposed in the Bill and that as currently prescribed in the Local Government Act.

The Local Government Act does not define what an interim council is but a closer look at section 180 and 182 reveals that it considers an interim council to be for the newly created local government since only the chairperson is elected. It is important to note that the newly created local government unit is considered interim because it has no chairperson. Indeed, the moment a chairperson is elected, that council ceases to be an interim.

On the other hand, the Bill defines the word “interim” council to mean the council that remains without a chairperson after the chairperson of the original local government has exercised his or her right to join a newly created local government or to stay in the original local government. This is so because whenever a local government unit is created out of an existing local government unit, the councillors representing local government units in those electoral areas now falling in the newly created local government retain their seats and automatically join the council of the newly created local government without necessarily going through a general election. 

In other words, what is missing from that council is a chairperson and an executive which the chairperson is empowered to appoint otherwise, the council is constituted. Therefore, what is making - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I would ask you to justify your motion but it looks like you are now responding to the report of the committee. We needed the justification for the motion because we have not yet debated. I want you to help us with your justification of your motion so that the Bill is read for the second time and I ask the minister to respond.

If the minister is in concurrency with your proposal, then we might need to take some steps. However, I do not know because you have now - all these issues are going to be raised by members again to which you have to respond at the end before I put the question. I do not know how to proceed now. Do you feel you have justified your motion second reading of the Bill?

I think you have spoken to the request at the time you were given the leave to present; you have justified why this Bill is necessary. We might have to pause it there and then you come after the debate based on the report of the committee then we move from there.

MS MUTONYI: Mr Speaker, my intention of requesting for more time was to respond to the issues raised by the committee. Therefore-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I was saying that you could do that after the debate. The committee report is part of the debate. However, I just wanted you to justify why this Bill is important and why the motion for second reading must carry.

MS MUTONYI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think you have done a good job at that –(Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Hon. Rose Mutonyi you have done your job. However, the procedural issue I am raising is, I just give a practical example before I ask the procedure. I am the Member of Parliament for Budadiri West and the gazette reads “Nandala-Mafabi is the Member of Parliament for Budadiri West”.

Tomorrow they curve out Sironko municipality and yet, I was voted as Member of Parliament for Budadiri West. (Interjections) Yes, including the municipality but at that time, the municipality was not there and it was a town council that has become a municipality. If I decide to go to the municipality and yet, the gazette reads “Budadiri West”, will there be a gazette to read that Nandala is now a Member of Parliament for Sironko municipality without an election?

Mr Speaker, we may have done mistakes, which we need to correct. Maybe we make a better law and I need - because sometimes we do some things in a hasty because we want to clear something. If I went to court and said, “You were voted the woman representative for Pallisa, now you are calling yourself the Woman representative of Butebo” wouldn’t I win the case because I will come with the gazette and say, the moment you went to Butebo, Pallisa fell vacant?

Likewise, you should have been elected in Butebo to be called Woman representative for Butebo with a gazette. Without a gazette, how will you tell the people of Uganda that - Mr Speaker, would it be procedurally right for me to change from Budadiri West to Sironko Municipality if it is created yet I was gazetted as a Member of Parliament for Budadiri West?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If the law allows you to, you can do that. If the law allows it means there are mechanisms within the law to deal with that situation. However, if it is not there, I mean there are provisions that relate to the elections of the women representatives in Parliament.

I think it is allowed that they choose where to go. Is it by practice or by law? It is by law. Therefore, the law allows them. If the honourable member was elected for- I use the case of hon. Nabbanja who was elected for Kibaale District, it was divided into Kakumiro and Kibaale and the member opted to represent Kakumiro instead of Kibaale the name that appeared in the gazette as being elected for to represent. Therefore, because the law allows that, it has mechanism to deal with the issues of gazettement and so on. So, if the law allows it, then there are procedures for dealing with it. However, if the law does not allow it, then there is a gap that has to be done away with. 

MR MUTONYI: Mr Speaker, that is the very reason I moved this Bill so that the chairpersons of the districts and the lower local councils can move. I gave the justification that the chairperson of the districts and local council IIIs as well as the interest group councillors are not allowed to move. The instances we have witnessed are that the chairperson may be originating from the newly created local government; that is where he resides and is born then he is tagged to the original one where he no longer resides. This is also against the Constitution, which prescribes that for one to be elected a chairperson, he must be ordinarily a resident in that district. 

Therefore, if a law was created for women Members of Parliament, I am not saying that they should be thrown out; it should also apply to those in lower local governments. That is my justification, there are many that I can deal with but – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think it is clear. I want something from the minister.
 
6.31
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Col [Rtd] Tom Butime): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I agree with the recommendation of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government.

The most important recommendations were three. The first one was that after their careful scrutiny of the Bill, the committee is of the considered opinion that the Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2017 should not be passed by the House because it is in contravention of Article 1 (4) and 180(2) (a) of the Constitution as already highlighted.

Secondly, that the Ministry of Local Government should undertake a comprehensive review of the Local Government Act and initiate comprehensive amendments to cater for emerging realities in local governments as observed in this report. 

Thirdly, that the proposed amendment among others should also focus on repealing Part 12 of Local Government Act and synchronising the timing of elections in the newly created districts and so on. 

Therefore, I agree with these recommendations. To allay the fears of hon. Mutonyi, I would like to lay at the table the Ministry of Local Government Legislative Programme for the Financial Year 2018/2019. Number one on this programme is a comprehensive review in the amendment of the Local Government Act Cap 243. The concern, therefore, of the honourable member will be taken care of. I lay it at the Table.

Point number two, this is what honourable Nandala-Mafabi was alluding to. 

Section 137: Declaration of results and reports from the Electoral commission: 

“The electoral commission shall, as soon as practicable, after the election, ascertain, declare in writing under its seal, publish in the Gazette the results of the election in each constituency.” 

Each constituency means parliamentary, presidential and of course, district. The issue now is, if I am elected in district A, my name is ascertained, signed, sealed and gazetted for that district; should I cross to another district where I am not elected, ascertained with seal and I am not gazetted, that is the problem. Anybody can challenge you for posing as somebody elected in that district when you are not. For me, that is very important. 

The last point I have is –(Interjections)- I am still explaining.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, allow the minister to finish because I am going to push this to tomorrow.

COL BUTIME: The last point I have why I support the Committee on Public Service and Local Government is that the ministry and I appeared before this committee. The Minister of Justice and the Attorney General also appeared before the committee. What is produced in the report is as a result of the opinion at the appearance of the Attorney General before that committee.

Finally, Article 180 (2) (a) of the Constitution reads as follows: “the person elected as district chairperson of a local government shall be a member of the council.” Therefore, you have now to amend the Constitution before you come here to say that any person elected district chairperson of a local government shall be a member of council. Any person who becomes, not elected but just becomes, either by transfer or by translation but in this case, a person elected as district chairperson of a local government shall be a member of the council. You cannot come from district A created from the big district, change the Constitution, cross to a new district to become a chairman there but not elected. Therefore, you are not a member of the council and as such, you are not elected for that district. That is why I am saying that this is a matter that needs careful handling. It is a matter that needs a review of the Local Government Act and a matter, which will eventually when all is done, affect or call upon the Constitution itself to be reviewed.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, those are my views. I support the position of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we will not be able to finish this matter today. We will deal with it tomorrow. We will not also be able to handle the Investment Code Bill, 2017 because I think the consultations are still ongoing. The minister has requested that we pause the handling of that Bill until they have done the necessary consultations so this will be the only Bill for tomorrow.

Honourable members, the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.41 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 3 May 2018 at 2.00p.m.) 

