

Thursday, 3 May 2018

Parliament met at 2.04 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Today is marked in the world calendar as the World Press Freedom Day. It arises from a United Nations General Assembly Declaration to raise awareness about the importance of the freedom of the press and to remind governments about their duty to uphold the right to freedom of expression enshrined under Article 19 of the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights. This particular provision is also in our Constitution. 

This day also marks the anniversary of the Windhoek Declaration, a statement of press freedom principles which was put together by African newspaper journalists in Windhoek in 1991. 

On behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, I wish to convey my salutation to the journalists upon this important day. I recognise that the work that journalists do is vital to the society and cuts through all sectors. Without them, there would be an information limbo. 

In many parts of the world, journalists have lost their lives in the line of duty. So, at this point in time, let us share our sympathy with the families and friends of the journalists who have since died in the line of duty. 

The Parliament of Uganda enjoys a cordial working relationship with the journalists accredited to the Parliamentary Press Association. To the Parliamentary Press Association members, I would like to assure you that Parliament will continue to provide a conducive working environment for you. The association is always welcome to interact with the leadership of Parliament to promote its work and that of Members. We thank you for doing a good job. Please keep it up. Once again, I wish you a pleasant World Press Freedom Day.

The Northern Uganda Media Centre (NUMEC) was the first to draw my attention to this day. They had asked me to be with them today as they celebrate in Gulu. I take this opportunity, given that I will not be there, to congratulate them as well and wish them happy celebrations in Gulu. (Applause)

Honourable members, it has been brought to my attention that the Committee on Budget is oversubscribed by five members. I wish to call on the Government Chief Whip and the Chief Opposition Whip to address this concern so that the provisions of the Rules of Procedure can be adhered to. Please, report back by Thursday, 10 May 2018 so that the concerned members can be informed accordingly.

Honourable members, as you may have already known, our own colleague, hon. Geoffrey Dhamuzungu, Member of Parliament for Budiope County East, has been hospitalised in Case Hospital due to suspected food poisoning. I am happy to report that he was discharged from hospital last Saturday, 28 April and he is recuperating at his home. (Applause) I urge you, in the spirit of parliamentary solidarity, to check on him or send messages of support as he needs this encouragement more than ever.

Honourable members, on this same note, as you can see today in the House we have, for the first time in a very long time, Dr Joyce Moriku Kaducu, Woman Representative for Moyo District. (Applause) The family has organised a thanksgiving on Saturday. I will be there. I urge all of you to come and join Dr Kaducu in Gulu to thank God for the miracle that has happened to her life, her family and this Parliament.

I heard that hon. Cecilia Atim Ogwal, who is a Parliamentary Commissioner, was there when Dr Kaducu was being airlifted to be taken for treatment. She should be here today when Dr Kaducu comes back to Parliament. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, I will give you time, after my communication, to welcome Dr Kaducu back to Parliament on behalf of the Speaker, the Parliamentary Commission and the whole Parliament and staff. 

Honourable members, we will not be able to handle item No. 6 on the agenda today. I had thought we would finish it today but the learned Deputy Attorney-General has been called for an urgent meeting. He called me about three hours ago saying that he would not be able to come because he had got a call that he should report for something. Therefore, we will get another day to complete this matter.

Honourable members, I think part of item No. 7 on the Order Paper created difficulty because of the way we were handling it. The heading is not properly captured. The Auditor-General does not present any report called “unqualified opinion”. This was a phrase coined by the committee to draw the attention of the House to what it specifically did in this event, but that report does not actually exist. 

The report that exists is the report and opinion of the Auditor-General for the financial year 2014/2015. Therefore, the issue of “entities with unqualified opinions” is a phrase coined by the committee and should not be in our heading or part of the motion we are adopting. Rather, it can be an explanatory note on the subsequent flow of the report. I would like this amended to capture the actual report they are presenting and on which we will base our adoption of the report of the committee. That should be corrected for next time, to inform the debate and final determination of this matter. 

Honourable members, I will alter the Order Paper to accommodate a petition from the Uganda Cooperative Savings and Credit Union Limited. It is about the imposition of tax on savings and credit cooperatives as proposed under the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill. There is a petition and I will alter the Order Paper to accommodate that and then we will see how to proceed. 

At this moment, I will give hon. Cecilia Ogwal an opportunity to deal with the matter I have just highlighted.

2.14
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I was about to stand on a point of procedure to request for two things. One is on World Press Freedom Day which is being commemorated today, as you mentioned in your communication. We share a lot with the press and we feel that it will be unfair for this day to be commemorated without giving us 10 or 15 minutes to share with the press issues that concern the press in this country, in the continent and globally. I request you, Mr Speaker, based on your communication, to give Members some few minutes to comment on World Press Freedom Day. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank God for our dear sister, colleague and friend, the honourable Dr Joyce Moriku Kaducu. All of you are well aware that hon. Moriku was taken ill in November. I believe anybody from the medical field or who has a medical background will be able to explain. However, from a layman’s view, we draw our conclusion that she suffered food poisoning. Whether food poisoning is the same as poisoning, we will also require medical interpretation.

Mr Speaker, Joyce was lingering between the grave and the world. I saw her a few minutes before she was taken to Nairobi. It is only by God’s divine intervention that we see hon. Moriku today with us. Therefore, I would like to praise and thank God. For those of you who do not believe in God, there is a God; the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the God I worship. There is a God and hon. Moriku is a testimony of how God is still in the business of healing helplessly sick people.

Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate the role that Parliament played. It is surprising that Parliament picked the entire medical Bill for hon. Moriku. I had anticipated that probably this issue would have been a shared responsibility between Parliament and the ministry or the Executive. However, we took full responsibility and we are not complaining. In the future, we should be mindful of our responsibility when one of our own falls sick. I want to appreciate the role played by Parliament to ensure that hon. Moriku was treated in the various hospitals and finally at Aga Khan Hospital, Nairobi.

I should have gone - Mr Speaker, if you recall, I wrote an official letter requesting you that on 18th December, we were expected, as Parliamentary Commissioners, to witness the swearing in ceremony of the East African Legislative Assembly Members. I had officially requested that during that time, I will take a day or two to visit our sister, Joyce. Unfortunately, Parliament decided that it was the day to decide on the issue of the age limit. Therefore, all of us were here to express the views of our voters and I could not make that trip. I felt extremely bad that I was not able to share that time with our friend and colleague.

Mr Speaker, hon. Moriku is now here with us. I would like to request that we should take keen interest in the administration of the environment we live in. The issue of food poisoning or poisoning is not new in this Parliament. There were times when reports were officially made to the Speaker of Parliament about attempted poisoning of our colleagues. That matter was silenced because they thought it would embarrass the image of Parliament. However much it can embarrass us, let us talk about it. 

Let us know how our people are being poisoned. Who can we trust and where can we go? We have decided that we eat in our own restaurant and relate with ourselves. However, it is being proved that the environment we live in is not safe. It is important that we take interest in knowing the administration of our restaurants. We need to know the people who handle our food and those who bring food to us. 

Members, please do not take things for granted. The Bible tells us that it did not take a stranger to betray Jesus. It was one of his own that betrayed him. Therefore, do not think that a stranger will be the one to give you poisoned food; it could be the people next to you. It is important that we also take precaution to make sure that we take care of our lives. 

Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to welcome hon. Joyce Moriku Kaducu back to Parliament. Traditionally, it may not be fair but let us clap for the Lord (Applause) In Jesus’ mighty name. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you like to say something at this moment?

2.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I would like to add my voice to thank God because I stand as a living testimony and a miracle, not in a coffin being placed before you to pray over. I thank God.

Mr Speaker, it is true that I was sick for a while. From 9 November 2017 up to February 2018, I moved through a series of hospitals and the last was Aga Khan Hospital in Nairobi. I had a lot of experiences before I woke up. I was in coma for six weeks but I have to say that you, the people here, suffered more than I did. You were traumatised and you went through a lot of stress while I slept. You prayed all sorts of prayers and finally God heard our prayers and I woke up. 

However, before I went to sleep, I gave a testimony while at Platinum Hospital, which I cannot forget. I told the people that I will not die; the devil is a liar and the Lord is my shepherd. Those were my words and then I went into coma at Platinum Hospital until I woke up and found myself in Nairobi.

I would like to really thank all of you for the support you have given my family. Mr Speaker, you stood by my family and all of you, Members of Parliament. I want to thank the President of this country; he was so passionate about my ill health. I also thank the ministers and all Ugandans, not forgetting the people of Moyo District, whom I represent. I thank them all.

I thank Parliament for the financial resources you have provided. It was entirely the Parliament of Uganda that gave the financial resources. I also thank my ministry that covered the bill when I was in Platinum Hospital. I thank all other individuals who have supported and stood by my family. 

As an appeal, let us take care of ourselves; know what you eat, where you eat from and whom you eat with, what you drink and where you drink. You cannot prove who a friend is, unless an intimate one.

I can attest that it started with food poisoning but later on, foreign elements were found in my body. All medical tests done from all the four hospitals did not come up with a natural cause of illness. I would like to thank the health professionals at Platinum Hospital, Mulago Hospital, and Aga Khan Hospital, and International Hospital Kampala (IHK) and all who played a crucial role to ensure that I live. 

Mr Speaker, I thank all of you and I encourage us to be one another’s keeper. For God and my country. I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us leave it here; you will make speeches in Gulu, honourable members. 

2.26
MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this chance. 

Honourable members, on behalf of the people of Madi sub region, Moyo District, West Moyo County in particular and on my own behalf, I wish to welcome Dr Joyce Moriku back to Parliament. 

We thank God for her life and all those who gave her material, physical, financial support and all those who remembered her in their prayers. May the Almighty God bless us and reward us abundantly. Long live Joyce Moriku, long live Uganda and long live the people of Moyo. I thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am being reminded that Dr Moriku Kaducu is married to Dr Kaducu who comes from Omoro District. (Laughter) and that I have to get somebody from the region where the husband comes from to say something.

2.27
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Independent, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is from our hearts. Dr Kaducu is a very prominent personality in the Acholi sub region. He was completing university when I entered university but we have remained very close.

When this matter of food poisoning happened and the eventual difficulties that the family went through here and all the way to Nairobi, the people of the Acholi sub region were greatly concerned. This is because Dr Moriku Kaducu, whom we now see here as a wife, means a lot to the family.

We are very grateful for all that happened and I would like you to join us for a thanksgiving ceremony on 5 May in Gulu. We dedicate all this we have said to the Lord because without God, I do not think she would have returned from Nairobi, given the challenges. I would like to invite you all to Gulu to join us to give thanks to God for what He has done for our minister, wife and daughter. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the purposes of the record of this House, the honourable member is not a wife; she is Dr Kaducu, Member of Parliament for Moyo District. 

2.30
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to also thank God for the life of our colleague. However, I stand here on a matter of national importance.

In my constituency, there is a village called Sunga in Kyankwanzi Town Council just behind the National Leadership Institute. There are people who have been living there and are known in the records of Government. According to the previous census, there are over 700 people in that area. The total voters were 321 and indeed His Excellency the President got the majority share of votes. There is a well-constructed primary school, there are two dams and the majority of the people there are cattle keepers with a few crop farmers.

The people have been squatters on that land that has been housing Government projects right from the previous governments. The land measures 21 square miles. It used to be prison land but later changed to land for national youth service and now the National Leadership Institute.

The Government came up with a proposal to bring investors to do some development work there on cattle fattening. Indeed, in 2016 shortly after the ministers’ and permanent secretaries’ retreat, we met the President as leaders of the district together with the representatives from the people of Sunga. The President promised to help resettle these people so that they can continue having a good life -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please go to the urgent matter. 

MR KAMUSIIME: That was a preamble. (Laughter) As we wait for the President’s promise, Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) officers from the National Leadership Institute have descended on those people for the last five days. They came and fenced off the whole area and are now driving people out in an inhumane manner. They just sent people away and those who went back home to pick their property were beaten like thieves or armed robbers. 
	 
I am not saying that Government should stop the project, but we should have a human face in this. Government should have relocated the school and resettled these people so that life can continue. This term children did not go to school because the school was occupied by soldiers and other workers who were doing the fencing.

I call upon the right ministry to do something so that my people can have peace. As a Member of Parliament, I cannot have peace when my people are being treated like that. They are waiting for answers given the fact that the President promised them. I request that there should be sanity. Help me so that the soldiers stop torturing my people. Otherwise, I am planning to go on a hunger strike should my people continue suffering. I cannot sit here eating chips and chicken when my people are being tortured. 

Mr Speaker, I beg that Government comes in to help so that we can have a consensus and have our people resettled.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there anybody from the Government to react on this matter? Honourable Minister of Lands. 

2.33
THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I request the Member to give me the details of the location of the place and the people affected so that I can dispatch a team of people to ascertain what the matter is and then I can be able to report on the actions taken. Thank you.

2.34
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Mr Speaker, I would also like to welcome the minister back. I promise to give you a rosary from Kibeho, Rwanda, tomorrow. I know you were within the Virgin Mary’s hands. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to raise a matter of national importance. Umeme introduced a pay system called Yaka and it had relieved us from the problems of Umeme staff coming to our homes to check on electricity bills before we pay. However, for the past week, their system has been down. People are having blackouts yet there is no response from the Government. You cannot get power even if you go to Umeme offices. 

I would like to know who will compensate me when my business collapses due to failure to get power yet we have a contract with Umeme. The point of national importance is: I would like to know why we do not have power and what they are doing about it. 

The information we are getting is that Umeme has failed to pay their service providers for internet services. When you use your phone to try and pay, MTN will do everything very well but they will tell you that the reception platform from Umeme is not functioning. 

2.35
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Ms Irene Muloni): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I recognise the concern raised by hon. Ssewungu. 

Indeed, Umeme is experiencing a technical challenge, which might not be with the Umeme system but with the telecom systems’ interface for purposes of buying units for Yaka. They are working around the clock to make sure that the interface between the telecom companies and Umeme is sorted out so that our people are not inconvenienced.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In the meantime, what happens?

MS MULONI: There is a call centre, which is handling case by case – (Interjections) – When you have a challenge and you give them the specific challenge that you are experiencing –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable members, listen to the minister first then you can ask.

MS MULONI: They actually try to address the problem. It is an interface challenge that they are experiencing between the telecom companies and Umeme but it is going to be sorted out.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for her response. First of all, there is no official communication from Umeme nor from the ministry. It is until I came to this Floor that you are giving that response. 

Mr Speaker, there are people who already paid for units using the mobile money platform, but they never got the Yaka units. A company like Umeme, which is providing a power service, should not fail to provide it. There are so many telecom companies that have internet systems. Most of the banks now have two internet service providers. If one is down, they use another one. Now, if you come and tell us that the system is down and they are trying to work it out, what is the remedy? 

If I went to Umeme offices in Najjanankumbi, would I get units? The answer is “No”. Alternatively, say that Joseph Ssewungu and other people get some people in your home to by-pass the metre and get power -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, the point is made. Honourable minister, please respond.

MS MULONI: Mr Speaker, Umeme provides a 24-hour service. As and when problems crop up, they have a 24-hour call centre that is supposed to address those challenges. However, because these challenges are to do with the interfacing between the different telecom companies, you may find that you are able to load your units without any challenge with MTN but possibly with another service provider, you are having that challenge. 

They offer a 24-hour service and they are working around the clock to resolve the matter.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the honourable minister for giving way. 

The information I would like to give is that this problem has not been there for only three days but for the last one month. In Gulu, for example, whenever you try to load Yaka units, the system fails. When I consulted the people from Umeme, they told me to buy another cable to connect from the pole to the system inside. 

The problem is great; right now all people who are using the Yaka system are suffering and just crying. Therefore, the minister should not casually respond; let her be very serious. Let her assure us –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you referring to the dressing or the words? (Laughter)

MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, what I mean is that let the minister address the matter seriously because people who are using Umeme are not comfortable as businesses are being shut down because there is no power in their houses. Thank you.

MS MULONI: Mr Speaker, I am very serious in my response –(Laughter)– I am not taking anything for granted. What I would like to inform Members is that the Umeme service is 24 hours, so the issues that are being –(Interruption)

MR MACHO: Mr Speaker, Busia has a more serious problem than any other part of the country concerning the services of Umeme. The minister is referring to a call centre as a solution for people who do not have power but the whole of Bukedi area has one non-functional office in Tororo, serving almost 20 districts. At least in Bulambuli where the minister comes from, people are a bit better because they can tap power directly from the wires –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on a point of order.

MR MACHO: I, therefore, would like to know whether the minister is in order to say that our people can use a non-functional Umeme service centre. Thank you.

MS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take the honourable colleagues’ concerns on electricity supply seriously. For those who are having outages, again there is already a process and a centre that has been put in place. If you call, you are able to get a response so that your outage is addressed – (Interjections) – They have a 24-hour call centre –(Interruption)

MR OYET: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Some time back, we had a serious engagement with the people of Umeme. It is true that they have a 24-hour call centre and each time you call, they politely respond that they are going to respond to your call and they shall send their people. However, that response might take a week and in the areas of Gulu, Kitgum – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on a point of order.

MR OYET: Yes, that is the point I am bringing up – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could you raise the point of order?

MR OYET: Mr Speaker, I am doing that by way of preamble so that I get direct to the point – (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I would like you to say, “Is the honourable minister in order to do the following…?”

MR OYET: Mr Speaker, is the honourable minister in order to lie to this august House that we are receiving constant service from Umeme yet the experience we have countrywide is to the contrary? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not believe that the honourable minister is not serious. She just has a smiling face but she is very serious. (Laughter) 

The issue is: If you have a call centre and 200 people call it at the same time and you say you are going to respond, how will you respond to 200 homes in that span of time?

MS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. The call centre has many telephone lines with many people attending to the different calls. As a matter of fact, when you call using all those lines that are connected to the call centre -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am referring to the response in the field.

MS MULONI: Yes, you are given a reference number. They will take note of which area you are calling from and will immediately dispatch that fault report to the respective area. That is how it works. By virtue of the fact that it will require someone to move from point A to your place where the problem is and try to establish what the problem is and therefore rectify it, it may not be instantaneous; it takes a little bit of time.

If it is a transformer that has blown, it would take longer because they will have to go, remove that transformer and replace it with a better one. If conductors are broken, it means they have to come and get their people to connect the conductors so that you have power re-established. 

All in all, every effort is made to try and respond to you as fast as possible. The problem has been aggravated because of the rainy season. When we have trees falling, you get conductors breaking, and that is a matter of fact. During the rainy season, we experience heavy problems because of the outages that are caused by conductors getting broken. At times, the transformers fail because of vandalism. Our own people go and siphon oil from the transformers and they end up exploding and therefore, cutting you off supply.

Mr Speaker, I would like to assure colleagues that every effort is made to try and respond but we are going to implore Umeme to ensure that they double their efforts in making sure that teams are on the ground 24 hours because it is a 24-hour service.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Next item.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION ON BEHALF OF THE UGANDA COOPERATIVE SAVINGS AND CREDIT UNION LIMITED CHALLENGING THE IMPOSITION OF TAX ON SAVINGS AND CREDIT COOPERATIVE ORGANISATIONS (SACCOS) AS PROPOSED UNDER THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

2.47
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons with Disabilities Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am presenting this petition on behalf of the Uganda Cooperative Savings and Credit Union Limited challenging the imposition of tax on Savings and Credit Cooperative Organisations (SACCOs) as proposed under the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2018. 

A petition to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda moved under rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

The humble petition of Uganda Cooperative Savings and Credit Union, challenging the imposition of tax on Savings and Credit Cooperatives as proposed under the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2Ol8 presented by hon. Hellen Asamo representing PWDS Eastern Region. 

STATES AND SHOWETH THAT: Your petitioner is the National Association of Savings and Credit Organisations, established in 1972 and registered as a cooperatives under the Cooperatives Act of 1991; 

It has one thousand two hundred and sixty five (1,265) members comprised of community, institutional and enterprise-based SACCOS across the country;

Your petitioner has a core mandate of fostering the organisation and development of SACCOs in Uganda and specifically objective (d) of its registered bye-laws obliges it to promote and advocate for legislation required for the preservation and improvement of SACCOS in the country;

Your petitioners –(Interruption)

MS KATALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The tax Bills were presented to this House and forwarded to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This committee is still scrutinising these Bills in line with rule 185(c) of the Rules of Procedure.

Mr Speaker, we have tried to engage the different stakeholders in this Bill and the committee has not yet come up with the report. Are we proceeding rightly to have a petition before the committee presents its report? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, ordinary citizens of this country have a right to access this Parliament through petitions at any time. (Applause) It is how we process the petition that matters. Proceed.

MS ASAMO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. Mr Speaker,

Your petitioner has a core mandate of fostering the organisation and development of SACCOs in Uganda and specifically, objective (d) of its registered bye-laws obliges it to promote and advocate for legislation required for the preservation and improvement of SACCOS in the country.

Your petitioner states that in 2017, Parliament passed an amendment to the Income Tax Act, Chapter 340 of the Laws of Uganda, wherein under section 2l(1), SACCOs were exempted from payment of tax for a period of 10 years effective l July 20l7 up to 30 July 2027, with the rationale of promoting savings among Ugandans, especially in rural areas.

Your petitioner further states that since the exemption was granted in 2017, SACCOs have indeed mobilised more members, savings, share capital and equity thereby increasing the volume of loans extended to members; SACCOs have also made a significant contribution to employment and wealth creation, inclusive growth and increased taxable income.

Your petitioner knows that before the lapse of the 10 years of exemption, Government is proposing, through the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill 2018, to impose a tax on SACCOS thereby reversing section 2l(1) of the Income Tax Act, which was amended only last year in 20l7;

Your petitioner further avers that the proposed reversal of the exemption is retrogressive and will disrupt the SACCOs sector and the financial system since SACCOs play a leading role in mobilising savings from their members, most of whom cannot access financial services in the formal sector; and further that SACCOs have already made long term commitments such as borrowing for on lending to members with the assumption that the larger cash flows from tax exemptions will enable the members fulfil their obligations; and that not only is it difficult to cancel such a commitment but it will destabilise SACCOs and undermine their reputation. 

Your petitioner is cognisant of the fact that they contribute to the Government’s tax revenue in a sense that Savings and Credit Cooperative Societies (SACCOs) deduct and remit income tax and Pay As You Earn (PAYE) from employees and board members; SACCOs deduct and remit to district local governments local service tax from employees; and that members pay withholding tax on interest earned on their savings, dividends earned on their shares and stamp duty on each loan agreement.

Your petitioner has reservations about the proposed reversal of the exemption because the tax exemption motivates members to buy more shares, increases savings and develops SACCOs’ capacity to mobilise domestic capital; the exemption allows SACCOs to keep more capital hence reduce the necessity to borrow externally from Government thereby saving it from external borrowing in order to lend to SACCOs; and that the exemption allows SACCOs to grow, create employment and wealth and hence contribute to increased taxable income.

THEREFORE, your humble petitioners pray that Parliament urges Government to reconsider its proposal in the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2018 not to tax SACCOs and maintains the status quo in the Income Tax Act.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray. And hereto your humble petitioner’s representatives have appended their signatures. 

I beg to move.

Mr Speaker, I have here a list of the petitioners and the petition. I beg to lay them on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you, honourable member. Like I said at the beginning, members of the public have access to this House through this process at any time. However, the rules also guide us on how we handle this kind of situation. 

If you look at rule 30(6) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda under which petitions are moved, it gives some guidance: “Notwithstanding sub rule (5), the Speaker may refer a petition of an urgent matter to a particular Minister or Committee where he or she is of the opinion that such a petition would be better handled by such a Minister or Committee.”

In my opinion, this is part of the Budget process. The revenue laws are already with the committee and this particular petition touches on a particular revenue law that is already before the committee. I, accordingly, refer this petition to be considered by the committee with the rest of the considerations on the Budget laws that are before them. 

Clerk, extract the minutes and forward this matter to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which is dealing with this particular law. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I have two papers to present. One is an addendum to the supplementary schedule 2 for financial year 2017/2018 to accommodate Shs 860 million to cater for a wage shortfall for a number of votes. These requests came while we were in the advanced stages of considering the supplementary schedule 2 that we submitted here. We beg that we lay it here on the Table and it is considered by the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

2.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, the second addendum is to the supplementary schedule 2 for financial year 2017/2018 to accommodate Shs 19.2 billion to cater for Management Training and Advisory Centre (MTAC) for statutory obligations and training materials; Shs 1 billion for Busoga Growers Cooperative Union;  Shs 1.97 billion for Lango Growers Cooperative Union; Shs 4.1 billion for land compensation under Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and Uganda Land Commission; Shs 1.95 billion for land compensation for Masindi Hotel; and Shs 9.2 billion for Parliamentary Commission for tax arrears.

Mr Speaker, we submitted this schedule here and we have been having numerous engagements with the Committee on Budget. These engagements have resulted in consultations and pressures from numerous votes. During the meetings that we have had, some chaired by the Deputy Speaker, we saw the need to lay this addendum on the Table so that the process is formalised. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable chairperson of the Committee on Budget, have you already dealt with this matter which the minister is talking about? Have you had a scan or an idea about it? If not, I will give you 15 minutes to look at it.

3.00
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Mr Speaker, for the second addendum, yes we have knowledge about these figures and we have incorporated them in the report. However, for the first one, we have not as we did not have prior knowledge about this.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, we are not supposed to debate in anticipation but some of the issues in the second addendum touch on matters that I had already raised in a minority report. It will only be proper and fitting that you avail us 10 minutes to harmonise so that those issues do not feature.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay, Mr Chairman? Prime Minister’s Question Time is at 4.00 p.m., would it be okay if we gave you 20 minutes or 15 minutes? Please look at this because you are reporting soon and that is why I am saying that in about 15 minutes, we should be ready to move. Thank you. This matter is referred to the Committee on Budget to handle and report soon.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO COMMEMORATE THE INTERNATIONAL DAY OF THE STREET CONNECTED CHILDREN

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what that means is that item No. 3 is now stood over. Item No. 3 is supposed to be a report of the Committee on Budget on this motion of the supplementary schedules 1 and 2 for this financial year. That is why I am saying we defer this particular motion and consider it after this particular item that has been called.

Honourable members, for the item that has been called, we received this motion and I propose the question and debate starts now. You had not justified your motion. Okay, you have five minutes to justify your motion.

3.02
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First and foremost, I would like to thank you for the opportunity to present this motion. 

This was the second time Uganda was joining the rest of the world in marking the international day of children connected with the streets. The theme for this year’s celebration was, “Equality for street children starts here: Let’s make it happen.” That was the theme under which we marked the international day of children connected to the streets. 

As I justify this motion, I would like to recognise honourable colleagues who joined the street children in marking this day by walking on the streets of Kampala, particularly in Kisenyi area where most of these children dwell. The Members included:

1. 	Hon. Anna Adeke, Youth Representative, National;
2. 	Hon. Fredrick Angura, Tororo South County;
3. 	Hon. Silas Aogon, Kumi Municipality;
4. 	Hon. David Abala, Ngora County. 

Mr Speaker, these are the colleagues who joined us in marking this day. Before I say one or two things, I have a clip of five minutes, which I would like to use to justify this motion because it is the voices of the children who live on the streets.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then that will be the only justification. 

MR ATIKU: I have no problem with that, Mr Speaker.

(A video presentation was made.)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have heard it from the horse’s mouth. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament to commemorate the international day of the street connected children. Debate starts now, each Member taking two minutes. It will be a limited debate because the day has passed but the significance of this particular matter is why we are having it today.

In the distinguished strangers’ gallery this afternoon, we have Mr Damon Wamara, the Country Director of Dwelling Places, which is an NGO that deals with children that sleep and work on the streets. Please join me in welcoming him. (Applause) You are welcome.

We will take only one seconder of the motion. The rest will debate the motion.

3.10
MS ANNA ADEKE (INDEPENDENT, National Female Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my voice with that of the mover of the motion, hon. Atiku, that as a Parliament, we should commemorate the international day of the street connected children. 

I was privileged to be in the shoes of a street child for just a few hours and I must share that their plight is terrible. It is very painful, especially considering the fact that they are children and very vulnerable. The case is especially worse for the female street child. I had the opportunity to speak to a seven-year-old girl from Mbale who shared what she had been going through on the streets. She had been a victim of sexual abuse, among many other abuses that they face on a daily basis.

The influx of street children into Kampala City is birthed because of the imbalanced regional development that we have as a country. Many Ugandans feel that they would have an opportunity to access more opportunities, businesses and chances to improve their lives if they lived in Kampala City and the periphery of the city. 

I believe that it is important for us, as a Parliament, to carefully consider the imbalanced regional development that we have as a country. Some regions are more privileged and as a result, you can see that the pressure on Kampala City is overwhelming. The children come because they feel that they can access a much better life here. 

As a Parliament, let us consider extending services equally across the board so that the children in Napak can feel they are as equally privileged as those in Kampala. It should not be the case that the ones in Kampala are more privileged and have access to a better future than the ones who come from Napak district.

Mr Speaker, I believe it is right for us to carefully consider the idea of regional governments as this will help us a great deal. The children who are on the streets are from particular regions of this country; they do not come from all regions. We have an opportunity, as Members of Parliament, to provide for the future of this country. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. Debate starts now, each Member taking two minutes, and it will be a limited debate. I will ask the Member for Kumi to start.

3.13
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was on the streets with the children connected to the streets to look at their plight. We have decided to call them street connected children because streets do not give birth to children; they only come there because of circumstances, which are bad and hostile to them where they come from.

As we belatedly commemorate this day, there are certain questions that I would like to ask:

    1. Where are the children who are connected to the streets coming from?
    2. Who are the parents/guardians of these children?
    3. What went wrong where they came from?
    4. What can be done to re-unite them with their families or guardians?

Mr Speaker, we had a chance to talk to the children and there was even one from Kumi. He told me that the reason he ran to Kampala was because his stepmother beat him because he was being forced to go and dig yet he was hungry. Therefore, the problem was hunger. Gender-based violence is spilling over from parents to their children and it is affecting them badly.

Mr Speaker, this House needs to realise that it is much cheaper for Government to have children of school-going age attain education than to deal with criminality and the cost of managing criminals. That is my observation. If we do that as a country with intention, will, energy, unity and purpose, we shall progress as a nation. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the motion.

3.15
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I was also on the streets with the children and we really learnt a lot. 

One thing we must all agree to here is that these children come from our communities. I come from Tororo, which is very far, and I did not expect to find one of the children on the streets from my sub-county. 

Honourable members, these children are our own. We must support them and ensure that they are given the healthcare that our children get. I would like to call upon Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA), especially since these children are predominantly here - When these children present themselves to the health centres, they are chased away without finding out why they are on the streets. The question is: why are these children on the streets? Once we answer that question, we should be able to help alleviate these challenges. 

The children were complaining about the police, saying that they are time and again mistaken for criminals. They have their own way of behaving. Mr Speaker, when you relate with these children, they greet you by folding their fists and putting them on their chests. It means once you do that, they recognise you as someone they can open up to, to tell you what their problems are. 

I call upon the Police to handle these children with care such that we can see how to nurture them and return them back to their homes and reintegrate them in their families. These children can become a problem to us in the society in form of insecurity if they are handled wrongly. This calls for us to pay attention and see how we can support these children –(Member timed out.)

3.17
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I keep wondering why these children come to the streets. I stay in Bugisu region and if you to go to Mbale and Kampala here, you will find that most street connected children are from Karamoja sub-region. 

You saw in the presentation that they were from Napak. Therefore, we would like to find out from the leadership of Karamoja, especially Napak, what is going wrong in that area. Our efforts should be put in Napak where the children are coming from. Let us engage the parents and communities so that the children do not come to the streets but stay home.

Secondly, as Government, we have remand homes. Members, I would like to call upon us to provide enough money in the budget so that those who are on the streets can be taken to these homes for rehabilitation. We have remand homes in Mbale, Kampiringisa and Gulu, among others. Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, we need these homes to be accessible to these children.

At the international level, the Government of Uganda should ratify the Palermo Protocol and at the local level, we need to fast track regulations that will help us in implementation of the Children’s Act. Although we passed the Act, the regulations are not yet in place. Members, these children need a better future. 

We are also informed that there are people in our communities who bring these children from Karamoja and take them to Katanga, Kampala. The labour laws need to be revisited because certain “business people”, if I can call them that, are the ones responsible for our children being in Katanga and other slums in Kampala because the money these children beg from the streets go to these “business people”. Therefore, we need to work closely with Kampala Capital City Authority to ensure that these “business people” are brought to book and our children are retained in schools. 

As Government, we have Universal Primary Education; why aren’t we tapping such opportunities? Universal Secondary Education is also there. Therefore, on the question of education, Government has provided but let us help these children access the quality of education that we desire them to have, and keep them off the streets to have a decent life. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we used to say that remand homes were meant for children in conflict with the law. We have now modified that to say, children in contact with the law. All it means is that there are some violations of legal rules that these children have committed and that is why they are called remand homes. They are not strictly of the nature the Member is referring to.

Honourable members, each Member is taking two minutes.

3.19
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion to commemorate the international day for street connected children. 

Some of us who have grown up in Kampala have had good experiences growing up with children from the streets. These children have a lot of potential and they can become better children if handled well. If you go by some examples, we have very many sportsmen who came from the streets and they have now benefitted this country. 

When Universal Primary Education was introduced in Uganda, we had schools that took up the initiative of bringing in children from the streets of Kampala to give them an opportunity to study. When you look at the records, these children began studying and became better students and performed well in their Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE). Some are MPs, by the way, and some are even doctors. 

Therefore, we should not take street children as a very big problem. Rather, we can learn how to work with such a problem and see how to absorb them in the various communities by according them the various incentives they need while at home so that we stop them from coming to the streets – (Member timed out.)

3.22
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I sincerely thank hon. Atiku and my colleagues who have taken great concern regarding this issue of street children. 

It is true that there are many children on the streets of Kampala and the majority of them from Napak District, which is my home district. The history of these children coming to Kampala and other towns of Uganda is that in the 1980s when there was a lot of trouble in Karamoja, they were giving that as a reason for them to come to Kampala. However, these days when we speak in Karamoja, we tell people that this is no longer a reason to justify their being here anymore. There is no more fighting in Karamoja. 

What is happening is that there are some characters, some of whom we have identified and some of whom have been locked up, who were trying to do some kind of “gymnastics”. They bring these children to the streets of Kampala and as these children beg for money, they come and take this money from the children. 

We have taken this matter to the Police and also informed Kampala Capital City Authority but we are not getting results. 

Recently, we had a meeting in Karamoja and I told parents in my constituency that it is very dehumanising to find that –(Member timed out.)

3.24
MS STELLA NAMOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Atiku for moving the motion for a resolution of Parliament to commemorate the international day of street connected children. 

Mr Speaker, the issue of Karimojong street children did not start yesterday but way back in 1975 when there was famine and insecurity. The Turkana came to Bokora and took all the animals and the people moved as far as Nakasongola, Jinja and Busia. At that time, people moved to look for alternative livelihoods. Some of them are now business people in Iganga, Jinja, Nakasongola and Masindi and they are prosperous. 

However, the current trend has changed. During disarmament in 2002 to 2010, things changed. Those people who were already in Iganga, Jinja, Nakasongola and Masindi had left their relatives in Karamoja because they were running away and these relatives would visit them in those districts. What I am saying is, we have tried our level best as leaders. We have had meetings with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Minister in charge of Karamoja Affairs to find a way to return these children. 

However, these children do not come here alone; they are brought here innocently by people who are making money by using them. It is something, which is easy and can be handled – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MS NAMOE: I would like to call upon the Government to take this issue seriously. In 2013, a budget was appropriated in this House to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to come up with a comprehensive plan to return these children and reunite them with their families. However, that money got lost in the gender ministry.

Further, this Parliament appropriated money for Kobulin Rehabilitation Centre, which was supposed to be a transit centre for these children, but the money was mismanaged by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. I think we are not doing enough as Government to see to it that these children are reunited with their families. 

Mr Speaker, it is very unfair that we come here and say these children come from Napak. These children are Ugandans. They have a right like other Ugandan children. Therefore, it is the responsibility of Government to make sure that these children get proper care. Even when we are returning them – 

I really thank Dwelling Places because they are putting up schools to attract these children. That is what the Government should do. Government can build health centres and schools for these children. In fact, we have land where we can resettle them to start new lives. What we need is the resources to take these children off the streets and arrest the women and men who bring these children to the streets. We can solve this problem because it is not a very difficult issue. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Leader of the Opposition -

3.28
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to indicate to my sister that I am very happy to see her. Indeed, you make us all proud and we are grateful to God for saving your life.

As the Leader of the Opposition, I would like to thank the movers of the motion, those that seconded the motion and those that have spoken in support of the motion. 

No nation in the world can stand without a backbone. The pillars of any nation are its children. We are who we are today because we were once children and we had people that were there for us when we needed them. I think it is very important that every Government puts in place systems, frameworks, laws and policies to support our children.

Mr Speaker, we will never be forgiven by history if we do not support our children. It is very important that we put in place interventions that are guided by evidence on what specifically we need to do for our children. 

I would like to thank our colleagues that moved the motion because it is timely. Issues that affect children in our country today are issues that cut across principal contradictions. They go beyond our political affiliations and faith. Therefore, I would like to encourage all of us to support this motion but support it with specifics.

The issues that confront our children are fundamental and I would like to encourage our Government to find a way of focusing on what these fundamental challenges could be by clearly identifying them.

I would like to propose that we work with universities and research institutions to conduct an in-depth research that will help us understand and recognise what is known and unknown. When that happens, we will be in position to know the findings of such a study. Depending on the findings of such a study, we will be in position to design suitable and accurate interventions. In so doing, we will be addressing the real challenges.

In the meantime, I would like to encourage Government to cluster its interventions as follows: See what it can do in the immediate term because the challenge is already with us. What is it that we can do now? Secondly, we try to focus on what we can do in the medium term and then also, for sustainability purposes, we make sure that the problem stops from reoccurring. We need the long term and all of these have got to be in specifics. Mr Speaker, I really want to thank you for the opportunity. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Peter Sematimba, did you want to say something? (Laughter) 

3.35
MR PETER SEMATIMBA (NRM, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) I too would like to take this opportunity to support the motion, especially because of the fact that children are on the street, not because they want to, but for many reasons that we do not understand. Many of the children who are on the streets end up becoming great people and I would like to give you an example. I went to the United States many years ago to start school. Along the way, things went wrong and I skipped out of school and ended up on the street myself. A lot of people that saw me on the streets- I actually lived in abandoned buildings, in cars and in strange places. I was on the street for a year and a half.

Many people who looked at me in those days probably thought I was worth nothing. As we talk children that are on the streets in Kampala today and in Uganda - from the children in USA who are like those on the streets today, we have an honourable Member of Parliament representing the people of Busiro South and I dare say that we have many more such children on the street that need the support that I got to end up serving this country in a great way.

Let me conclude by saying this, Mr Speaker. While there is a need to support and help these children who are on the street, there is also need to find out how many of them are genuinely on the street and therefore need support to move their lives forward and how many are actually victims of commercial enterprises.

We know that there are a lot of people out there that bring street children onto the street for purposes of fleecing the public off its money. These children come out here, ask us for money, we give them the money –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I just wanted to balance the debate. (Laughter) Yes, honourable minister?

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank hon. Bernard Atiku for presenting this motion. I thank the Members present, for this is an extremely critical issue relating to the little ones of the country. Certainly, as the saying goes, no country can be stronger than its children. Therefore, we are all seen in the image as a mirror. What the children do, we do. 

On the number that is being talked about in Kampala, I would like to correct the record that it is just more than 4,000 children. Ten thousand children is the number for the entire country.

From the investigations, I have a couple of videos where I am on the streets with these children, trying to find out what is going on. This is what I discovered - coming to what the ministry is doing – that almost a third of the people who have reported missing children in the past four months, those children were left in town after night prayers in centres that conduct such prayers in Kampala alone. After the prayer sessions, in Rubaga only, 304 children were left on the streets.

What we are doing right now is that in two weeks’ time, we are going to ensure that the homes that are not licensed give us the children to take them to the free areas and homes that we have around Kampala. For example, there are homes in Kawempe and Kampala, which are newly renovated by the whites and they have a capacity of taking care of more than 600 children. However, to date, they have only 91 children there, meaning that the children do not want to move away from the streets. We have cases where we have rounded up these children and the mothers come with court summons to claim that these were their children and they had been rounded up as street children yet they had just sent them to do some shopping. 

In Kampala alone, they are using these children as proposals to get money from the donor community – (Interjection) – yes and so what we have decided is to ensure that we publish a list that you are going to see in the newspapers this coming week, to tell you the homes that are involved in ensuring that these children are on the streets day in day out. Napak, for example, is one of the most developed districts in Karamoja, making up the seven districts in Karamoja. Napak is relatively developed. I went there for a week and discovered that there are business people that are involved in ensuring that some of these children are on the streets. We worked together to ensure that the child helpline, which is 116, can instantly relieve us of this problem.

Last year alone, we had 8,000 cases that were saved from getting onto the streets through the courts of law. These children were abandoned all of a sudden. Therefore, the 116 number, which is toll free, was put onto the stage for whoever is about to fall into danger or is abandoned or when you see a child being abandoned, call this number. We will come instantly to any part of the country, pick that child and take him or her to the home.

However, what is happening now is that we are putting this to the centre stage –(Interjection)– wait a minute. Let me exhaust my point. Wait a minute –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister is explaining how these children are being used. She has said how some people are getting money out of these children. Is the honourable minister in order to ignore the plight of these children, while knowing exactly those people who are making money out of these children, by allowing them to continue being on the street, yet some people continue gaining out of these children? Is the minister in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion that we are debating is for a Resolution of Parliament to Commemorate the International Day of the Street-Connected Children. That is the motion we are debating. The honourable minister has started outlining policy issues. Honourable minister, I would wish that you would find time to come to this Parliament and address us properly on this issue -(Applause) - when you have sufficient time because now you have two minutes and I am not going to extend it. When you have sufficient time and it is your day to address us on the issue of street-connected children all over the country – for now I would like you to support the motion, resume your seat and we continue with our business.

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I will oblige as guided. I hereby support the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I now put the question that the Motion for a Resolution of Parliament to Commemorate the International Day of Street-Connected Children be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we look forward to the day when the minister responsible for this sector will come here with a ministerial statement to enable us have a full debate on this subject in order to come out with reasonable recommendations on the way forward.

In the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery this afternoon, we have pupils of Apac Model Primary School from Apac District, Maruzi County. They are represented by hon. Maxwell Akora and hon. Betty Engola. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

Hon. Bernard Atiku, thank you very much for this motion and thank you for championing the cause of the children of this country and as we always say, children first. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for the guidance. In this Parliament, if you tell a minister to find time and come to make a ministerial statement, I promise he or they might come after this Parliament has expired. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, would it not be procedurally right that you give this minister a timeframe within which to come back to us with a comprehensive statement on this matter? I am saying this because as you saw her speaking, she has all the information on her fingertip. Even if you gave her only one day, she would be able to come. Don’t you think it would be better she comes back with the report on the street children next week because this is a real national security problem? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is not one of those matters upon which we can impose time. This is a policy issue. We would like to give the minister sufficient time to come back and address us properly on this matter. It is a matter of concern and so we are not going to say she should come tomorrow or on the other day. As soon as she is ready, with notice that this matter is coming up, we will schedule her on the Order Paper so that we can have a comprehensive debate. If people want to come from the countryside to listen to the debate, we will give them notice. 

So, I will not give any timeframe on this matter. Thank you.

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULES NO. 1 AND 2 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider Supplementary Expenditure Schedules No. 1 and 2 for the financial year 2017/2018.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Mukono South, Kachumbala, Pakwach, Koboko, Zombo, and Kumi. 

Honourable members, this motion does not require justification. It is a straightforward motion that this House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider Supplementary Expenditure Schedules No. 1 and 2 for the financial year 2017/2018. 

Before I put the question to this motion, I would like to say that this motion was referred to our committee because when we finally take a decision on it, we have to go and supply the figures. However, we need to receive the report. So, I will put the question as we prepare to receive the report from the committee and any other concerns and then we see how to handle it.

Honourable chairperson, you have a very limited time; help us because the Prime Minister’s Question Time is in ten minutes.

3.48
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I beg to present the Report of the Budget Committee on the Supplementary Expenditure Schedules No. 1 and 2 for the financial year 2017/2018.

Introduction

Mr Speaker, on Tuesday, 28 November 2017, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development laid before Parliament the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No. 1 amounting to Shs 451.255 billion, which is 1.56 per cent of the total budget. 

Further, on Wednesday, 14 March 2018, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development laid before the House Supplementary Expenditure Estimates under Schedule No. 2 amounting to Shs 910.344 billion of which Shs 419 billion, equivalent to 1.4 per cent of the approved budget for the financial year 2017/2018 was authorised within the confines of the three per cent provided for under Section 25 (1) of the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act, 2015 while Shs 481 billion is what was above the three per cent, thus requiring prior parliamentary approval for the expenditure to be authorised. 

In addition, the following addenda to Schedule No. 2 for financial year 2017/2018 were also laid on Table by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. There was an addendum laid on 27 March 2018. The second one was laid on 29 March 2018 and the third on 24 April 2018. The estimates were all referred to the Committee on Budget for consideration and reporting back thereon. 

Mr Speaker, the committee considered the two schedules and the respective addenda and now begs to report on the two schedules as follows: 

This report is presented in three parts. Part A is the methodology, the legal framework where we are deriving the authority from and the status of compliancy and preliminary observations. Part B is about the proposed supplementary estimates under Schedule No. 1 and the observations and recommendations thereon while Part C is about the proposed supplementary estimates under Schedule No. 2 for the financial year 2017/2018.

In the interest of time, Mr Speaker, I will skip the methodology and the legal framework which Members are very familiar with; it is something we always talk about; I will go to the preliminary observations.

    1. The committee noted that the supplementary expenditure estimates were laid in accordance with Section 25 of the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act, 2015. The dates of submission were within the stipulation of the law.

    2. The committee further noted that whereas Parliament approved the total budget of Shs 29 trillion for the financial year 2017/2018, part of the supplementary requests within the three per cent permitted by law were already generally released while other requests shall require prior parliamentary approval before expenditure could be effectively authorised.

    3. In the process of scrutinising the supplementary requests, the committee had engagements with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development regarding the persistent use of supplementary expenditure approvals which distort budget execution. 

	The finance ministry made an elaborate explanation about the funding pressures that arise from sectors and MDAs due to limited funds and constrained resource envelop. The ministry explained that it is almost impossible to imagine an expenditure that will comply with all the three requirements of Regulation 18 (5) at the same time. That was before the regulation was amended.

The committee resolved to recommend approval for some supplementary requests and to reallocate some that were unjustifiable to other deserving MDAs. 

The ministry will move to amend Section 18 (5) of the PFMA, 2015 Regulations to make it more applicable and to avoid any other unnecessary infringement on the law.

Mr Speaker, I am informed these amended regulations were laid on the Table yesterday.

Part B includes the proposed supplementary estimates under Schedule No. 1 for financial year 2017/2018. This schedule comprises a total supplementary expenditure request of Shs 451,255,143,612 that translates into 1.56 per cent of the approved budget, which on preliminary grounds, is consistent with the law. 

Out of the total supplementary request, Shs 263,338,276,182 is recurrent expenditure while Shs 187,916,867,430 is development expenditure. For details refer to table two below which comprises of table 2(a) and 2(b). All the entities that benefited from this supplementary have been highlighted in those two tables. Table 2 (a) and table 2(b). In the interest of time, I will not go through the details. 

I will now move to the sources of funding at page 8. The committee was informed that the supplementary expenditure under Schedule No.1 was financed from the following sources:

    1. Reallocations within the Budget and borrowing from the domestic market as approved by Parliament - Shs 392.2 billion;
    2.  External financing  - Shs 27.6 billion;
    3. Reallocations within NIRA and Kayunga District - Shs 10 billion; and
    4. AIA arising from compensation to Uganda Police and Mbarara University amounting to Shs 2l.4 billion.

The committee was concerned that the finance ministry could not provide evidence of consent by the affected MDAs on reallocations as required by Section 12 (3) of the Budget Act. The argument by the finance ministry was that some MDAs were under performing and to avoid idle resources, Cabinet decision was sought to suppress and reallocate to institutions with shortfalls. By the time of signing the report, the relevant Cabinet minutes had not been provided to back that decision.

Justification of expenditure by vote - again I am not going to go into the details but the information is available in the report for you to see. However, what I will do is to move to Vote 017 because this was very contentious in the committee.

Vote O17 - Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development

A total of Shs l2l.875 billion was authorised of which Shs 106.875 billion was to meet outstanding payments for capacity charges to Jacobson Uganda Plant Limited and Electro-Maxx Ltd. The expenditure was previously rejected by Parliament during appropriation for financial year 2017/2018. 

The Government position is that the two companies have running contracts, which must be respected. They availed copies of those contracts to us. During appropriation, we did not have those copies. 

In addition, thermal plants are needed in the country's generation mix to ensure security of supply. The Government is requesting for a supplementary of Shs 106.87 billion to cater for the following: 

    1.  Clear arrears to the thermal power plants and loan repayment to Nordea Bank of Shs 44.17 billion for the financial year 2016/2017; and
    2. To fund the shortfall on the 2017 l18 budget of Shs 62.7 billion. The details are in the table below. In that table you see the details on the arrears owing to Electro-Maxx, Jacobson and this Nordea Bank. The sub total there is Shs 44.1 billion. And in the 2017/2018 budget because we had cut the budget, the shortfall is Shs 68 billion to again Electro-Maxx, Jacobson and Nordea bank and a net supplementary budget is Shs 106.8 billion.

The committee was informed that Government had the option of exiting the contract but this option involves paying the entire debt of $44.97 million and outstanding unpaid VAT of Shs 57.8billion, which at the time was not available due to competing budgetary requirements.

The committee was further informed that regardless of whether or not dispatch from the thermal power generators is stopped, obligations to pay capacity charge stilt remains and the amount applicable in 2O18/2019 is Shs 43.94 billion. It should be noted that capacity charges for Electro-Maxx Ltd are only applicable to 30 September 2018 when their contract expires. The other Shs 15 billion was to Petroleum Authority and the National Oil Company. There were no controversies about those two. 

I will now proceed to the observations and recommendations on Schedule No. 1 at page 13 of the report. The Committee observes that whereas the exercise of registering learners -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, the Prime Minister’s Question Time is now and the prime minister is here. However, I will use the indulgence of the Prime Minister to allow the chairman of the committee to finish for us to receive the report before we can go into Prime Minister’s Question Time. Please try and summarize now.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Okay. Thank you. 

Observations and Recommendations

The committee observes that whereas the exercise of registering learners was concluded, there are reports relating to the gross mismanagement of funds under the NIRA Vote 309. The committee recommends that the Auditor-General is urgently instructed to undertake a forensic audit on the operations of NIRA to prevent any further loss of public resources. A final report on this matter should be expected by end of August 2018. 

Secondly, the committee also observes the unending huge payments for idle power generation under previous contractual obligations between Government and Jacobson on the one hand and Electro-Maxx on the other. The committee recommends that the Auditor-General should urgently undertake a value for money audit to determine a short-term solution to the problem including exercising the option for paying off the debt entirely and acquiring the thermal power plant.

Third, the committee observes almost all the funds under this schedule have been released to the beneficiary institutions under Section 25 of the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA). The available option is to account for the utilization of the funds by the respective MDAs. 

The committee recommends that a total of Shs 451,255,143,612 comprising Shs 263,338,276,182 as recurrent expenditure and Shs 187,916,867,430 as development expenditure be approved for supply and supplementary appropriation under the respective votes in tables 2 (a) and 2 (b) above.

Now let me go to part C of the report. This schedule comprises a total supplementary expenditure request of Shs 910.344 billion out of which Shs 419 billion, equivalent to 1.44 per cent of the approved budget for financial year 20l7/2018 has been authorized and Shs 481 billion requires prior parliamentary approval as this does not fit within the three per cent limit provided by the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. 

In addition Parliament received more requests for prior approval as detailed in the table below but I am not going through the details of that table but since I have been given five minutes -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who gave you five minutes? (Laughter) Please wind up, Mr Chairman.

MR LUGOLOOBI: I will now take you straight to the supplementary requests that require prior parliamentary approval. We have a number of them and are all presented in table 5, supplementary requests for prior parliamentary approval - I beg to make two small corrections. 

We have the Uganda Police Force and the figure there is Shs 60.9 billion recurrent expenditure and Shs 60.9 development expenditure. We also have the Uganda Land Commission for Amuru Sugar Factory with Shs 12 billion in the last column and not Shs 2 billion. 

The Government has made justification for each of these, we went through it; we have made these conclusions: 

However, before that, I invite you to look at Table 8, which is on page 32. Table 8 is about supplementary requests under Schedule No. 2 for financial year 2017/2018 for prior parliamentary approval and in that table we present what the committee is recommending for approval and supply. 

There is a section for what has been proposed and a section on what has been recommended for supplementary approval and supply. It is all reflected in that schedule vote by vote. It goes up to page 35 and that takes us to the recommendation on Schedule No. 2. 

Supplementary Schedule No. 2 comprises a total supplementary expenditure request of Shs 868.715 billion out of which Shs 419 billion equivalent to 1.44 per cent of approved budget for the financial year 2017 has been authorised and Shs 449.714 billion requires prior parliamentary approval as this does not fit within the three per cent as already mentioned. 

The committee recommends as follows:


(a) 	That Shs 419,001,152,637, comprising recurrent expenditure of Shs 174,375,462,968 as elaborated in Table 3 (a) and development expenditure of Shs 244,624,689,659 as seen in Table 3 (b) above under Schedule No. 2 for financial year 2017/2018, be approved and supplied under the respective vote for Supplementary Appropriation, 2018.

b) 	That of the Shs 520,613,685,035 requiring prior parliamentary approval, a total of Shs 459,034,337,576 only be approved comprising of Shs 139,867,429,095 as recurrent expenditure and Shs 319,848,908,481 for development expenditure - see Table 8 above for details by vote.

c) 	A request for Shs 8 billion to procure hand hoes was found to be time bad and excluded from the approved supplementary estimate. 

	The committee recommends that the expenditure ceiling for vote 15 for NAADS be enhanced by the same amount in the financial year 2018/19 as a measure to provide for time sufficient to undertake procurement of such a significant magnitude.

d) 	A request by the Cotton Development Organisation to procure a motor vehicle, enhancing salaries and repainting of cotton house was found not to be in tandem with the priorities of the organisation.

	The committee recommends that Shs 682 million earmarked for this purpose be saved for next year’s appropriation. Further, we recommend that a statutory revision of Shs 009,229,133,897 through the Parliamentary Commission be approved to meet arrears in tax refund for Members of the 9th Parliament.

Conclusion

Mr Speaker, I move that the report of the committee on Schedules No.1 and 2 of Supplementary Expenditure for the financial year 2017/18, be adopted as amended by the august House to enable the finance ministry process the releases in good time before the financial year comes to an end. I beg to report.

Mr Speaker, I have been notified about the minority report on Supplementary Expenditure Schedules 1 and 2 for the financial year 2017/18, sponsored by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi and hon. Cecilia Ogwal. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and the committee, for the good work. I invite the people who have a minority opinion to present it to the House.

4.13
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I have a few issues to raise for Parliament to note but also appreciate Parliament for having improved the process of budgeting over the years. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you, because you even guided the House by putting in writing, the procedure that the House and Committee on Budget should follow to come up with a proper supplementary budget on the 10th day of July, 2014.

We have walked through the years trying to press for compliance to the law and to follow certain guidelines. That aside, I express my great appreciation to the Attorney-General who, for the first time, gave us a legal opinion, which has put to rest, that issue of re-allocation of resources.

The law is very express that there must be consent and evidence of consultation between two sectors and that, we have been trying to get it from the ministry but failing over the years. Now that matter has been put to rest, I would like to appreciate the finance minister to have acted positively because he has now tried to amend the laws. You are aware that on Tuesday, there was a statutory instrument that was laid on the Floor of Parliament and even this morning, there is a list of some of the items not captured in schedules 1 and 2 and the addendum, which have also been captured. This to some extent has improved on our process. 

However, Mr Speaker, I have observed some concerns which the ministry still has to brush up. It looks as if there are some ministries that feel that getting money through supplementary is easier than going through the long route of putting it in the budget. Therefore, I would like to plead with you that the ministries should try their best to put all their concerns in the budget to make your and our work easier as Parliament. Also this business of removing resources from one ministry and putting it to another in a way makes some sectors not to perform to what is expected of them.

Finally, I would like to say that when I pleaded in the past that the compensation for cattle that was taken from northern Uganda, specifically Acholi and Lango, was not being done properly, some people doubted. However, from the time we stopped getting money through order mandamus, we now came to confirm that the people who are benefiting from that money were not the genuine beneficiaries. 

I would like to plead with this Parliament that we are concerned about the ordinary people in Amuru. Let us hope that the money we have allocated will go to the beneficiaries of the land because we want to know whether the people registered in those registers are the beneficiaries of the land. That is my plea, Mr Speaker, and I pray that the details of our views will be summarised by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You should have alerted me earlier that two of you are going to speak. Hon. Kivumbi, you now need to limit the time.

4.17
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I will go straight to the point. The first bone of contention is failure to comply with the law and the second is on reallocation. The third on first schedule will go to the issue of subsidiary appropriation - thermal power plant, which the chair touched, technical supplementary, donations and cotton and lint stock. 

In schedule No.2 I talk about the compensation of Dr Muhamad Buwule Kasasa, compensation to Mr Ishingoma, facilitation of Resident District Commissioners (RDCs), the national CCTV security system project, staff recruitment and the Cotton Development Organisation. 

Mr Speaker, in conformity to the law to the supplementary criteria - because of time, I am going to speak for each item in order to beat time.

Conformity to the supplementary procedure 

Hon. Cecila Ogwal has noted that the finance ministry set a standard of what should constitute a supplementary. They set a criterion for the finance minister, while approving a supplementary, what you must look at. One was that the expenditure must be unavoidable, absorbable and unforeseeable. 

However, when we look through the list of expenditures before us even with amendment, which with a heart of stone we can agree with as compromises to move a country forward, you will see that a number of expenditures are clearly avoidable and were foreseeable. It constitutes incompetence of the highest order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They were avoidable and foreseeable?

MR KIVUMBI: They were avoidable; they were foreseeable because if we do not correct that, we are going to distort the entire purpose of budgeting. Otherwise, we now have nearly two trillion as a supplementary budget; so looking at the figures there, one by one you will see that they were all foreseeable and avoidable.

The next issue is reallocation. The majority report has confirmed but has failed to have the guts to fire the bullets. It has confirmed that for a supplementary, if you are going to use the route of reallocation, the agencies must as by law, have given a go-ahead to that expenditure for you to deduct it. The majority committee report has said they requested - because they are taking a route that for agencies to give a go ahead, it should be a cabinet approval. The majority decision, which is erroneous also - we requested the minister to avail a minute of Cabinet where those decisions were taken, they failed. Even the abridged version where they are taking the route of Cabinet to approve, we asked for the minutes where agencies approved that their budget items be reallocated. 

Secondly, reallocation is only permitted under the law if the expenditure item under consideration within a vote has also been transferred. If you do not transfer the expenditure item under the law, you cannot reallocate. What is permissible under the law is only virement. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, when you look at Table 1, you realise all expenditure items that should have been through budget reallocation is outside the law. In the opinion of the Attorney-General, which the finance minister presented to the Budget committee, he noted with sadness that all the supplementary approvals by Parliament had been outside the law. I have a copy of the opinion of the Attorney-General attached as an annex, which hon. Bahati presented to the Budget committee. The Attorney-General confirmed we have been acting outside the law.

Therefore, should we continue with impunity to break the law even in a case where the Attorney-General has confirmed to the Parliament? I humbly request this august House that, in order to conform to the law, to regard all the reallocations as being outside the law. 

I have said two conditions are clear: One is that the expenditure item, if you are to reallocate, you must move functions and two is that you never sought the authority of the agencies. We asked you to have a minute of Cabinet but you did not present. That is the minimum; that road too is erroneous and you are not abiding even with that bare minimum. Therefore, what would you want Parliament to do for you? 

Let me now move to the thermal energy power plant. Parliament rejected this expenditure and pronounced itself. The finance ministry hijacked powers of appropriation, disregarded the position of Parliament and went ahead to allocate money to an item upon which Parliament had made a decision and pronounced itself. That is contrary to the law. 

What the finance ministry ought to have done, if there was need, was to come back to Parliament and request for Parliament to reverse its decision. However, on your own even within the three per cent that is mandated you cannot hijack powers of Parliament to appropriate- and for me, that is a serious issue.

Mr Speaker, you will observe that all expenditure items under the three per cent provision are almost controversial. Most of them go to personalities and compensation. That is why we find them outside the law and an abuse.

Technical supplementary; the Attorney General has pronounced himself that “technical” supplementary is a word that does not exist in our legal framework. A supplementary is defined by the law both by the Constitution and the Public Finance Management Act. 

Therefore, for the ministry official to coin a word called “technical” supplementary is outside the law. Therefore, the expenditure for NIRA was outside the law –(Interruption)

MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, I rise to seek for clarification from the holder of the floor. On record, he has mentioned more than five times the words outside the law. I want to seek for clarification such that you become specific on the law. If any action is against any article in the Constitution you would quote it. If it is against the Public Finance Management Act, you quote it. However, to make a general statement “outside the law” it has come out of your statement over and again. Thank you.

MR KIVUMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My good friend is right. I have not tried to read every provision of this statement because you have it on the iPad. If you read the text, I quote the specific law and there is a reference to an annex to everything I say that is unlawful.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I think I should proceed. The thing called donation should be defined because it is becoming very controversial. We want a criterion on what constitutes a donation to help Parliament to process what is called a donation. It seems in this land, every time we will be approving money in name of donations by the Office of the President. It is only better that we define what constitutes a donation-(Interjection) I do not want to go into the Rukungiri issues- the public knows.

Mr Speaker, I go to page 14- American Procurement Company. Mr Speaker, this company or whatever name it is called got a supplementary of Shs3.6 billion in the last Supplementary   Act. It has gotten a supplementary provision of Shs6 billion in this supplementary. All I want to see- it still has outstanding balances to pay of 13 billion. I have had the courtesy to look into them in the ministerial policy statement for this ministry.

I do not see the reminder of this figure in the policy statement. Otherwise, you would expect that in the next budget –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of Order

MS JOY ONGOM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are handling issues of finance of this country and it is a budget supplementary- it is serious. However, is it in order as we are handling this serious business for an honourable Member of Parliament to be very busy reading newspapers in the House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which honourable member?

MS JOY ONGOM: Hon. Pecos Kuteesa. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sergeant, can you verify this fact for me please? I am informed that the honourable member had this report inserted in the newspaper (Laughter.) However, if he was also glancing at the newspaper then it is not right but I am told that the report was actually with the newspaper.

MR KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I was only saying that AMPROC should not consistently feature in supplementary expenditures. However, the line ministry should incorporate the balance of the figure within the policy statement so that it does not look like every time there is a supplementary, AMPROC as an agency will appear.

Mr Speaker, compensation to Dr Muhammad Buwule Kasasa. His land was confiscated in Mutundwe. I will even sound very honest that I know the gentleman. With due respect I would be the first person to say he should be paid.

However, there are issues with this compensation. The land in question still has a couple of encumbrances and various claimants on it.  This same land has been grossly encroached on. Even then, the ministry requested for Shs 1 billion. With outstanding problems, I find no rationale why the Budget Committee should find it within its own power for land with serious encumbrance and legal challenges not only to give them the Shs 1 billion but increase it to seven.

Mr Speaker, on this I am very serious. It happens to be that the lawyer in question is a Member of Parliament and consistently attended committees of Parliament in consideration of this item and disappeared when this item - therefore, I sense conflict of interest.

If Parliament proceeds this way, we will land into serious problems. With due respect, I would understand on a humanitarian basis that Mr Buwule deserved his money yesterday but it should be done in a proper fashion.

Mr Speaker, we have resolved the issue of laying at Table. I am happy that is now sorted. I only encourage the finance ministry never gain to come to this Parliament to play a bit of tricks. Let things be done the straightway. Otherwise, we have the capacity even if matters concern some of us to raise constitutional issues.

We have money that was for facilitation of resident district commissioners. Mr Speaker, this item was in the Independence Day celebrations, clearly that item is foreseeable and should be properly budgeted for and cannot be a subject of a supplementary.

In any case, when you look at the Auditor-General’s report, they have consistently failed to account for monies allocated to them.

The closed-circuit television (CCTV) camera system

Mr Speaker, this is an absolutely huge amount of money. We needed to enhance our national security yesterday. With murders going on in the country – I am a Shadow Minister for the Ministry of Internal Affairs; I know the agency of this expenditure. All I am saying, it can be properly aligned in a policy statement which is only two months away. This would enable us to clearly look at it and give them the money. 

However, to stampede Parliament through a supplementary for this huge sum money, we may not have the appropriate time to go into the details. Therefore, this is an item that can be clearly budgeted for and it is money we must approve as Parliament because Ugandans are tired of murder cases.

Staff recruitment

Mr Speaker, there is a directive by His Excellency the President; directing all accounting officers not to dare recruit midway the budget or make any adjustment to the budget allocation on salaries and arrears that will lead to a supplementary. The President was emphatic that any accounting officer that does so should not be reappointed. 

In addition, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development issued a budget circular directing all accounting officers not to recruit midway and they re-echoed the position of the President. I find it erroneous for the same minister to approve a supplementary budget for staff salaries and wages. This means the ministry cannot even adhere to the minimum standards they set themselves, and that is gross incompetence.

If the directive of the President of the Republic of Uganda is not obeyed, if a budget circular is not obeyed by the minister in charge of finance, whose directive will accounting officers obey too?

The reason, we strongly take this kind of position is that this money is borrowed internally at exorbitant interest rate, for which even the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development does not have a scheme on how it will pay back. It has risen up to Shs 13 trillion domestic borrowing and we borrow every time and again to finance this kind of behaviour disrespecting the directive of the President and budget circular.

As I conclude, Mr Speaker, we must know as Parliament as we debate this supplementary that the economy is severely hard on Ugandans. Every price; be it cement, sugar or steel has gone up. The Ugandans would have expected us to legislate on how to mitigate those consequences but none of the expenditure before this Parliament, is directed towards the hard suffering Ugandans. We are paying for thermal power, land compensation among others that will end up aligning pockets of individuals. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move and say that all those items we have questioned; cotton – the cotton husks was just by the majority committee. The issue in there is the issue of buffer stock. There are many spinners in this country but for us to say only two should be favoured –(Interjection)- Mr Speaker, I do not know if the Chairperson is on record? I will simply direct the Chairperson of the Budget Committee - I think you had the opportunity to even read this document. I am quoting the Auditor-General’s report. The Auditor-General mentioned that there are so many spinners in this country. As the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget, you ought to know better than me as an ordinary member.

However, for us to favour Southern Range Nyanza Limited and these companies are controversial. It is Southern Range Nyanza that gets a corporate tax waiver, it is Southern Range Nyanza that gets money for a buffer stock on cotton, it is Southern Range Nyanza that gets a tax holiday and bailout. The question is why this particular company that gets all these favours? They are so many spinners in this country and the Auditor-General directed that this kind of buffer stock – In the last Parliament, we gave out Shs 10 billion in supplementary as one of the buffer stock. What did they use the money for? Part of the money according to the report, was used for administrative expenses which was supposed to be for a buffer stock.

Therefore, as we give this money, care must be taken. We should not disfavour – including money on co-operatives. I have seen here you have given Busoga Co-operative and Lango Co-operatives but I come from an area which also has co-operatives and there have issues. Bugisu Cooperative Union has issues and it is left out, Wamala Growers, where I come from is left out and they all have debts and these debts are verified but you are picking only three? Are they from heaven? All animals are equal but others are more equal.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, the issue I am presenting on the minority report is that as a country, Parliament must exercise its power and restrain the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development not to take us to this dangerous root. 

As Government of NRM you have a manifesto and this manifesto entails you to fulfil it and you must not align and realign only but you must align and realign matters of finance. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Member for Butambala, for the elaborations you have made on the minority opinion of the two members of the committee for the fundamental question that they need ask because the motion is for us to move the Committee of Supply. Honourable members, there are general issues of policy, that have been raised and that can attract the debate. I would like to know whether there are issues with the numbers. If there are no issues with the numbers, we could go to Committee of Supply and have sufficient time to deal with this issue of policy in the debate which we are going to have for our long time to see that these issues are addressed. 

I say this because I have been part of your meetings. Some of the resolutions have come because I have participated in some of those meetings including those issues of unavoidable and absorbable and foreseeable –(Laughter)– I think I participated in those meetings. I hope that the common meeting that we had has helped the process. If there are issues with figures then we deal with them now but if there are no issues with the figures then we could go and supply. However, if you are proposing changes on the supply and then specifically propose those ones clearly so that we see how to deal with them.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, in the spirit of the Committee on Budget that found the wisdom to reallocate Shs 80 billion that should have gone for votes that help the poorest of the poor but because there was restraint of time and lack of absorption capacity in the remaining time, it is in the same spirit that I move to propose:

    1. For Electro-Maxx Shs 106 billion was a subsidiary appropriation not permitted in law. That should be deducted. I think that was a common opinion we had in the committee but I looked at the figures and the chairman had written as they were. I think that was not even contentious. We had agreed in the committee that figures for Electro-Maxx be deducted. I found it here in the main report but that was not done.

    2. Now onto reallocation: all the expenditures for reallocation - the good thing is that we are delaying appropriation, for example, for reallocation. The agencies have the money but in refusing to appropriate, we are seeking a sanction to those officers because they are moving outside the law. You cannot appropriate money that is unlawful as Parliament. That will make us reduce by almost Shs 300 billion.

Mr Speaker, I have questioned the money, Shs 14 billion, for Fine Spinners, that it goes to a buffer stock. I have questioned Shs 7 billion to Mr Buwule that is contentious. I have questioned, so I beg that all those deductions - (Interjections)- The committee agreed to reduce the 600 - so I move that all that money should not be appropriated in this schedule.

4.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you hon. Kivumbi for the minority report. Indeed there are policy issues that we have taken note of and we will have to work on them together as Government to address. Some of them have actually been addressed. I would like to comment on two of them:

    1. Consultations: The consultations with other vote holders required by the law if you are going to do a supplementary or deduction. We have had this debate in the committee. We have involved the Attorney-General and our view is that we are taking a Whole-Government Approach. We approve these supplementary figures in Cabinet and every vote of Government is represented in Cabinet. The Prime Minister is here to confirm that. 

When we are taking these decisions, it is a Whole-Government Approach. We approve them in Cabinet and that is how we consult as Government.

    2. Donations: The second issue is the donations- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would like you to help me with the issue of the figures because we are going to debate the policy issues. They had made proposals for deductions. If you take us to policy issues, that means I have to open the debate. Please help me with that specific issue of figures that are proposed to be reduced from that list. Can we deal with this please?

MR BAHATI: Thank you. He has raised an issue of the idle capacity that Parliament did not appropriate. Even at the time of appropriation, we raised this issue. We said that as a country, and the Minister of Energy and Minerals will add to this, we need to provide for security of our energy. We do not know what can at any time happen to our hydroelectricity or the solar that we have.

What the Minister of Energy and Minerals, who is actually the leader in this sector, did was to develop a policy, an energy policy, for us that we are going to have thermal electricity to cater for any eventuality. Should there be a problem on our hydro, the country should not go into –(interjections)- now, the issue is; you cannot have this energy security at a zero cost.  I would like to beg, with your permission, Mr Speaker, the minister of energy to inform leaders of this nation on this important matter of energy security, if you allow.

4.50
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Ms Irene Muloni): Thank you, Mr Speaker and my colleague, hon. Bahati. The matter of energy security is critical to us as a country and as international best practice, when we plan for energy supply, security is very pertinent. We are lucky as a country that we are endowed with plenty of renewable energy sources but when we visit our energy policy, you plan for the unexpected. You recall some years back when the drought hit us really hard. The amount of thermal generation that this country had to suffer was almost equivalent to another hydro-power plant –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister has not yet made a statement. Can you let her make the statement then you seek clarification? Please.

MS MULONI: Therefore, while we tap the renewable energy sources, we must also have on standby, thermal generation which easily kicks in. The generators that are on thermal, positioned in the different parts of the country are to serve that purpose. They are kept on hot standby and they keep generating some electricity into the network such that should there be a problem, they are able to kick in and sustain the load.

It is therefore not that this thermal power generation policy or planning started recently. It has been part of our energy mix. 

As a matter of fact, Mr Speaker, we do plan in our budgets. We put it in there. Therefore this figure of Shs 106 billion that is being talked about is constituted by arrears for the financial year 2016/2017 of about Shs 44 billion. When the financial year 2017/2018 came in, the amount for thermal was rejected and yet we are already in contractual arrangement. The thermal generators are operational, they are on hot standby. They are already feeding into the network. There are already agreements - (Interjections)- the power networks. We have Jacobsen, it is connected, it is in Namanve, Electro-Maxx is in Tororo.

Therefore, these things are already part of our network. We already have contractual engagements and one of the systems, the Jacobsen is actually a system that is going to revert to Government once we pay off the loan. 

Part of this money is to cater for the loans that brought that plant into existence. The Shs 106.87 billion which figure is being talked about is constituted by arrears and by the portion of the budget in financial year 2017/2018, which was not allocated. 

Therefore, I implore colleagues to appreciate the need for power security as a country and to respect the arrangements that we put in place so that we ensure that at all time we have electricity for our needs. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Take the clarifications, honourable minister. It helps if we understand them. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, you know as I do that Namanve was built on the basis of “build, operate and transfer” and there was a power purchase agreement signed between the Government of Uganda and Jacobsen. May I know from you what has been the production capacity of Jacobsen and how much electricity we have got to the national grid as a result of them feeding the national grid so that we know – because Jacobsen has been operating at this capacity, when we pass a supplementary we shall get more power as a result of this. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, let us clear this point.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the clarification I would like to seek from the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development is that, first of all honourable minister, you need a supplementary of Shs 106.8 billion, which is almost 107 billion. That is in addition to what you have already been given. We are talking of this company called Electro-Maxx Limited and this is a man called Bitature – one of the richest men in Uganda and I hope this is not where he got the money to become rich. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the minister that, of this money you are going to pay, how much have we got from that company called Electro-Maxx and what did it supply so that we understand?

Secondly, the President is complaining about the high prices of power – we the citizens don’t complain because we accepted to pay – how has this Electro-Maxx helped us to reduce power tariffs? We are giving them this money, yet they are overcharging us at the same time.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, I support your submission but why do you want this money as a supplementary other than putting it in the main budget since we are just two months away from the budget?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the money was rejected in the budget. Please, let us not go back to what we know. It was rejected and that is why they brought it as arrears and that is what the minority report says. Please!

MR AOGON: Mr Speaker, the clarification I am seeking from the minister is that, from the information available –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Available where?

MR AOGON: With the minister – the one she has just supplied. (Laughter) It is very expensive to have these contractors have standby generators which we are going to pay for even when they are idle. What is the cost of us replacing that kind of service such that instead of having a contractor to give us power we get the thermal energy ourselves as a country? I think that would be the better way to go because these people are eating money from us. Even as we talk right now they are counting the money. They are not even feeding it into the grid but they are counting the money. Can’t we get our own thermal energy? Thank you.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, “power security” is the new word –(Laughter)- and we know that Bujagali has been producing power and the power from Bujagali is not fully utilised. Bujagali produces about 250MW to the national grid and whether this power comes to the national grid or not, we pay for it. Why are we looking for money to fund thermal energy when there is power from Bujagali? 

Secondly, new dams are coming up to produce more power. Why are we spending money on thermal energy when we have got a lot of energy around? Why “energy security” at this time?

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I appreciate the arguments being advanced. We are not trying to look for reasons why the Shs 106 billion is being requested. What we are saying is that it is against the law. Parliament expressed itself on that issue and, therefore, if the ministry wanted that money, it should have come back to Parliament to reverse its decision. 

Secondly, we are against reversing the decision of the Budget Committee of Parliament with regard to the supplementary – this decision after appropriation. Once we appropriate based on the decision of Parliament, the minister has no authority to reverse the decision of Parliament. That is the argument we are trying to advance, Mr Speaker. It is not that there is a justification, demand or whatever. We are saying if the minister has any demand at all, the minister should come to Parliament and we reverse our decision. That is our argument and the position of the minority report. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you rose on procedure. However, if I gather it correctly from the minister, the point is that this matter was presented to this House for appropriation. This House rejected it but the demand remained outstanding. That is why they have brought it back this way. That is the explanation from the minister, isn’t it? 

Because it was rejected, it remained outstanding and now they used this other method of supplementary to try and bring it back. That is why you are saying it is unlawful to come as a supplementary. In other words, if it was coming, it should have been one of those ones that needed prior approval of Parliament. (Applause) That is the point they are making. 

Honourable minister, I don’t think it is your case anymore. I think you leave it there. It is the issue of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. You made your request and your request was rejected by Parliament. Why did the minister think it was better to bring it through a supplementary rather than coming to re-engage Parliament? Is it because it can only do it during the budget or should we have done it through prior approval? Why have you chosen this avenue, honourable minister?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I can see hon. Cecilia Ogwal trying to guide me. I do not know what she wants to guide me on. It is true Parliament considered this matter and we made a passionate plea to the committee that it was important to have this resources appropriated so that we can secure the energy of our country. 

Parliament was informed that there were commitments which Government had already entered into and there was no way we could cancel them in the middle. Parliament rejected it. We received enormous pressure on the obligation we had already committed and in our wisdom, as Government, we took a decision under the law – of three per cent of supplementary – and it has been brought back here to be considered by the whole House.

On the second issue of Nyanza and Fine Spinners, Mr Speaker, it is my hope and prayers that in my lifetime I will see a situation where we shall end this practice of dehumanising Africans. Someone puts in a container old clothes they have worn and then bring them to be sold here and yet we have our own cotton that we can process and make new clothes out of it. 
 
The point I am raising is that we supported Shs 10 billion for – we only have two –(Interruption).

MR AKOL: Mr Speaker, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is talking about bringing second-hand clothes to Uganda. He has also said that we have our own factory in Uganda that produces clothes. I have never witnessed any serious production of cheap clothes that Ugandans could buy from here. Therefore, is it in order for the minister to allude that it is dehumanising when that is what Ugandans can afford?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I did not hear the minister say there are factories in Uganda producing clothes. He said when we have our own cotton. That is what he said. He did not talk about factories. I listened to the minister very carefully as I always do. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue we are talking about before the minister could talk about cotton is the supplementary under the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, which we would like to resolve before we can go ahead.

First of all, I would like to apologise to Parliament. I do not know why I asked about Shs 106 billion when we rejected it. Would it be procedurally right to go to the next item when we have this matter of Shs 106 billion, which Parliament in its wisdom at budget time rejected and we allow it pass for supplementary and yet the main budget rejected it.

Mr Speaker, our laws say that if something is spent out of the law, the person who spent it is personally held responsible. Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we resolve Shs 106.87 billion before the minister can go to the next item because it is the heart of everything as far as we are concerned today. How did the minister spend our money when Parliament rejected it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I need to hear from the minister and this is a question that the minister needs to answer so that we can understand properly.

There are items of expenditure that require prior approval of Parliament and the list has been exhibited here. Is it possible to move those items that required prior parliamentary approval from those under direct supplementary, which are under the three per cent? Would it be something you want to consider so that the items that you brought today that also required prior approval of Parliament, which they do not have issues with be accommodated under direct supplementary, while those that require prior approval of Parliament like Shs 106 billion and others go in that category and then we can deal with them separately? Would that be okay?

The issue of Shs 106 billion requires a different level of approval. Can we conclude with the three per cent and bring forward other items that are not contentious under the three per cent and leave out those that are beyond three per cent, which require prior parliamentary approval? Would that be something you wish to consider?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The budget table we have is very clear in the majority report. It clearly shows items that require prior parliamentary approval. The bone of contention of Shs 106 billion is that it did go through the prior parliamentary approval. The minister gave out the money long time ago and brought it to Parliament under the pretext of those within three per cent.

I know the minister has powers to do that and we are not questioning it. What we are questioning is that the minister financed an item for which Parliament had pronounced itself. The powers to appropriate solely lies with Parliament and in fact, you took away the powers of Parliament to appropriate. The decent thing would have been that you bring this money in that schedule that requires parliamentary approval. However, as the case may be, if it was extremely urgent, Parliament is always here. You would have come back to Parliament to pronounce it. 

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought I would be privileged to also serve my colleague and the House this information. It is true Parliament rejected this during appropriation including in my own Committee on Budget and the Committee on Natural Resources.

Mr Speaker, the law does not appreciate in its current state what the ministry would consider under prior approval. We looked at this as a Committee on Budget. In fact, I am among the people who moved for rejection but I must be genuine that if we are to study the law, we should treat the law as it is.

It is true that the ministry used its powers using the law knowing that when they bring it within the three per cent - Even if we were Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, when issues are presented and you have got the mandate of expending within the limit of three per cent - the law does not quote what makes the three per cent. The law is silent on that. It only mentions that as long as you have expended whatever is above three per cent, it must be presented to the House – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I know that hon. Nankabirwa Ann is very conversant with issues of energy because she was a vice chairperson of Umeme investigations.

The three per cent is what the ministry is allowed to spend. However, the ministry is supposed to spend it on things which are unforeseeable. Foreseeable things should be budgeted for. In this case, the issue of this Electro-Maxx Uganda was foreseeable as an activity; Government budgeted for it and Parliament, in its wisdom, rejected it. Parliament is the final decision maker in as far as finances are concerned. That means it was a foreseeable and rejected.

Mr Speaker, is the honourable Member for Kyankwanzi, hon. Ann Maria Nankabirwa, knowledgeable in energy sector, in order to come and tell us that the minister is free to spend anyhow and anywhere, where even Parliament has rejected it? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Shs 106 billion was brought before Parliament. Parliament rejected it. The obligation remained outstanding. When they were spending or whatever they did, were there provisions of the law that permitted them to do that? [Honourable Members: ”No.”] These are rhetorical questions that do not require any answers. (Laughter) Please, withhold your answers. The Speaker is still thinking through questions. In other words, I am interrogating the matter. 

Were there provisions in the law that permitted such expenditure? Then, as the law was captured, there was not but the spirit of the law existed then. What was the spirit of the law, which has now been corrected that a particular expenditure was unavoidable; was unabsorbable or unforeseeable. This particular expenditure was foreseeable and it was budgeted for but was rejected. Is it an expenditure that was unavoidable? It was rejected when it was in the budget. Therefore, you cannot bring the principle of unavoidable, unforeseeable and unabsorbable because it was in the budget. Those principles do not apply in the budget process.

The spirit of the law of making these three items applicable, in consideration of issues of supplementary, remains. The question is; after Parliament rejected a foreseeable expenditure, which was foreseen by the spending agency and they brought it to it and rejected it, did it remain an expenditure that was unavoidable? [Honourable Members: “No.”] I said I do not require answers. (Laughter) If it was unavoidable, did they spend the money in that spirit? If they did, is this the right time to come back to Parliament?

Honourable members, we are here to provide solutions and the solutions we provide must never violate the law. On the issue of Parliament having rejected it, did it terminate the obligation?  Did it terminate the requirement? Did it terminate the debt? It did not. (Applause) It remained outstanding. Therefore, how do you deal with an outstanding obligation that has not been financed through direct appropriation? How do you deal with it as a Government? You come to Parliament. 

Therefore, what does the law give you on the process of coming to Parliament? It gives you; one, three per cent to spend within. If it goes beyond three per cent, you must come and first ask for prior approval of Parliament.

Honourable members, we need to deal with this issue in this way properly. I have said time and again that the requirement that was in the law did not support the spirit of what that request is supposed to be. To require a supplementary, it must have been unavoidable, unabsorbable and unforeseeable, all in one transaction, could not have been what was intended because it leads to an absurd result. If it was foreseeable, why should I first go and find out if it was unavoidable or unabsorbable? If it was foreseeable, why should I go to the other two?

The way the loan was captured in the letter seems to suggest that I must first verify. It is unforeseeable. A disaster has happened. I did not foresee that it was going to happen and I did not plan for it. Therefore, it has happened. I must now first confirm that the expenditure I am proposing for that disaster is unabsorbable, unavoidable and unforeseeable. It leads to this thing I have always called an absurdity. Therefore, the true intention should have been that if you find that a particular matter is unavoidable, you can request for a supplementary and if that supplementary falls within this three per cent, you can spend that money.

If that particular expenditure was standing on its own unabsorbable, you could look from within and see that that matter could be financed through supplementary and you spend it. If it was unforeseeable, then you look within the law and say, “   Well, this matter was unforeseeable. I could not have foreseen it.” Therefore, if it is below the three per cent, you spend the money. That is what should have been the normal anticipation or regulation that the law should have provided. 

In the current situation that we are in, the situation was foreseeable and it was provided for in the budget because the spending agency foresaw this expenditure and planned for it. Parliament rejected it. When Parliament rejected it, the outstanding obligation remained there. Was it unavoidable? Was it unabsorbable? They used the criteria of those two and spent the money. Therefore, can we proceed, honourable members, please? (Applause) 

It was a point of order. So, was the honourable member in order to proceed the way she was proceeding? The only order that the Member violated was a point of privilege because the matter that the Member raises is of no privilege at all. (Laughter) But it was full of information that could have been used for the benefit of this House. However, it was not a matter of privilege and I was hoping that the honourable member was rising on that. The honourable member simply stood and articulated information.

For the benefit of the Members, privilege arises in situations, for example, where this House is faced with some serious threat. For example, the temperatures have changed completely and could cause death; or it has been discovered that a Member of the House has some situation that is infectious and it has come to the knowledge of the House. For the benefit of the House, you rise on a point of privilege. Privilege is essentially an adjournment motion. When you rise on privilege, you are seeking an adjournment of the House so that it can suspend business and deal with the matter. (Laughter)

Please, conclude what you are saying, which is not a privilege. 

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the good education on the topic. 

As I wind up, Mr Speaker, I really wanted to bring to this House genuinely what the Budget Committee and I, who was against it in the beginning, faced. I would like to call upon this House- (Interruption)

MR AKOL: Mr Speaker, hon. Ann Nankabirwa is a member of the Budget Committee and I do not think it is right for her to debate the report of the committee since there was no privilege she rose on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Probably that is why she sought the refuge of privilege. I think she is giving information to the House.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: I know my colleague is a member of the Budget Committee and at one time, he got lost from the committee. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is immaterial. Please, make your point. (Laughter) 

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, the point I wanted this House to address is that we are treating an issue which, at one time, the Budget Committee recommended this House to define, at a later time, either by a policy or an amendment to the law, what the three per cent is because the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development cannot come here to ask for parliamentary approval as long as they still have their three per cent and when they come, they are treated as priority. Even today, you had to send the committee for some few minutes to read a request the ministry had just received. 

I would wish, as we agree to treat this issue the same way the Budget Committee did, we come up with guidance to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development so that when the House pronounces itself on an issue, even if the ministry requires a supplementary and they are within the three per cent, they first come back to the House for approval. However, that needs a law. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR BABA: Mr Speaker, we are in this because the Shs 106 billion was rejected by this House. If I were the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and I was in this situation having been rejected and yet I have this power under three per cent, I would have sought other ways to come before this House to get the necessary approval before we came here. (Applause)

However, now this has happened. If I were the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development I would now beg this House for forgiveness and atonement for my sins and say, “I heard; please, forgive me but my situation is desperate and I need the Shs 106 billion to settle this matter”. (Laughter)

This is my plea, Mr Speaker.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to first contextualise this debate as far as appropriation is concerned. Even the three per cent being talked about; I construe it to be that you can only spend within the three per cent if you find alternative source but not to allocate money within the budget because once you appropriate the money in the budget, an Appropriation Act is passed. A few people asked which law has been breached. Even Cabinet cannot sit and reallocate the money; they can only make proposals to this House.

Mr Speaker, if we are to move away from the Appropriation Act, we must take into account a number of factors. However, today as we talk, the National Planning Authority has informed this House that in our budgeting process, whereas the budget must conform to the National Development Plan, parts of our appropriation do not conform to the National Development Plan. They conform to the IMF policy sector programmes; where actually, we are moving away.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, we are not conforming to the National Development Plan as we talk now. The issue is if we are to reallocate any money to support the supplementary, we must show the source. In my opinion, it would not be strategic enough for this Government and I wonder even how the Prime Minister would sit and allow Parliament to reallocate money from within the budget because it affects the objective of the Government because if you look at Government, there are strategic investment plans that have caused what they want to achieve. By the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development reallocating money from within their budget for the purpose of a supplementary, it affects Government performance.

Therefore, as Government, the Prime Minister needs to give proper clarification whether the reallocations within the budget supports supplementary. Does it affect Government performances and in effect, affecting the Vision 2040, which we would like to achieve? 

When you look at the report by the National Planning Authority, it shows we are performing below 50 per cent in as far as following the National Development Plan is concerned and therefore, there is a disconnect between the objectives we have as a country and the resource allocation. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we are discussing the Shs 106 billion and where it should go. I do not think anybody has proposed that it was financed by reallocation. Did he say the Shs 106 billion was a reallocation? Where was it said? I have not heard that.

MR JACOB OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I can appreciate the depth of your guidance. You enjoy the privilege of listening more than talking and when hon. James Baba got up, I shared his sentiment. Planning and budgeting, even for ourselves, is a very huge task. There are things you can foresee; there are things you would not foresee. For example, the question would be; was the rejection foreseeable? (Laughter) Was it foreseeable that Parliament would reject a budget proposal?

If it has never happened, it happens. The Government made a proposal and Parliament rejected it. The question also would not be why they rejected it but whether that rejection in the budgeting process was foreseeable. (Laughter) The rejection is what has caused this. (Members rose.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member. Let the Member make his point, please. He is just making a point, please.

MR OBOTH: Thank you for your protection, Mr Speaker. The point I am trying to make is that it is not easy to plan for a homestead, community, district and it cannot be easier for a country. I am one of those who used to question whether there are planners in Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. But you really see the country is very dynamic. 

Things are coming up but on matters of the energy sector, Mr Speaker, I do not want to give evidence from here but we are familiar with some of these things, in your previous position. The thermal power generation in Tororo is not owned by anybody from there and there is no crime owning any power generation. It is not against the law but it is a reality that we have it and we might have it for some time. If we cannot accommodate them in our budget, the question is faced by this Parliament. What can we do? 

Now, can we continue rejecting when we have several contractual obligations? When there is a contract? I wish hon. Bahati and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – this Parliament can never be what you are saying but this is a Parliament for the people of Uganda. We are here to resolve matters. We are not here to add another chapter to - we are not here to –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR OBOTH: We are here to do fault finding and also find solutions. That is what this Parliament is for. And we are faced with a situation – can we fold our hands and say we are done? We must find a solution and a solution is in this House. We can decide to do – and it is not the first time this is happening. The solution is in Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Can you own up and we move forward? 

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My namesake is standing back to me permanently that you have seen the concern. I want to be guided because the powers to appropriate are by law conferred to this Parliament. When we say that the ministry planned and provided for this in the ministerial policy statement but it was rejected, I want to believe the reasons for rejection were given and therefore, the budget that we passed was reduced by that amount.

The clarification I am seeking is if by law it is only Parliament allowed to appropriate and it has disallowed the provision, does the same law also still maintain that the minister has the powers to spend on something that has been disallowed within the three per cent? That is what I would like to know.

When my brother hon. Oboth asked a question, was the rejection also foreseeable? At least, I want to believe that when you bring something, which is called an estimate to this House, you expect it to be allowed or disallowed. Therefore, prepare for any. How in this case, if you did not expect a rejection and it was rejected, isn’t there a known mechanism? 

Therefore, I want to wish that if it is known how to come back to this House if something has been rejected, that line should have been followed. That is why, in my conclusion, I agree with hon. James Baba that may be that can persuade better than insisting on the three per cent, which to me, was no longer allowing that item to fit in. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do we need a background on why the rejection was made in the first place? We do not.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural point I am rising on is on justification when it comes to controversial items on the supplementary. The last time we were here, there was the issue of a law firm; is it Byabashasha something and that time, I remember very well we rejected the supplementary.

The minister said there is a writ of mandamus issued and therefore, our assets of Government may be attached or even the accounting officer may be arrested. So, there was need to give that money. Now, today the justification seems to be on the contractual obligation accruing to the Shs 106 billion. 

That time, we made a decision that this kind of thing should not be allowed. Aware that the foreseeability test is based on expenditures not based on parliamentary decision whether we are going to accept or reject as opposed to what hon. Oboth said. Foreseeability test or avoidability test is on expenditures of Government and not on a parliamentary decision.

Now would it be procedurally right again to open up and say it is okay for today again to give a strong justification to justify what otherwise is effective according to rules of supplementary? Today, we warn them and next year they will bring another thing with a stronger justification.

Mr Speaker, would we seek for your procedural guidance that in the interest of how much we struggle to advise Government especially on those very remote items on the supplementary; that we should continue entertaining this. We need your procedural guidance. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the challenge we have is the Public Finance Management Act we passed in the year 2015. In the year 2016, there was already need for amendment. Ever since we started implementing this law, it is almost like building the road on which we are walking. You see there is need to change the bridge but you are still using it; what do you do?

Therefore, we are still trying to fit properly within the change budgetary regime and regulations as you have put since we enacted the Public Finance management Act, 2005. There are areas that are still cagey and do not fit very well. For example, you just heard of the removal from the law of a particular provision from the Act and they brought it in the regulations. Even the regulations they feel did not capture the spirit of the law; just two days ago, they have brought an amendment.

Therefore, walking on the road on which you are building - there are issues. This is one of those issues. The question is, when it arises, how do you deal with it? When you have to break down the bridge in order to fix it, what do you do? You must create a diversion to deal with that temporary situation. Except that in Uganda, people build so close to the road that you do not have the room to do a diversion. (Laughter) 

In other countries like Kenya, they can do a diversion of 30 kilometres without affecting any citizen but in Uganda, you can hardly do a diversion when constructing a road. That might be what is applicable to this law. That is the mentality we have in approaching this law. We have built so close that we cannot even accommodate a diversion to enable the bigger purpose of the legislation go forward.

Honourable members, this is something that can be solved and the sanctions about what we have done are clear. I hope I have done my best to guide on what is necessary for us to do in order that we move this matter forward and avoid situations of this nature arising in the future. 

Now that the regulations have been improved upon we do not anticipate that this kind of situation will happen again. So, is there a violation of the law as we stand now? [Honourable Members: ”Yes.”] I do not see it that much.

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to agree with hon. Baba. We are also setting a precedent. When it is an amendment, it is still the ministers who should bring them on the Floor of Parliament. You do not know how much sometimes Members of Parliament are abused.

There are people outside who follow everything done here and they are so keen and almost better than us. When we deliberately make this kind of mistake - we know that the three per cent is a maximum but it is not to be abused. This almost tantamount to abusing the three per cent; that the Shs 106 billion can still fit within the three per cent; so let us just push it there. 

Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, please, help us so that we are not looked at as people who come here to waste people’s time and resources. We are here to follow the law and if it is not alright, why don’t you bring an amendment so that we look into it. Let us not set a wrong precedent. Thank you.

MR ALEX NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, mine is a follow-up on the guidance taken by my senior colleague hon. Baba. I do not know what is hard for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We understand very clearly that the law was not violated but we understand that you disregarded the decision of Parliament. You knew that Parliament had rejected but you went ahead and did it. Why can’t you apologise and we move forward.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, Shs 106 billion is quite a big figure and Parliament rejected it. We worked within the law to appropriate it but I think it would have been better, given the amount of the money, and for the fact that Parliament had considered and rejected, it would have been better to come and seek prior approval through a supplementary rather than the three per cent.

Because of that, I would like to apologise on behalf of Government - (Applause) - and also promise that we will bring all the amendments as you have said.  You even recall that on the first day that this law was approved, we did not have money on the first day of July and we were stuck. We were forced to come here to amend the law within one week so that we operate. We are learning and we shall bring more amendments so that this law is improved. Thank you. I too appeal to this House to capture it because it is with the law so that we move forward. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to hear from the Prime Minister as well. 

5.49
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker, the minister and all those that have contributed. In the interest of time, I would like to focus on three contradictions.  

The constitutional contradiction, that is Article 156 (2), section 25 of the Public Finance Management Act contradiction and the regulations 18 (1-2) under Public Finance Management contradiction.

I am happy that colleagues are served with the minority report, the presentation from my senior colleague has been very clear. If we went ahead without performing the following, we would be bordering on an illegality for the following reason; I will specifically propose that Shs 106 billion supplementary appropriation is outside of the law. 

As the Leader of Opposition today, I will propose that it should be deleted. Reference is page 8. 6 (b) Dr Mohammed Kasasa page 16, Shs 1 billion for RDCs page 18 and Shs 14 billion for plant spinners page 11, I propose that that be rejected by this House and then also Amuru should not be rejected but be withheld until further verification.

This is basically under the umbrella of Article 164 (3) that all Government expenditure shall be monitored by this Parliament. I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Prime Minister, I need an undertaking from you as the Leader of Government Business that such things will not re-occur and where the law is required to be amended you superintend over bringing those matters to us so that we are moving in a clean way.

5.52
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I must say that I salute you for guiding the House well in this difficult debate. This debate has taught all of us many things. However, I would like to point out that obligations have been undertaken and contracts are in place. It is the duty of Government to be as lawful as possible to ensure that it fulfils these contractual obligations.

However, let me reiterate the point made by the Minister of Energy that all the energy mixture that Government has been embarking on is for the interest of everybody. However, it is also to make sure that people who spend money to invest in our country, to carry out projects, are assured that if one type of energy has problems, there will be another type of energy ready so that their investments will go on unperturbed.

Therefore, to cut the long story short, I do agree with comments made by the honourable Minister of Finance that this matter should be concluded and that the supplementary estimates, which have been so robustly debated, should be endorsed. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want assurance on the law?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the question of the law is quite a challenge. It is true, as hon. Bahati said, we had to come back to this august House to make sure that within a week or so after passing the law, the law becoming effective, the standoff and the fact that Government could not spend, we had to come back to the House. Therefore, in a way, your point about building a bridge or a road as we are walking is a real point. 

Government will do its best to make sure that this construction of the bridge and the road, as well as the walking, will go on simultaneously and as smoothly as possible. Government will co-operate in making any amendments. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this debate has been very detailed. It is one of those debates that make the presiding officer burn a lot of calories because the brain is working beyond the required percentage. It is almost going beyond human proportions to be able to accommodate this very versatile debate. However, like all debates, we should come to a conclusion. 

My appeal to the House is that there are some mistakes that have been made but none of those mistakes violate our laws. It is just bad manners to do the things that some people have opted to do and for those bad manners, the honourable minister has apologised. However, for the future, it should be a provision in a straightforward law. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I need you to also listen to this carefully. It should be a straightforward provision in the law that where Parliament has rejected something, it can only be accepted by the same Parliament prior to any action. (Applause) This should be captured in the law that you propose to bring to this Parliament. 

This is the second time it has happened. Parliament rejected a provision in a law, which was proposed – I do not remember the actual Act. A Bill was brought and we expressly deleted that clause from the Bill. However, the minister – I do not remember the law but I think it was also related to the energy sector – went and included the same provision that had been rejected by Parliament in the regulations. It happened and that is dishonesty. 

Therefore, there should be a way where if we are not satisfied with a decision of Parliament, probably – This is a very resourceful Parliament and it will not reject anything just for the sake of rejecting it. They base their rejections on reasons. Therefore, if there were reasons that were not within their knowledge at the time they were rejecting this, you should have come back to Parliament and said, “By the way, when you took that decision, we did not have this additional information; with this, we would like to ask you to reconsider the earlier position.” Parliament would then pronounce itself properly. 

I would like this captured in the spirit of the law. Even where the law is express, honourable ministers and people who propose regulations, please do not abuse the authority that we give you. Because of these kinds of operations, it is beginning to bog down the work of this Parliament. 

I will give you another example. Because of such fears, all regulations are almost going to be passed with the prior approval of Parliament. It is because of this problem. Parliament is now suspicious that if you give ministers powers to make regulations, they will go and bite beyond the Act and try to regulate what you never gave them permission to do. It happened with the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) law, which came when that suspicion was still in the House. Even the regulation on currency points was required to first be approved by Parliament.

We all know that once bitten, twice shy. That is how this Parliament is now operating. For you to remove the suspicions from this legislative body, you might need to start acting in a way that supports us rather than makes us always looking with suspicion at everything. What we do is for the general good of this country. 

What I am now suggesting is that let us proceed to finalise this matter with these undertakings and then we see; if there is any reoccurrence of these matters in the future, then we move under the appropriate laws to deal with the specific individuals whose duty it is to safeguard this. I am now urging you that we deal with these matters as they have been proposed by the chairperson and then we conclude. This is for only this time; for the future, we shall see how to improve on these matters. 

I really urge you, honourable members, because we have sat here for a while and we have even dispensed with the Prime Minister’s Question Time. It is now 6 o’clock and I usually close at this time. I urge that we conclude this matter. Can I now put a question to the motion for – Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, please sit down. Can I now put the question to the motion that the House resolves itself to a Committee of Supply and then we go to supply? Can I put the question?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to this motion that Parliament resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider the supplementary expenditures schedule number 1 and 2 for financial year 2017/2018.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we need to remain in the House to take decisions.

Honourable members, I will now propose and put the questions in the following order: I will deal with schedule 1, which is within the three per cent, and then I will deal with aspects of schedule 2 that are within the three per cent. Finally, I will deal with figures that are above the three per cent requiring prior approval, which are also still under schedule 2. Therefore, schedule 2 has two parts. Is that okay, honourable members? 

I will now put the question. I propose that the amount of Shs 263,338,276,182 be appropriated as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2017/2018. I now put the question that Shs 263,338,276,182 be approved as supplementary expenditure for financial year 2017/2018, recurrent.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have no big problem with us approving this. However, you said that when we reach the committee stage, we could raise issues, so one of the issues that I had wanted to raise was on classified expenditure. Under the first supplementary request, State House is getting Shs 13.7 billion; under supplementary two, it is getting Shs 58 billion; under supplementary three, it is getting Shs 3 billion. All this comes to Shs 74.7 billion and yet we already gave State House classified expenditure early enough. 

I would like to know, what is this classified expenditure in State House? (Interjection) I think that is where we make a mistake – when we do not want to listen. The same State House was given a budget of Shs 80 billion under classified expenditure in the normal budget process. That is the reason we are raising this. State House does not buy guns; it is the Ministry of Defence and the Police. State House does not get intelligence information; it is the Internal Security Organisation (ISO) and the External Security Organisation (ESO). However, we gave them Shs 80 billion in the normal budget and now we are giving them Shs 75 billion in supplementary -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I think the issue of classified expenditure for State House is a policy issue that can be handled appropriately at a proper debate. Whether we gave Shs 80 billion before, that is what we did, but now this is a supplementary, which is also allowed. Therefore, can we finish with this process and then all the issues that we have captured. Let us find time to deal with them in a more systematic way. Can we proceed, honourable?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have no objection. I think you have said it. However, the last issue that I want to raise is: Chairman, there is some money that we are passing now in May and procurement has not begun; it means this money will be spent in the next financial year. Why should we approve supplementaries now yet the expenditure will be in the next financial year? 

I will give an example. There is an issue on painting Cotton House – (Interjection)- Yes, it is stated but there is one portion, which was approved - CCTV cameras. Mr Chairperson, the reason why people cry for supplementaries is because we are going to spend, but it is no longer an urgent issue so why don’t we put it in the normal budget?

I can pull out for you Shs 250 billion here, which I have done, which is not going to be spent this financial year because you must advertise, get bidders, evaluate, etc. Wouldn’t it be proper for the finance minister to agree with us that those portions, which I wanted to raise, if he does not mind, be pulled out and then we put them in the normal budget?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, there are procedures when money has not been spent. If they fail to spend it, the rules are clear on what happens to the money. Therefore, you should not worry about that one. They have asked for it and we have discussed it and then we shall say “okay, let us do this”. Let us do our bit. Honourable members, we have been on this matter for a while; can I now move to development?

MR KATUSABE: Mr Chairperson, I am standing in for my bosses and I have to give an account tomorrow. Therefore, I just want to make sure that I get things right. I had proposed that Shs 106, 875,717,034 be deleted from the total of Shs 263,338,276,182.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Can I deal with it now that you have raised it?

MR KATUSABE: Yes, Mr Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: For all the matters that you have raised, we had a subsequent debate after that. Afterwards, I proposed a way forward, which was adopted by the House. That is why I put the question that we come to the Committee of Supply and supply, and that is why we are here now. All those issues were considered but we have adopted the spirit that we move forward with this matter, conclude it and if there are outstanding issues, we will have time to deal with them later. Thank you.

Development Expenditure

Honourable members, I propose that Shs 187,916,867,430 be approved as supplementary expenditure for development for financial year 2017/2018. I now put the question that Shs 187,916,867,430 be approved as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2017/2018.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recurrent Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, now we go to the first part of schedule 2. I propose the question that Shs 174,375,462,968 be approved as recurrent supplementary expenditure for financial year 2017/2018. I now put the question that Shs 174,375,462,968 be approved as recurrent supplementary expenditure for the financial year 2017/2018.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now propose that Shs 244,625,689,669 be approved as supplementary for financial year 2017/2018. I now put the question to that motion that Shs 244,625,689,669 be approved as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2017/2018.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now move to the second part of schedule 2, which requires prior approval of Parliament. 

Recurrent Expenditure 

Honourable members, I propose that Shs 139,867,427,095 be approved as recurrent supplementary expenditure for financial year 2017/2018. I now put the question –

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Chairman, this is the schedule that has got the Shs 6 billion for Dr Muhammad Buwule, which we found erroneous.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, Dr Muhammad Buwule had his land compulsorily acquired by the Government, particularly by ISO at Mutungo Hill. After negotiating, the figure of Shs 26 billion was agreed. Now, the Government was only offering him Shs 1 billion; Shs 1 billion out of Shs 26 billion. This is land which was acquired in the year 2000 and was already occupied by the Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence (CMI), a Government entity. 

We felt it was unfair. Therefore, we moved a step by adding an additional Shs 6 billion to the Shs 1 billion granted by Government. On the issues he raised on the caveats, the caveats were raised by the Government itself. The minister can add on the issue you raised about the registrar of titles.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The Commissioner, Land Registration and the Attorney-General put a caveat on the land because under Article 26 of the Constitution, we are supposed to first pay someone before we change the title to the name of Government. Since the year 2000, we had not paid this particular person. He refused to sign a transfer form in favour of Government and since the security required the land, we put a caveat and negotiated with him from Shs 26.4 billion to a reasonable amount. 

When I appeared before the committee, what the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had given was Shs 1 billion. However, considering the Shs 26 billion, it was too little for him to accept. He again appealed and I put up a spirited fight – Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi was in that committee. I requested the committee to move the allocation from Shs 1 billion to a reasonable amount. I am glad that the committee moved it to a reasonable amount of Shs 7 billion. We are going to factor in the balance. Shs 26.4 billion is the total and if you deduct the Shs 7 billion, it is about Shs 19.4 billion as a balance.

This is part payment and the first since the year 2000 because the 12 hectares of land was compulsorily acquired in 2000.

MR OYET: Mr Chairman, I arise to seek clarification from the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. We have information that part of the deal that was negotiated between Government and the owner of that land was to the effect that the same land, which is situated in Kitante, would be part of the deal. Would it be proper for the minister to inform us if that was not part of the same land which is fenced off? As I speak right now, is it part of the consideration in the negotiations?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Chairman, that land is caveated by the following people: 
    1. Nalinya Dorothy Nassolo 
    2. The Attorney-General.
    3. Registrar of Titles 
    4. Theresa Serwadda 

From our submission, we have said that this land has a lot of encumbrances and the likelihood of us incurring loss is real. That is why we would like to humbly propose that since the initial request was Shs 1 billion and the initial request for Shs 1 billion was that the gentleman is in ill health and needed medical care, whereas the verification is still continuing, let us avail the Shs 1 billion. The extra money should be availed within the ministerial policy statement so that the relevant committee can take due diligence and ensure that by the time Parliament pays, it is paying a legitimate concern. Otherwise, there is a likelihood of us losing money.

Mr Chairman, I also raised a pertinent issue on this payment. The legal counsel for Dr Muhammad Buwule is a Member of this Parliament and grossly lobbied the committee. I am hesitant to belong to a Parliament that conducts business this way. The way the Committee on Budget raised the money with effective lobbying in the attendance of a lawyer raised suspicions and therefore concerns.                         

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairperson, I would like to remind Members that it is the same House that has been telling Government that when it compulsorily acquires somebody’s property, it should pay that person. Even if Theresa and Nalinya put a caveat, Government also put another caveat on their caveat. This is because after compulsory acquisition, as soon as we complete payment, if they have any interests under the law, their interests can also be handled by Government. Under compulsory acquisition, once we finish paying, the title is immediately transferred to the name of Government.

I am looking at the period from the year 2000 up to now - how many years are those?  -(Interjections) - So, for 18 years, Government has had this person’s money and the total is Shs 26.4 billion. We are requesting an initial payment of Shs 7 billion in 2018. I would request this House to accept.

MS OGWAL: Mr Chairperson, if you look at the submission of the minority report on page 16, we stated the reason why the minority report rejected the request of Shs 6 billion very clearly.

First, we do not have any document to back the additional figure of Shs 6 billion. There is no way we can cheat this Parliament and create, out of nowhere, that the doctor must be paid Shs 7 billion. There is no document to justify this payment. We have requests from the ministry and it is on the basis of that, on humanitarian grounds, that we should not oppose what was requested by the minister – Shs 1 billion. Otherwise, ordinarily it would have been unfair for us to allow the committee to alter the request from Shs 1 billion, which was officially requested for, to Shs 7 billion without any document to back that. We must clean the image of this committee.

Mr Chairperson, my contention is on page 16 and I have given you reason. The ministry has not given us documentation to justify the Shs 7 billion but we have a justification for the Shs 1 billion. That is why we say that in the spirit of reconciliation, let us give that Shs 1 billion and the rest can be appropriated in the budget.

THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Chairperson, I am acquainted with this case because Dr Buwule, an 82-year-old gentleman, trusted Government and gave his land. Government has not met its obligation. Government and we, the people, have a responsibility to be honourable, to make sure that this man, a veterinary doctor of 82 years, who has not been paid for 18 years, gets treated fairly. At least, the payment process must begin and starting with Shs 7 billion, in my view, is a very reasonable beginning. Therefore without any doubt, I fully support that the payment process for Dr Buwule should start. At his age of 82 years, it is already a belated payment

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, the Prime Minister proceeds in a way that presupposes that this House is against the payment for the land of the doctor in question. However, Parliament is saying that we should follow the procedure; the right documents and evidence of the negotiations should be availed.

For 18 years, they did not stampede any Parliament to pay. Now they are stampeding us to pay the Shs 7 billion, and wrongly. Is the Prime Minister, therefore, in order to presuppose that this Parliament is against the payment to the gentleman yet all we are saying is that it must follow the procedure with the right documents? This is not an open market; this is the national Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is a point of order, so I need to rule on it; please resume your seats.

Honourable members, I may not be right but this is what I understand: The facts that came before us are that an amount of Shs 80 billion, which was for NAADS, was rejected by the committee in the supplementary request. The reason for this is that since there will be no time to spend this money, it should now be factored into the budget so that there is sufficient time to spend it. You cannot spend Shs 80 billion in two months. That was the testimony of the committee. Therefore, this money remained available. Therefore, the committee, as I understand, put this money into other sectors to try and help. I suppose that is how the Shs 6 billion was found, to lift the amount from Shs 1 billion to Shs 7 billion.

It may not have been requested for but the thing is that it remains an outstanding obligation of Government. Now that the money was made available, like we have considered other votes to be supported, would it not be proper to add Shs 6 billion to this gentleman whose case has been elaborated upon? I think that is where they are coming from. 

Therefore, is the Prime Minister in order to make the statement he is making? He only said that we need to make a gesture to pay; if we paid Shs 1 billion, it would be okay but if we paid Shs 7 billion, it would be better. I think that is the point he is making. So is he out of order? I do not think so. Honourable members, can we deal with this matter please?

MR MWIRU: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. I think what – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I had not yet allowed you to speak, so even your “thank you” is not welcome. (Laughter) Now you can speak and thank me appropriately. (Laughter)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think the issue that Members are raising is that if land is disputed, if there is a proprietor and there are two people, the appropriation would go not only to Dr Buwule but to all of them including the caveators. This is because, what if you pay Dr Buwule and later after the dispute you found that the owner of the land is not Dr Buwule but those that put caveats on it, what would you do? 

Therefore, our proposal is that we appropriate for paying for the land so that we do not restrict it to Dr Buwule alone. The land was taken over by Government so it is now incumbent upon the Ministry of Lands to deal with the details and take into account the interests of Uganda. We should not pay to an individual and thereafter the caveators arrive with their interests, while we are the rightful owners of the land.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, how much money is owed? Maybe the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development can help us. What was the negotiated amount for this land?

MS AMONGI: Shs 26.4 billion is the total amount the Government is supposed to pay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: How much has it paid so far?

MS AMONGI: Nothing. This will be the first payment. I also want to put on record that there are three plots - plot 29, 48 and 56. The caveat, which has another interest outside Government interest, is only on plot 48. The other two plots, which constitute the bigger portion, do not have problematic caveats. 

Therefore, the Shs 7 billion would not have a problem in respect of the interests of the third parties. Plot 29 is caveated by Government. Plot 56 is in respect to a court order. It is only Plot 28, which has a caveat of both Government and two third parties. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clearer, honourable members? Can we take a decision on this matter? Can I finish with this, hon. Nandala-Mafabi?

Honourable members, I had already proposed the question. I will now put the question. I now put the question that the amount of Shs 149,982,667,264 be approved for supplementary recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2017/2018.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This was for recurrent expenditure. I am following what I am doing. I had proposed the question for this but I had not put the question to it and that is why I am doing it now. I have now put the question on recurrent and it has been adopted and now I am going to development. Is it okay? Thank you. 

Development Expenditure

Honourable members, I now propose the question that Shs 319,848,908,481 be approved for supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2017/2018. I now put the question that Shs 319,848,908,481 be approved as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2017/2018.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of Supply report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

6.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered and approved supplementary schedules 1 and 2 for the financial year 2017/2018 with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

6.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report from the Committee of Supply. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, can we still do Prime Minister’s Question Time? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 6.41 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 8 May 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

