
Wednesday, 9 May 2018

Parliament met at 2.39 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. We shall not be able to handle the Prime Minister’s Question Time today because we would like to finish with the budget process. 

I hope that the ministers will be fully available today so that we can, as much as possible, complete our programme in order to allow the budget committee to do their work. There are a few members with some issues; if you could each use two minutes. 

2.42
MS MARGRET LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance about the deaths caused by South Sudanese. For the last nine years, over 138 people of Orom sub county, Kitgum District have lost lives.
 
On 21 January 2017, the people of Orom and Namokora wrote to His Excellency the President when he graced the last funeral rites of Gen. Tito Okello. They requested him to establish a barracks for security reasons.

Again on 5th May, the Sudanese killed two people in Orom Sub County. The deceased left behind widows with 18 children and 49 grandchildren. They tasked the RDC to immediately follow up on the issue of the barracks. The RDC called all the stakeholders. The community gave their land to the army and requested them to set up a barracks. Not until 12th - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lamwaka, I thought your complaint was about the massacre of the 138 people because the issue of the Orom land was raised yesterday and the minister is due to answer. What exactly is your urgent issue?

MS LAMWAKA: The land was given by the people of Orom contrary to what my colleague, the Member of Parliament for Chua West said. He does not represent Chua East and did not attend the meeting.

THE SPEAKER: You are using this opportunity to continue with something - when you came to the office, you said that there was a massacre of 138 people. Tomorrow, the Minister of Security will come and we shall debate that issue.

2.45
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance on behalf of the people of Bukooli Island, Namayingo District. Over 400 people in my constituency have either been killed or maimed by crocodiles.

Allow me bring to your attention the statistics that show that 240 people have been killed by crocodiles since 1998. Of these, Lolwe Sub County lost 112 people and 83 of them were school children. Sigulu Sub County lost 93 people and 56 of them were school children. Bukana lost 35 people and 17 of them were school children. From 2017 to this year, 70 people have been killed by crocodiles; 41 died in Lolwe, 16 in Sigulu and 13 in Bukana. 

Madam Speaker, it is my humble prayer to this House that:
i. 	The Government takes immediate action to provide water tanks to all schools because school-going children go to the lakes to fetch water, which endangers them.

ii. 	The Government should bridge the swamp between Sigulu West and Sigulu East because many children have been wading in these swamps on their way to school, where they are attacked by crocodiles.

iii. 	The Government should avail the people of Sigulu Island a ferry, which has been promised for years, so that they are not killed. 

iv. 	The Government compensates the victims in these areas because it is the duty of Government to protect the lives of the people. 

v. 	The Government sets up a perimeter within the shores of the lake to allow residents draw water without being attacked by crocodiles. 

vi. 	The Government provides the islands with special boats for the school children, just like His Excellency once provided such in 2000.

Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I was busy and I did not study some of the things that Members are raising. I know that we need boats but you could have raised this during the debate on the report about the Ministry of Works and Transport. I thought you had an emergency; that the crocodiles had taken children yesterday. 

I will give you an opportunity when the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure is here then you can talk about the ferry. 

Members are now beginning to use this opportunity to raise other issues which are not emergencies - to petition for roads, boats, etcetera. I think I will have to study all your documents first before I allow you to speak on these issues.

2.48
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My issue is in relation to the conduct of the honourable minister of Lands, hon. Betty Amongi, who should conduct herself under rule 84 of this House.

The honourable minister has used her position to acquire five properties; Plot 29 Acacia Avenue in Kololo, Plot 22A Prince Charles Drive, Plot 18 Periman Gardens and Plots 15 to 17 Fifth Street, Industrial Area. 

Madam Speaker, before I lay some documents on the Table, the conduct of the minister amounts to fraud –(Interruption) 

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, most of us watched when hon. Betty Amongi appeared before the Commission of Inquiry into Land Matters. This is a body that was instituted by Government. Is the honourable member in order to bring up these matters before Parliament yet the matter is still under the commission of inquiry, when we know that this commission has judicial powers?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what he was going to say because he has just started talking; I do not know what he wants to do.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling –(Laughter). This morning I was called to take money so that I do not raise this issue in this House; that shows the level of influence of some of the people we are dealing with. 

However, this House should pronounce itself on the conduct of the minister who is currently keeping 2,336 land titles of the departed Asian properties. This is a grave national disaster and I wish to lay on Table copies of evidence of awards of land to the Minister of Lands in the name of the company, AMOBET Investments Limited that they are dealing in Asian property. 

Other than the minister owning five properties, she has fraudulently sold 88 properties out of the 2,000 existing departed Asian properties. This House should pick interest in the matter. 

Before you advise on the direction we should take - whether to bring a censure motion or take the minister to the relevant disciplinary committee or institute a select committee to investigate this matter - I beg to lay documents on the Table;

First is the document for the award of land to AMOBET Investments Limited, which was signed by George William Bizibu, the Executive Secretary of departed Asian properties under reference V7/COM/747/9 dated 4 August 2017. I beg to lay. 

I also wish to lay a document which shows that the minister went ahead to sell the land to another Ugandan to invest that money in Dubai; a letter dated 11th April and signed by the minister herself as a majority shareholder and all the correspondences there under in relation to Plot 18 Periman Gardens. 

Most importantly, I wish to lay a copy of a notice where the minister, through her company, is threatening Indians to leave land and to leave this country for Ugandans; if not, they will deal with them in a manner, which they feel is appropriate. This letter is dated 9 January 2018. 

Madam Speaker, this House in a way or another, has to find a way of pronouncing themselves on the conduct of ministers who use Government offices to enrich themselves –(Applause)– and as a member of the Opposition, I am sad because the minister is also a member of the Uganda People’s Congress (UPC). 

This is sealing our fate as the Opposition; so, we would like this House to pronounce itself on this matter in relation to rule 84 that involves the personal conduct of the ministers in this House. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, of course I have not seen those documents; I also did not know what hon. Odonga Otto wanted to say but I will study what you have presented and I will give my ruling later.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO URGE GOVERNMENT TO INTENSIFY ENGAGEMENT OF ESSENTIAL DIPLOMATIC CHANNELS TO CONVINCE THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY TO RETAIN THE UN REGIONAL SERVICE CENTRE IN ENTEBBE, UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Ssekikubo comes, there are some Members who had wanted to raise some issues but I know that tomorrow we shall have a debate from the issues of security.  So I will give you an opportunity to talk about security in the country including the things you want to raise tomorrow because the minister is coming to give a statement.

2.54
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to urge Government to intensify engagement of all essential diplomatic channels to convince the United Nations General Assembly to allow Uganda house the Global Shared Services Centre for the Africa Region.
The motion is presented under rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Are there seconders to that motion? Okay, several members from both sides of the House have seconded the motion.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, the motion reads:

“WHEREAS the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe (RSCE) was established in 2010 through the United Nations (UN) General Assembly Resolution 64 of 269 as part of the Global Field Support Strategy (GFSS) with the objective of transforming service delivery to field missions through a fundamental shift in the existing division of labour and a relocation of functions to improve responsiveness and address the needs of the field missions;

AND WHEREAS the Regional Service Centre Entebbe currently provides a full range of administrative, logistics and information and communications technology services to 13 Client Missions in Africa, representing over 680 per cent of all UN peacekeeping and special political missions worldwide including staff payroll, vendor payments, cashier services and financial management and accounting services to over 20,700 personnel in field missions including international civilian staff, national staff and uniformed personnel;

AWARE THAT the missions served by Regional Service Centre Entebbe include the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilisation Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilisation Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the United Nations Organisation Stabilisation Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo (MONUSCO), the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), the United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS), the Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to the Great Lakes Region, the Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring Group, the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), the Special Advisor to the Secretary-General on Burundi and United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO);

COGNISANT of the fact that the location of the Resource Service Centre Entebbe in Entebbe is of immense economic and strategic interest to Uganda in that it supports-

    i. Employment of over 1,500 Ugandans as staff, individual contractors and casual labourers;
    ii. Blossoming of tourism, hotel and housing sectors within Entebbe and Kampala;
    iii. Foreign exchange through staff salaries and entitlements, procurement contracts and direct remittances from the UN Headquarters; and
    iv. Small and medium enterprises such as international schools, hospitals, business malls among others derive clientele from UN officials;

NOTING THAT in 2017, the UN conducted an assessment for the location of the Global Shared Services Centres under the Global Service Delivery Model and the results contained in the report of the Secretary General on the Global Service Delivery Model for the UN Secretariat (Al72l8O1/Add.1) and Addendum 1 Rev.1, indicate that Nairobi scored highest for location in the Africa Region;

COGNISANT that Uganda is suitable to host the Global Shared Services Centre for Africa Region due to the following reasons;

    i.  Uganda is a peaceful country, politically stable and hospitable which will enable the services centre to provide efficient, client-oriented and scalable services across Africa;
    ii. Uganda is a key player -

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. This is about Uganda; it is not about parties but Uganda.

MR SSEKIKUBO: “Uganda is a key player at the international scene in that it has been at the forefront in addressing the international refugee crisis where it hosts an estimated 1,300,000 refugees from different countries;

    iii. Uganda has tremendously contributed to peacekeeping missions aimed at reinstating peace in Africa wherefore she has sent peacekeepers to Liberia, Congo-DRC, Central African Republic, South Sudan, Chad and Somalia;

    iv. The RSCE in Entebbe is an already established facility with high standards and is a reference centre for many other UN establishments across the globe, the shared services centre will take advantage of the existing infrastructure in and around Entebbe;

    v. Uganda is centrally located for most of the missions and activities of the UN in Africa, which makes it cost effective for the shared services centre to remain in Entebbe, Uganda;

    vi. Many Ugandans working at the RSCE have been highly skilled and trained and have the expertise to carry out the operations of UN yet it will cost the UN a lot of funds to train a new team if the location is changed;

    vii. Uganda and Kenya are sister countries and member States of the East African Community, the IGAD, the African Union among others and therefore, it is pertinent that sister countries should move in tandem without pulling apart;

    viii. Kenya already houses a number of UN Agencies such as the UN Environment Programme (UNEP), the UN Human Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT) and the UN Office in Nairobi (UNON)) among others and therefore, consideration should be given to an equitable distribution of UN functions and facilities in the different member States; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this august House that:

1.  	Government is urged to deploy its diplomacy to ensure that Uganda is given an opportunity to house the Global Shared Services Centre for the African Region given the immense contribution Uganda has given to the international community. 

2. 	Government brings to the attention of the United Nations General Assembly Uganda's reciprocity and participation in international engagements including her membership to the East African Community, IGAAD, AU and the UN.”

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Can you justify?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker and Members, on 1 May 2018, the United Nations Secretary General, Mr Antonio Guterres wrote to the Advisory Committee of UN to the effect that advantages are in favour of transferring the United Nations Services Centres from Entebbe International Airport to Nairobi. 

As mentioned in the motion, Uganda cannot lose this opportunity. Uganda has been at the forefront of the top most sacrifice. When the international community fled Somalia, Uganda was the first country to send a rescue military force to Somalia under AMISOM and to date, Uganda is the largest contributing country to AMISOM wherein we have suffered and Parliament raised concerns here. We lost four choppers, we have lost an untold number of lives, we have paid the ultimate price and therefore, it is so undiplomatic and discomforting that this reciprocity is being paid in the negative.

It is the only resource centre that Uganda has and therefore, we, as Parliament, on behalf of the people of Uganda, stand to register our emphasis that Uganda should remain as the regional centre and this regional centre served the entire Africa. That is why it is critical that we retain it.

In the international community, Uganda has been sidestepped in favour of Mexico, Budapest and Nairobi. However, the criteria they based on - the security of the country, the cost of services, cost of living - all these favour Uganda. 

Uganda is also located at the heart of the region where conflict is immense. Uganda is in the heartland of Africa compared to Nairobi. Uganda has given all these and its easy accessibility to DRC, the Central African Republic, South Sudan and Somalia amongst others.

Uganda has been a centre in hosting refugees. Currently, we host 1.3 million refugees and we are the second in the entire world of the countries that are hospitable and that has allowed refugees to settle in the country without any problem - not being attacked as it is being done in other countries.

It is therefore prudent that the United Nations is cognisant of Uganda’s contribution and puts in place measures to redress this injustice. We call it injustice because Kenya already has its full plate. Kenya is a sister country; we have seen Presidents visiting each other, the people of Uganda and Kenya interacting freely, we have seen Uganda using Kenya as its entry port, we have seen all these benefits among the two sister countries. 

At the time when Kenya was on fire in 2007, Uganda moved in to save a sister country. Therefore, we cannot stand to be humiliated where we have not run against the interests of Kenya but Kenya on the other hand is running against our interests and yet we are supposed to be moving together as sister countries. It is on that note, Madam Speaker, that this Parliament expresses its strongest support to this effort so that Uganda can retain this regional services centre.

We may pick a leaf from the neigbouring Kenya. When the contest came to struggle for this UN base, President Uhuru Kenyatta stood side by side with Raila Odinga and it is therefore pertinent that we fight together as a country. Some of us might be having reservations as to how Uganda has fought to retain this centre, we can even point fingers but this is not the time. We shall have it another day. 

What is important is to recover our regional resource centre. We shall go to that again but for now, Uganda stands to lose as a country and we cannot afford to lose as a country. Whether this is the current regime, tomorrow there could be another regime but the advantages and benefits are there for all Ugandans and that is why we should all stand up and support Uganda’s effort to regain this position.

Madam Speaker, there are other issues that are worth mentioning. The regional services centre, Entebbe brings into the country an estimated $30 million annually. This saves in the stabilisation of the foreign exchange. Once we lose this, you will see our currency collapse. It may stand but it will be affected immensely. 

The remittances from the UN employees; the food they eat is from Uganda, the hotels they sleep in are in Uganda, the transport they use is in Uganda, the taxi drivers and food suppliers, the casual labourers and people with houses in Entebbe have left them to the UN staff to occupy. This is all income that goes to this country. Therefore, whatever shade of opinion, we must stand for Ugandans and this is the time for this Parliament to stand up and urge Government to do all it takes to ensure that this country does not lose the resource service centre.

The resource service centre processes 175,000 staff payroll to all the peacekeeping missions in Africa. This payroll includes; national, that is the locally recruited personnel staff, international civilians, uniformed personnel and the UN volunteers annually. This is very critical because as Uganda, we stand to gain and we shall lose this vital resource and revenue if the UN base is shifted to Nairobi. 

What happens is that they retain at least three quarters of the employees from the host country at the base and this is our struggle as a country. Our people may not be privileged to be in Parliament but are serving this country, and have relatives, families and dependants as it is the case with almost all Ugandans. You will find that it is not only these people who benefit but the chain goes all the way down to the common person on the ground. 

It is on that note, Madam Speaker, that we ought to stand together as Parliament to urge Government to do all it takes to come up with practical measures to ensure that Uganda retains this base. It is an enhanced base that we cannot afford to lose.

We are all here in this Parliament; Uganda is on trial and it stands to lose and to be humiliated. What if Uganda is to reconsider its participation in the international mission? The UN is tempting and pushing us to the wall because if you cannot reciprocate - the principle of reciprocity is critical and central in this matter. Let the UN reciprocate Uganda’s open handedness in terms of the refugees. We played a very important role to save Liberia. The base was at Entebbe to rescue Liberia and we have done it all. 

It is either now or never. We have to stand as a country and demand that the UN General Assembly should reconsider. We shall not go into the details of the personal interests where the current UN Secretary General is Mexican and we see Mexico scoring on the list because it has gained one regional centre. We shall not go into that just like we cannot go into our problems here in the country. Let us not spill the beans. We demand that the UN reconsiders its position on Uganda and restores the resource centre at Entebbe. I would like to thank you, honourable members. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Ssekikubo.                          

3.14 
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion. Anyone going through Entebbe and was here in the early 2000 when I was the Resident District Commissioner of Mpigi can testify that from a ghost town, it turned into a glamorous one with hostels and businesses booming due to the big clientele with purchasing power from the UN staff and their visitors.

We are struggling with unemployment and even exporting labour, which has sometimes turned sour due to the mistreatment of housemaids in the Middle East. The UN base has provided jobs to more than 1,000 Ugandans and we should not let it go.

Madam Speaker, in the spirit of the East African Community and brotherhood, I do not see why the big brother Kenya should pull out the only UN base for the regional service centre, let alone asking for more to become even the UN Global Shared Service Centre for the African region. We are being cheated. This has caused panic among the staff and country at large. 

Two weeks ago, the UN staff at Entebbe approached me and told me about their fate. I contacted the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and they have now satisfied my anxiety that they are doing their best because they want to do their best but we, members of Parliament, should come in and support this motion.

The Minister of Foreign Affairs and even the President, as I said yesterday, are already interfacing with different friendly countries in order to make sure that we get support. We wait to get the report from the minister. A lot has been said by the mover, I only pray that this Parliament puts aside our political differences and supports this motion for the good of our country. I beg to move.

3.17
MS ANITA AMONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to second the motion for the UN base to remain in Uganda. What motivates me is the contribution and sacrifice that Uganda has made in terms of its involvement in Somalia, South Sudan, Liberia, Democratic Republic of Congo and Central African Republic. 

The only benefit we would get as Ugandans is having the base in Entebbe. Having that base in Entebbe means our people will be employed and there welfare will improve. Madam Speaker, that is why as Parliament, we should lobby for this UN base to remain in Uganda. 

One may ask whether we brought them to Uganda or whether we invited them. Much as we did not invite them to come to Uganda, it is our noble duty to ensure that we lobby for them to remain in Uganda. It is this Parliament that can work for the Ugandans out there.

I also got a complaint that the UN base has been there but was not paying rent. Much as they are not paying rent, they are employing our Ugandans; we are getting revenue. 

The UN base is bringing tourism to Uganda. For the UN base to leave Uganda, that would dent the country amongst the UN community. It is helping us in bringing tourists to the country. That is one of the reasons that I stand here to second the motion that Parliament should lobby for the UN base to remain in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, with the high unemployment in Uganda, it is this Parliament that has the duty to make sure the Ugandans out there are settled somewhere. As already mentioned by the mover of the motion, the UN base has been employing over 1,000 people. Therefore, it is our duty to ensure that these people remain employed. At the end of the day when the UN base is taken away, we are going to have a very high unemployment rate. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. As I invite Col. Mwesigye, I think the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should tell Mr António Guterres, that the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) theme is that no one should be left behind. If they close this centre, they are going to leave thousands of Ugandan families behind. Which of the SDGs is he in?

3.21
COL FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for having moved rapidly on this struggle. I would like to appreciate that this mission to rescue our base should be multi-pronged. Therefore, the Parliament, the Executive, our staff at the UN should all move to make sure that we secure our rights.

We appreciate that the UN is trying to make some reforms in the name of improving service delivery in peace-keeping operations. This should not deny Uganda her right as a fully-fledged member.

Madam Speaker, as you clearly said in addition to what our colleagues have said, Uganda’s image on the international scene will be much bigger because of the existence of this global service centre. Currently, Uganda serves as a referral medical evacuation and security evacuation of cases and auspices from UN missions in countries including DR Congo, Central African Republic, South Sudan and all these countries. Many international hospitals are benefiting from this. 

Ninety per cent of the national staff have received great facilities in huge sums of money from various banks including mortgage financing. This has boosted the banking sector in the country and other stakeholders. In the unfortunate event that the UN relocates its service centre, all those loans would go bad and this would have a huge negative impact on the banking sector in Uganda. 

This would also raise criminality and insecurity due to high unemployment levels and closure of small businesses like salons, bars, restaurants among others as a result of relocating Entebbe Service Centre.

Madam Speaker, I would like to add my voice in supporting this motion and state that some committees of the UN are not free from influence peddling. I know that Uganda was edged out because of some personal manoeuvres within those committees. There is hope that this has not reached a final decision because it has to come to the UN plenary, which has to be debated by all member countries.

I urge our Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Government to start lobbying member countries so that Uganda retains its base where the UN has spent colossal sums of funds. It therefore defeats any understanding to say that they want to save whereas they want to abandon Entebbe and duplicate the similar services that are in Entebbe. I, therefore, do not agree with the reasoning that they are trying to do that to cut costs.

Madam Speaker, I support the motion. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. As I invite hon. Ayoo, I think we should also tell the United Nations that there are no superior members of the UN. We are all members and we pay our subscriptions; therefore, there are no superiors and juniors. We are all the same.

3.26
MR TONY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion that Government should intensify diplomatic engagement with the UN so that we retain the UN Service Centre at Entebbe.

Allow me to thank you, Madam Speaker, for providing this opportunity for Parliament to debate, engage and support the President’s position in his letter to the UN Secretary General.

I would like to give a background that the UN is undergoing reforms and the Secretary General wanted to reduce on the number of service centres across the globe. Currently, we have 45 service centres. He requested the support of consultants who then gave a report that the service centres should be reduced to four. This report is with the Committee on Accounts and Budget Questions that has not yet been presented before the General Assembly. All the 193 member states of the UN are supposed to debate this and make a resolution. 

Madam Speaker, there are 41 countries that are going to miss out if this resolution from the report of the consultants and the committee is taken. It is, therefore, our duty as Parliament to support the position of Government to lobby other member states who are also going to lose out so that they do not accept the resolution as it is going to be presented to the UN. It is not only Uganda that is complaining but there are also other states that we now need to lobby. 

I, therefore, would like to request Government, through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, to realise our need to strengthen our team at the UN, especially the embassy. With the able ambassador, His Excellency Adonia Ayebare, the team from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should be on the ground to, from time to time, provide information, respond to mails and give guidance and support to the embassy so that we strengthen our position. 

One of the problems we have is that sometimes communications between missions abroad and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs take a long time because of not responding to emails or giving guidance and this is one of the reasons why since 2016 this question has been on the desk and little has been done.

THE SPEAKER: Since when?

MR AYOO: Since 2016. I, therefore, call upon the Minister of Foreign Affairs to put a strong team to support our mission in New York because this is not going to be handled by men getting per diem and globe-trotting when it is not their responsibility. They know how the UN system operates and we must work through that system –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you. The information I am giving is that it was on 4 December 2017 when President Uhuru Kenyatta requested, in person, the President of the UN General Assembly that the centre be moved to Nairobi to join UNEP and UN-Habitat. The information I am giving as part of the way forward is for the President of Uganda to request the President of Kenya to withdraw his request. It has ever happened – Kuala Lumpur did the same. This Parliament should urge the President and Government of Kenya to withdraw their request formally to the UN.

MR AYOO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you hon. Otto, for the information. We do not want to see a rift between Uganda and Kenya that is going to affect the East African regional integration and this is going to be one of the reasons. Entebbe and Nairobi are not far apart; this is going to be one border. Why should the UN cause a rift between the two countries?

Madam Speaker, I have a point to put forward for Uganda. Kenya is using the Kenya Airways. In October, they are going to launch a direct flight from Nairobi to New York – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude.

MR AYOO: Madam Speaker, Kenya is launching a direct flight from Nairobi to New York and it is one of the points they are putting forward – that the cost of flights between Nairobi and New York is going to be reduced. They are even prepared to present special offers to the UN staff who are moving within the area, including having the Standard Gauge Railway running from Mombasa to Nairobi, which is going to ease transport. 

We are, therefore, saying Government must also move forward to fast-track having a national carrier so that transport between Entebbe, Nairobi, Juba, Kigali is reduced and this is when we can have a point to negotiate other than crying when we also have left a gap that other partner states are taking advantage of. 

The Government must act fast on the national carrier – the airlines – and the standard Gauge Railway so that we are not seen as underdogs. I support the motion and say Government must intensify diplomatic engagements with other partner states so that the proposal is not taken by the UN. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is not only the human sacrifices we have made but Civil Aviation Authority has forfeited Shs 70 billion in terms of rent, landing fees, navigation fees and aviation fees for the United Nations. Therefore, they owe us.

3.32
MR JOHN NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to throw my full weight behind the colleagues –(Laughter)- to urge Government to intensify the diplomatic engagements to retain this rather important facility of the regional service centre, based in Entebbe.

If this regional service centre is shifted from Entebbe to Nairobi, we are bound to lose 8,700 education grants which were granted to those who would wish to be trained and deployed internationally.

Madam Speaker, António Guterres, the UN Secretary General has advanced a number of reasons why this centre should be shifted to Nairobi and one of which is the geographical comparative advantage that Kenya has over Uganda. He said that because they are at the sea, it would be cheaper for them to be ferrying the goods and services and labour to Africa. 

If you subject his conflict of interest to scrutiny, he chooses Mexico City in the Americas where he hails from, which is not near a sea. He also chooses Budapest a capital city of Hungary in Europe, which equally does not have a geographical advantage like the one he mentions. Isn’t this conflict of interest, a point that would be used by Uganda to hit him at his own game?

Secondly, they said that compared to Uganda, Kenya of course has their own flights – the Kenya Airways – and the Standard Gauge Railway. I wish Uganda’s was also under construction at least by this time. (Laughter) Those are some of the points that they are advancing to shift the regional service centre from Uganda to Kenya. However, much as we would say that the Ugandan team that is at the UN should intensify the diplomatic engagements, the anointing flows from the supervisor – the minister himself – who is in charge of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

Up to now with the claim of soliciting a $500,000 bribe, he cannot access those headquarters and that is the challenge –(Member timed out.)

3.37
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to fully support the motion for a resolution of Parliament to urge Government to intensify engagement of all essential diplomatic channels to convince the United Nations General Assembly to allow Uganda house the global shared service centre for the African region.

Madam Speaker, I would like to follow up from the information that was given by hon. Otto. Colleague, that was superb of you. Before the President urges the Government of Kenya to withdraw, let me be the first because I know they are watching me right now. Please, withdraw and allow Uganda to retain this service centre. I believe they are watching from Nairobi. (Laughter)

Uganda has done a lot, not only for East Africa but Africa and the world at large. We are a small country but we have done big things as though we are already big. We are a peacekeeping country. When South Sudan was in turmoil, Uganda ran there. We used our own blood to save South Sudan. The UN only went to save the situation after we had pacified the place. What else can we say if this country cannot be supported now?

You know what happened in Somalia. In Lugogo here, we lost people in big numbers – over 80 – but everybody is quick to forget about that. When will they remember us if they cannot remember today? This is very serious. 

Uganda has housed UNICEF and we have done a lot through UNICEF. We have also had UNDP here and we have contributed a lot. This time the world should know that we have championed women empowerment as a country. If we are championing women empowerment, why should the UN withdraw its base from Uganda when we are a country which is very loving and highly hospitable?

Madam Speaker, one time, I was in Abuja, Nigeria and I was told that my President was around – I felt like shaking his hand. When you are out of the country, you will feel how good it can be to see your own that comes from Uganda. That is the situation which is being set up here, right now. We should forget our differences and focus on Uganda as a country because that is what we need and deserve. 

If we talk about the facilities in Uganda in terms of infrastructure like roads, we are about to launch the Entebbe Express Highway. Doesn’t the United Nations wish to enjoy this good facility? Why should they withdraw now when we are bringing the best of the best to the country? 

I do not think that would be the best. It would be a wrong time for the United Nations to withdraw. If we are focusing on peace, I think we are highly peaceful. I am aware of many United Nations staff who have married from Uganda. Some of our women and men are married to people who come from abroad but they work with the United Nations. Should you disorganise such families when they are getting better? Some of them have conceived yet you want to disorganise that - (Member timed out.)

3.40
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. It would be very unfortunate if the UN removes its centre from Entebbe. We must ask ourselves questions. The centre has been here since 2010; why is the United Nations deciding to move the centre from here now?

We know that the UN is undergoing a lot of reforms but if they were closing down operations here because they are cutting down on the costs, we would understand. I think there must be a reason for moving that centre from Entebbe to Nairobi. In fact, before any member of the African Union stands to apply to host an organisation like the UN, other members must know. To make it worse, it is Kenya, which is a member of the East African Community, a neighbour of Uganda - and the fact that Kenya is already hosting the UNEP and other UN agencies in Nairobi, it is very unfair and selfish for our brothers to snatch this from Uganda.

Before the UN takes a decision, they usually conduct research and send consultants. These consultants make reports for the UN Secretary-General. Our mission at the UN should have known this before and brought it to the attention of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the minister should have brought it here to the Floor of Parliament. That is why I have always talked - our Prime Minister and hon. Sam Kutesa, both served at the UN as Presidents of the General Assembly and hon. Sam Kutesa just returned from the UN. We would have stood a better chance because of our people who served at the UN. 

When such things come up, you must ask yourselves, “Why?” That is why I have spoken on this Floor that we must have professionals in those international organisations like the UN; people who must lobby and be on the corridors of UN all the time. They should have known that this was coming up. They should have knocked at every door. The work of professional diplomats is to lobby. You can see what is happening. That is what I always talk about at the UN headquarters in Geneva, Nairobi and Amsterdam. We should have lobbied so that this thing did not even have to come to the public and take us unawares. We are starting when the issue is already in the public. We should have lobbied quietly because we have an advantage. 

We are hosting refugees and we have people serving in Somalia. Uganda stands a chance. We should have started on this issue long before. The Prime Minister has always said that 40 per cent of our serving officers in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should be professionals. However, that has not been implemented and that is how we mess up on the international scene. We would not have messed up at all if we had professionals. We should have known and started lobbying earlier. But now it has come up as a surprise.

Madam Speaker, it is not too late because a decision has to be taken. We can intensify the lobbying so that the UN does not go ahead and carry out this exercise of moving the centre from Entebbe. I know what we are going to lose –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I recall when the motion was moved to have hon. Kutesa go to the UN. Some of us were very sceptical whether hon. Sam Kutesa was the right candidate for Uganda to present to the UN.
	
I would like to put this clear that all of us are Ugandans and we would love to see our country get to greater horizons. However, situations where people who are not clear in their way of operations are being presented and give a picture of Uganda - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are trying to solve a problem for the people of Uganda. Stop those issues. Just look for a quick solution for our people. You had finished. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: No. I gave room for information. Madam Speaker, I understand from the ministry officials that it is not too late. We can lobby and the Prime Minister is here. We are going to talk to Kenyans and we have got to dispatch a team to the UN and start lobbying so that we maintain the resource centre in Entebbe.

Otherwise, if they leave, Uganda is going to lose the money we have been spending and employment. We must start moving now. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let us use two minutes and please do not repeat other Members’ points. Bring something new.

3.47
MR ODRIA ALIONI (Independent, Aringa County South, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion that we engage diplomatic lobbying to retain the UN Global Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda.

Point number one is that in case this service centre is moved from Uganda, then the entire Ministry of Foreign Affairs must be reshuffled. The ministers must be moved.

Last year, I attended the UN Summit about refugees in Munyonyo. I heard the UN pronouncing and thanking Uganda, for being very hospitable to the refugees. Currently, Uganda is hosting over 1.5 million refugees. The Office of the Prime Minister has gone ahead to try to see that we even go into borrowing of loans to support refugee programmes in this country.

Madam Speaker, we have been practically on ground. In Yumbe, we are hosting over 287,000 refugees. In my constituency alone, I am hosting over 80,000 refugees. We are on the ground working but Kenya is basing on promises. If this centre is moved to Kenya, can we also open our gates at Busia and transfer all the 1.5 million refugees to Kenya? (Applause) We are not basing on promises of aircraft and the Standard Gauge Railway. We are practically on ground helping humanity.
Therefore, the United Nations –(Member timed out.)

3.49
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two questions. First of all, at what stage are we? We need to know whether the decision has already been taken or the decision is about to be taken. If the decision is about to be taken, usually when we are lobbying, this House even passes even if it means supplementary budget to ensure that we get specialists who can lobby those UN agencies. Those who can; go and lobby so that our centre can remain here. (Applause)

Therefore, if it means – if they tell us - we have a UN Permanent Representative, Ambassador Ayebare. If they are telling us where we are, we can save the situation by doing ABCD. So the Ministry of Foreign Affairs can really come and tell us that what we need is ABCD to ensure that we save our centre.

Secondly –(Interruption) 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you, hon. Sebaggala, for giving way. Madam Speaker, what we should actually do is to send a team to lobby the President of our neighbouring country because the worst enemy is the one who pulls away the plate which you would like to use. 

When we were sending troops to Somalia, nobody wanted to send the army to save Kenya from the terrorism which is affecting it. They also refused. Therefore, these are the ways and strategies which we can use to lobby so that the neighbours can withdraw before the decision is taken in the UN.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, when we were in Geneva for the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU), you were requested to present a paper on our best policies as far as refugees are concerned. It was only Uganda and Canada that were selected. You directed me to represent you. Uganda is known everywhere when it comes to refugees. Uganda is known in all UN organisations that it accommodates and has the best policies on refugees.

Therefore, everybody knows that Uganda has contributed and so the onus is on us. Let us set up a team that can save the centre so that the jobs that have been created are not donated to Kenyans. The moment the centre shifts to another country, it is like a donation. We are donating all that we have been getting out of that centre to another country. Let us put aside our differences and forge a way forward to save our centre. Thank you very much.

3.52
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and I would like to associate myself with the submission of hon. Ssekikubo and hon. Nambeshe. However, I would like to concentrate on the lessons we draw from this.

It is clear that we are relying on the UN base, which to me is production-related. The way we rely on the UN base is the same way we rely on sports betting to support our economy. This is a lesson to government that as we go to the next budget or even the budget allocation, when we issue ceilings, we should support the agricultural sector and industrialisation more. This is going to help to cover the gap of unemployment which is being created.

I see now we have no control as to whether the UN base will -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, is that what you want us to tell Mr Guterres - about agriculture? Please, be serious. Address the motion. Should we or should we not? Please forget that. Agriculture is important; we know, but Mr Guterres will not listen to that.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My point is clear. I support the motion for the reason advanced by my colleagues. However, I also know that there are lessons we draw from this. For instance, even for us to debate, we have no final say on this matter. That is why we are only urging colleagues that actually we are only persuading them.

I am saying that to avoid another motion of that nature next time; we should invest more in the agricultural sector. I know, Madam Speaker, that the statistics brought to this House about the industrial sector, agriculture and tourism would in the same way make a cover up so that we are not necessarily at the mercy of someone whom we have no control over. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewanyana, two minutes and address the motion, not Kampala issues. (Laughter)

3.55
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are here to bring new ideas, especially in support of the motion. I have a new idea. You see, when a person visits you in your home here in Buganda and every statement that comes out of your mouth is in some way affecting that visitor, then that visitor is free to go. (Laughter)

For those who reach the President, as Parliament looks for solutions, they should also help us talk to the President that sometimes the statements he makes and he is quoted in the international media are against neo-colonialism. After speaking against neo-colonialism, we are here today crying that we need some help from these people by putting their missions here. These things affect them and they do –(Interruption)

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Speaker, we are here deliberating on a very important issue of national importance; an issue that touches on the image of our country Uganda. We are in pain, actually that the only base we have is being shifted to another country. It has nothing to do with party affiliation.

Is the honourable member in order to attempt to taint the image of the President at this particular time and speak recklessly when actually we are trying to defend our country? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he is out of order. What he is saying is irrelevant. (Applause) Hon. Ssemujju, take the Floor, then hon. Khainza, hon. Elotu and the minister.

3.57
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I oppose the motion and the reason I oppose it –(Interjections)– and I am asking colleagues not to be emotional – is that Nairobi is a regional capital. Recently, I travelled with MPs on the Public Accounts Committee and I told them that my brother who works with one of the regional offices in Nairobi earns $10,000 per month.

They have all the various regional offices, including embassies from Europe. What Rwanda has done is to service land and begin attracting regional offices to Rwanda. We must not safeguard our commercial interest out of sympathy; by saying, “Please, sympathise with us; even if Nairobi is the regional capital with all their advantage, at least sympathise with us.” That is what we must address – (Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The procedural point I would like to raise is: You know Kenya has gone farther in almost everything than us. However, it does not mean we should sit back and look on as they develop and not wish ourselves well.

Madam Speaker, the UN Service Centre is employing many Ugandans. Is it procedurally right for the honourable colleague to think we should always support other growing nations without making ours also grow and develop?

THE SPEAKER: No, we have a right to development. Please, address the motion and then sit down.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, there was an opportunity –(Interjections) - I am addressing the motion - for a Ugandan in the name of Dr Olara Otunnu who was to be a Secretary-General of the UN and that time, we were not Ugandans. We disowned him and he went to Ivory Coast to apply for citizenship. (Applause) We must not hide our -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, by the time hon. Olara Otunnu came to apply for that position, he had been an Ivorian for over 10 years. Do not tell lies.

MR SSEMUJJU: It is because the process did not start – (Interjections) - that was the end -

THE SPEAKER: No, he had surrendered his citizenship of this country.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, this is my submission in opposing this motion. First of all, there was no resolution of Parliament when UN was coming here. The UN should leave because this is a service centre; they must go where it is convenient. What Parliament must address is to make Uganda attractive but not to begin looking for sympathy. If we mould our country to be attractive like Kenyans have, there would be many more regional offices opening up in Uganda. (Hon. Odonga Otto rose_)

I will take the information.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I would like to give you this information. Recently, I met Dr Opiyo Oloya; he was commissioned by the American Government to come and find out why Uganda has successfully stayed in Somalia and yet the Americans have failed. 

So, this is the information to show you that there are also good things the Americans would like to find out about Uganda. (Applause)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the point this Parliament must address and indeed mention is that the Auditor-General in various reports has been complaining that the UN does not want to pay at Entebbe. I am surprised the vice chairperson of COSASE did not raise this matter. In fact, we should be celebrating they are leaving because they occupy the whole of Entebbe International Airport for free.

The money you would like to get as a result of employing 1,500 Ugandans is money you can get when you develop the old airport and it begins serving the regional market. I do not want to be part of those who want to be given handouts and tokens; I would like merits. The UN must come here – (Interjections) - you see, at the time they were coming here, there were reasons and today, they have found reasons to leave. We must make Uganda, first and foremost, a very attractive country - (Member timed out.)

4.03
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues who are supporting the motion to have Uganda retain the UN base. 

However, my concern would be; in the report we were told Uganda won this bid to establish the regional service centre in 2010. My question then is: What were the terms and conditions at the time of the establishment of the centre? It is because if we won a bid, then that means there were terms and conditions. Have we, as a country, gone against these terms and conditions or has the UN gone against the terms and conditions established then for us to have this centre in Uganda?

Maybe, we can use this from a legal point to negotiate that the centre is retained in Uganda if the UN has gone against our terms and conditions. 

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, I support the motion because we have seen the advantages my colleagues have talked about in terms of employment and revenue. Therefore, I support the motion that the UN base is retained in Uganda. 
	
However, I would like to know the legal point of view especially on the terms and conditions. (Hon. Okin rose_) I will take the information from the colleague across about that.

MR OKIN: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving me way to give this information. 

Madam Speaker, by the time the UN was establishing this service centre, I was actually working with them. I think their primary objective, at that time, was to have a centre which would oversee the conflict in the Great Lakes Region, especially in the Democratic Republic of Congo and South Sudan. 

At some point, there was a discussion in the UN to shift this centre and build a satellite city around Karuma so that the focus remains South Sudan and the Central African Republic where the LRA was operating. 

So, basically, the reason why perhaps the UN would like to move away from here could have been some internal matters which I think we need to go to the depth of.

First of all, I would like to present that one of the reasons could have been our relationship in terms of the international connections. You remember the other time when we referred -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not think you should speculate on the reasons. Are you in support of the motion or not?

MR OKIN: I am supporting the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR OKIN: But let me first give this information -

MS KHAINZA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for the information. Like you said, that means their intention was good. So, honourable colleagues, we should all put our voices together to see that Uganda retains this base.

4.06
MR COSMAS ELOTU (NRM, Dakabela County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise also to support the motion. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to give you a bit of a historical perspective to this. In the mid-1990s, when we had wars in Rwanda and the DRC, Uganda stood up as the only nation that supported the refugees from Rwanda and the DRC. I would like to read verbatim: “The United Nations agency at the centre of support of the refugees was World Food Programme in relation to food. In 2001, and in recognition of the contribution of Uganda to the international community in support of the various crises in the region, World Food Programme, Rome, shifted its regional headquarters to Uganda and Uganda hosted the East and Central Africa World Food Programme General Office here.”

However, honourable members, I am sure with very little knowledge of this House, in 2011, the World Food Programme regional office that was supporting 11 countries in Africa was closed in Uganda. 

I just wanted to give that historical perspective. If you see the reasons that were advanced then for - and eventually 10 years later, you would see that all these manoeuvres are baseless. They are basically for either selfish means or simply political in nature. However, the reasons that bring these centres to Uganda are founded on our contribution.

The World Food Programme then advanced that –(Interruption)

MR MWIJUKYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Member knows that the Uganda human rights’ record is tainted. He also knows that our minister and our image are tainted. He knows that instead of us concentrating on campaigning, we should concentrate on cleaning up as to why people are leaving –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mwijukye, please take your seat.

MR ELOTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thought I should give the House the historical background and I was at the point of stating that the United Nations World Food Programme said that due to the contribution of Uganda to support the refugees from Rwanda, Congo and the region, the regional office should be housed in Uganda.

In 2005, and eventually 2006 and 2007, the same argument was again advanced due to our contribution in the region, particularly to peace keeping. That is when the regional centre was brought to Entebbe. However, now, you look at the arguments being advanced; one of the reasons is that Nairobi gives a more proper time zone as compared to Kampala or Entebbe as such.

However, Nairobi and Entebbe, we are in the same time zone. The reasons are more political as opposed to logistical as such. I, therefore, stand and strongly support the motion that our foreign missions, particularly the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should step up their game and ensure that our national interests are above everything else in the region. Thank you very much.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You had guided that Members should speak if they have new ideas to put in support of this motion. From both sides, the motion is overwhelmingly supported, would it not be procedurally right for you to put the question so that we move but after the minister has maybe made his statement? That is the procedural matter that I wanted to put across. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes. There has been overwhelming support for the motion except for one Member who opposed. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Let me now invite the Prime minister to speak and tell us what he is going to do.

4.12
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues for overwhelmingly passing and supporting the motion by hon. Ssekikubo. A number of issues came up – (hon. Nandala-Mafabi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: The Prime Minister is just summing up.

DR RUGUNDA: And I will just give a quick response.

One was whether a decision over the regional service centre has been taken or not. The fact of the matter is that no decision has been taken over this matter. The UN is discussing the matter and we expect that by the end of this month - if not in the course of June or within the next two months - a final decision will be taken by the General Assembly of the United Nations after going through its various committees.

The second point that was raised was on what Government has done. When this matter came to the attention of Government through our mission in New York, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs - both the political and technical leadership of the ministry - mobilised and advanced that the centre should remain in Entebbe. They came to Cabinet and this matter was discussed and President Museveni - (Interjections)– I am very well clarified.

Madam Speaker, President Museveni has taken up the matter and has already written to the Secretary-General of the United Nations asking the UN system to wholeheartedly support the regional service centre’s remaining at Entebbe. Government has put in place other mechanisms of contacting governments, countries and leaders to mobilise them to support Uganda retaining the regional service centre.

Therefore, in a nutshell –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much Ndugu Prime Minister and Madam Speaker. The big boy –(Interjections)– no, we were with him in Busoga College Mwiri and he was the “big boy” and I the “small boy”. The clarification I would like to seek from the Prime Minister is: You know Ndugu, you are very bright and at one time you were our representative at the UN. When there is something from government and the President writes a letter, a minister usually carries it to that place.

Right now, we are even lucky; the current Minister of Foreign Affairs was one time the President of the UN General Assembly and is well conversant with these things. When he meets people there, he knows them. The clarification I would like to seek from you is: Where is he? Did you send him with the letter to carry to the UN Secretary-General about this matter? If hon. Kutesa went to the UN, I am sure he would come back with the results. Therefore, where is the Minister of Foreign Affairs?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, hon. Sam Kutesa, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Uganda is on duty in Egypt. Let me however say that hon. Sam Kutesa and other colleagues in Foreign Affairs, like my distinguished brothers, hon. Okello Oryem and hon. Philemon Mateke, are all discharging their political duties without any problem.

Therefore, in conclusion friends, this is a serious matter that we are discussing today and I am very happy there is unanimity, except one lonely voice, and let us consolidate this solidarity and remain united; mobilise the entire country so that we can talk to the United Nations leadership with one voice. Our voice will be heard, respected and the centre will remain at Entebbe. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let me invite the sector minister to give us the way forward because he has to do our work now.

4.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Henry Okello Oryem): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. Let me first and foremost apologise for not being available yesterday to respond to my colleagues. I want to thank both sides of the House for supporting the motion and for the united front they have presented here in supporting the case for the regional service centre to remain in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, let me also thank you very much for the recent issues that you addressed that touched part of the issues of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. I saw how effective your performance in Geneva and recently your response to the UN mission that was here when you made it very clear on Uganda’s position on sexual issues. I thank you very much –(Applause)

Madam Speaker, mine is just a few clarifications. The reasons why Uganda is strong and should remain to host the regional service centre are these and these are the requirements by the UN:

    1. On security and stability; there is no reason why whatsoever - Uganda at the moment has the best security and stability in the region. That was one of the conditions we qualified as a family duty station. 
    2. I hosted the current Secretary-General of the UN when he was in Uganda and he visited the regional service centre. He expressed satisfaction that Entebbe had been reported to him as the best town for the regional centre. He stated that in my presence in Entebbe. 
    3. Another condition was on health, education and access issues including reliable medical, education facilities and a nearby international airport. We satisfied that 100 per cent. We have international health centres here. Recently, when some UN staff of MONUSCO were injured in the DRC, they were flown to Uganda and were treated at the Nakasero Hospital as proof that we have better capacity. 
    4. We satisfy infrastructure with the first class express highway that now takes us from Entebbe to Kampala and vice versa. 
    5. On the strong host government’s relations to ensure recognition of UN privileges, immunities and access to visas for UN staff including their staff and dependants; Uganda and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs give first class treatment and we have got a very fine relationship with the UN. 

In other words we satisfy all conditions and what is being speculated that Uganda does not satisfy the conditions that have been laid could be caused by some other reasons. I am glad that you overruled on several occasions.

The issue of the status of the Minister of Foreign Affairs, hon. Sam Kutesa; the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has given an effective response. That he remains the Minister of Foreign Affairs for the Republic of Uganda.

He has got the full confidence of the President of Uganda and at the moment he is on a state visit with President Museveni in Cairo. He is scheduled for four other state visits with the President of Uganda this year.

To the best of my knowledge, there is no criminal summons, no warrant requesting hon. Kutesa to report to any jurisdiction in the United States of America and therefore, the United States Embassy has in no occasion refused an application or withdrawn the visa of hon. Sam Kutesa to travel to the United States of America. He remains free to travel to the United States of America without impediment. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. You will give us an update on the progress of our very important motion. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

4.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table the corrigenda to the draft budget estimates of the financial year 2018/2019. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the committee for perusal.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORTS OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FY 2018/2019

THE MINISTRY OF SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Science and Technology was due to respond to some issues raised on the Floor; please, do it quickly, honourable minister.

4.23
THE MINISTER FOR SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are a number of observations and recommendations arising out of the report of the science and technology committee. In addition, Members also raised a number of issues regarding that report. 

I would like to categorise the issues into four: there was an issue of PIBID, Kiira Motors and innovation –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. The honourable minister making a presentation was yesterday nominated to run as MP for Sheema Municipality. We would like to know his status in this House. Is he in a campaign session or is he making a presentation as a minister or as an Ex-Officio member? I seek you indulgence.

THE SPEAKER: Has he lost it? I need to examine that situation; let us first go to another item while I deal with your issue. 

THE MINISTRY OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES

4.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (TOURISM) (Mr Godfrey Kiwanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the committee report, some issues were raised yesterday and I beg to respond as follows -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what was raised is new; give me time and let us first listen to the Minister of Tourism.

MR KIWANDA: Madam Speaker, one of the issues that was raised was about the Uganda Hotel Training and Tourism Institute in Jinja. I would like to inform the House as follows:

The project for the Jinja School has started but we had issues with the World Bank and our total sum reduced from $12 million to $ 7 million. This could not allow us to have a five star hotel and we zeroed on a three star hotel.

I clarify that even the Kenya Utalii College does not have a five star hotel at their training institute; they have a three star hotel. 

In regard to Jinja being excluded from the earmarked airstrips basing on yesterday’s submission, we have crosschecked with the National Development Plan I and proved that Jinja was not in the plan. It was Pakuba, Kasese, Soroti, Arua and Moroto that were earmarked. We are working with our colleagues in the Civil Aviation Authority so that this work is done. 

The issue raised by my brother from Busongora as regards the comprehensive strategy to handle human-wildlife conflict: Even before - today another Member raised an issue of crocodiles; as a ministry, we admit that the human-wildlife conflict is on the rise and we are coming up with a strategy on how we can mitigate this.

As the population is growing, a lot of encroachment is happening in our conservation areas but we have already directed Uganda Wildlife Authority to develop a comprehensive plan to resolve the human-wildlife conflict.

We shall closely work with the Civil Aviation Authority to ensure that its works are implemented. We had our celebrations in Kasese last month.

On the issue of elephants that are moving in South Sudan and in Somalia, I would like to inform the House that we have borders but our wild animals do not respect international borders. (Laughter) Some of these wild animals have their relatives in South Sudan, Sudan, Somalia and it is not very easy that we confine them in one place. 

However, the Bill, which is before Parliament for amendment of this Bill – (Interjections) - but you should also sympathise with us. Much as we talk about Uganda, these animals do not know about it because they do not respect international borders. We are working with our colleagues across the borders to see how we can mitigate this problem. 

Madam Speaker, the Member of Parliament from Bundibugyo raised the issue of hot springs that have not been developed. In the tourism sector, we are faced with two big problems; the first is product development and secondly, product promotion. These are the two major components that we are dealing with. Of course, we are also hampered by the small budget that we have; we cannot do everything at once but these are very many areas that have been identified that we need to work upon. 

I would like to request the honourable member, this Parliament and the local governments that these areas should be gazetted so that as we get money to develop them; we should not have human settlement on such national resources. 

The other issue was about having a comprehensive tourism development plan. We have already developed that and I beg to lay on the Table; the Uganda National Tourism Sector Development Plan 2015 to 2020. 

There was also another issue that was raised about the budget. I would like to appreciate your support to the ministry. It is true that when you look at the budget and the gap, at times what we demand we may not be able to do because if you look at the budget and the approved Shs 27 billion, there is a funding gap of about Shs 50 billion. We are trying everything possible to work within the budget. 

However, we also call upon – we are appreciative of the other ministries that they come on board because whenever we would approach the Ministry of Works and Transport to work on the tourism roads, they always respond. This time we would like to also call upon the Ministry of Works and Transport to put emphasis on our tourism roads as it was raised here yesterday.

We, therefore, need to do aggressive marketing; we need to diversify our tourism products if we are to be competitive, improve on the tourism and hospitality skills along the tourism bio-chain. We need to strengthen conservation and natural heritage which we are doing as a ministry. As I have mentioned and laid on the Table our comprehensive tourism promotion at the ministry - the plan is here - we are doing everything that will promote this country internationally and among Ugandans themselves.

It is Ugandans that can be able to market their own country and they cannot do so unless they have information about it. That is why we also promote –(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, your ministry brings in a lot of money. It is the main foreign exchange earner for Uganda. There are international tourist exhibitions in Spain, Japan, and Berlin and sometimes your ministry is not represented at these exhibitions. The stalls maybe cost about $10,000 or $15,000 but your people cannot go and put up a stall at an exhibition where tourists are attracted. 

How are you working on this to make sure we attract tourists to come to Uganda? Even at our missions, the money that is sent is not enough to allow officers handling tourism to go attend these tourist exhibitions and to convince tourists to come to Uganda. 

You talked about the two people who train at Kenya Utalii College; that it is not a five star hotel but in their country, people train to go and do practicals at five star hotels. Can you clarify on those issues?

THE SPEAKER: As the minister comes, in the gallery we have students of St. Stephen’s Kumi Child Development Centre; if you could stand up – (Applause) 

They are represented by hon. Silas Aogon and hon. Monicah Amoding. You are welcome. Honourable minister, please wind up.

MR KIWANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are participating in the marketing and exhibitions. Right now my senior colleague, Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu, is in South Africa with our team attending an exhibition. We have been attending Berlin; we have one in London and we actually attend. 

We are now trying to bring in more countries on board such as China, Japan and India. That is also another target but I would like to bring to your attention that we attend these international marketing exhibitions as a ministry.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I would like to seek is that one and a half weeks ago, we saw our 12 lions poisoned and killed yet these are the treasurers that bring tourists here. We never received any statement from you on the Floor of Parliament. 

The game parks are being encroached upon; in other words, you are presiding over a dwindling and a soon to become extinct sector. What have you done as a ministry? Before you attract people here, how have you taken care of the treasures of the wilderness; the basis where this country earns? It is almost the second foreign exchange earner to this country –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the debate ended yesterday; we had spoken and they are responding. Do not raise new issues. Please honourable minister, respond.

MR KIWANDA: Thank you. We are preparing a comprehensive statement on the mitigation measures that were put in place for human-wildlife conflict which includes the laws. The issue regarding the lions is a bad story; we have been having a lot of other problems but I even mentioned while I was beginning this statement that this is a big problem - of course not only to Uganda. 

The human-wildlife conflict is increasing because as the population of both the animals and that of the people is increasing, there is that conflict. We are putting up trenches, the “lion fund” and issues to do with compensation because even the law that we are proposing before Parliament - which is at the committee - we are also proposing issues of compensation. If someone knows he is going to be compensated even when his cow has been eaten, he will not kill the lion. 

However, there are still some gaps in the old law because it talks about compassion rather than compensation; therefore, we are bringing all these issues into the new law to see how we can protect our animals. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we had a number of senior ministers so I would like to allow the report of the public service committee to come first, then that of information and communication technology (ICT) and natural resources because the minister was here and respects seniority. He was here the whole day yesterday. So the report on public service by hon. Onzima; if you could give an executive summary, please. 

THE REPORT ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

3.39
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Godfrey Onzima): Madam Speaker and honourable members, the Committee on Public Service and Local Government scrutinised the ministerial policy statements and now reports.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to lay on the Table copies of the minutes of the meeting we had during our interface and a copy of the report. I beg to lay.

In accordance with Article 90 and 155 of the Constitution; the Public Finance Management Act, Section 12; and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, rule 145 (3), the Committee on Public Service and Local Government examined the ministerial policy statements for financial year 2018/2019 of the institutions under its mandate and made recommendations therein. The committee accordingly submits its report to Parliament for further consideration and approval of the sector as required by law.

Madam Speaker, the votes under our mandate were:

    1. Vote 005 - Ministry of Public Service 
    2. Vote 146 - Public Service Commission 
    3. Vote 011 - Ministry of Local Government 
    4. Vote 147 - Local Government Finance Commission 
    5. Votes 501-850 - All local governments 

The committee observed that the policy statements were complied with gender and equity consideration as per Section 13 (15) (g) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. The committee notes that the certificate was transmitted by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to Parliament. The certificate contained a summary report, which revealed that votes under the purview of the committee - vote 005, Ministry of Public Service (55 per cent); vote 146, Public Service Commission (54 per cent); vote 011, Ministry of Local Government (50.7 per cent); and vote 147, Local Government Finance Commission (54 per cent) - achieved the required pass mark of 50 per cent.

The ministerial policy statements' individual votes are consistent with the agencies' strategic plans and the National Development Plan (NDP). The NDP objective for the sector is to improve recruitment, development and retention of a highly skilled and professional workforce by establishing mechanisms for strengthening human capital planning, development and management.

Decentralisation is seen in the NDP as a vehicle to improve local democracy, service delivery and good governance. The public service and local government subsectors have developed strategic plans that are aligned to the NDP and they have been cleared by the National Planning Authority (NPA). Their work plans and budgets are derived from these strategic plans.

Madam Speaker, I beg to go to the observations and recommendations on page 13.

Vote 005 - Ministry of Public Service 

Planned Harmonization of Salaries for the Financial Year 2018/2019

The committee learnt that due to resource constraints, the Cabinet approved implementation of the pay enhancement in a phased manner, starting with selected categories of cadres during financial year 2018/2019. The categories of cadres include medical workers, scientists, science teachers, police, prisons and Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) in lower ranks. They also include External Security Organisation (ESO), judicial officers and state prosecutors, local government political leaders, head teachers and deputies of secondary schools, principals and deputies of vocational and tertiary institutions and public universities. 

The committee also learnt that Government was able to identify Shs 568 billion to cover the wage enhancement in financial year 2018/2019. The Cabinet approved a roadmap for implementing the salary enhancement to cover a period of five years starting from FY 2019-2023 for the remaining categories. The details can be seen in appendix 1.

The general enhancement of salaries for all public servants will have a positive impact like high levels of motivation, improved performance and retention of workers. The committee particularly noted that graduate science teachers will receive an adjustment in financial year 2018/2019, from a salary of Shs 1,089,533 to Shs 1,677,688, and diploma science teachers will get an increment from Shs 625,067 to Shs 1,092,885.

The graduate and diploma arts teachers are paid Shs 60l,34ll and Shs 447,080 respectively. However, a l5 per cent pay enhancement has been provided in financial year 2018/2019, representing a monthly increment of Shs 90,201 and Shs 67,062 for graduate and diploma teachers respectively, which takes their pay to Shs 691,542 and Shs 514,142 respectively. However, the committee noted that although the Government has planned to enhance salaries for these categories in the subsequent financial years, this could still be narrowed further.

The committee recommends that graduate and diploma arts teachers be paid Shs 0.8 million and Shs 0.6 million respectively during financial year 2018/2019. This should be done to narrow the salary gap between science and arts teachers. This will require an additional funding of Shs 1.214 billion.

The committee further recommends that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development secures an additional Shs 1.2 billion during financial year 2018/2019 to cater for the proposed salary review for arts teachers.

Establishment of the Public Service Pension Fund (PSPFI)

The committee noted that since the decentralisation of pension, there are continued complaints of pensioners who have been deleted from the payroll and some who missed pension due to inefficiency and limited funds, among others. Therefore, there is need for Government to begin restructuring the current pension policy and provide for a contributory scheme for all Government employees like National Social Security Fund (NSSF). The new scheme should cover all Government employees and Government should make mandatory contributions into an employee's individual pension account. This will guarantee availability of funds and increase the amount of retirement benefits for pensioners.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Public Service introduces a public service pension fund Bill that should be tabled in Parliament within three months of adoption of this report.

Vote 146 - Public Service Commission 

Irregular Payment of Members on the District Service Commission 

The committee learnt that there is a gross disparity and irregularity of payment of allowance and retainer fees to District Service Commissions (DSCs) in the local governments. The pay for the DSCs comes from the local government’s local revenue. 

It was also found out that it is only the chairperson of the DSC who is paid a retainer fee of Shs 1.5 million monthly from the Consolidated Fund while other members are paid as low as between Shs 10,000 to Shs 100,000 per sitting, depending on the revenue of the local government. The poor pay breeds corruption and inefficiency in the local government and affects the DSC’s independence in doing their work.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that retainer fees for all DSC members be uniform at Shs 400,000 monthly in all local governments. This money should be statutory and charged from the Consolidated Fund. This should take effect from July 2018. This is done to achieve equity and equilibrium among members in all local governments.

Vote 011 - Ministry of Local Government (MoLG)

Induction of Elected Local Government Councillors

The committee noted that the induction of councillors is necessary for efficient and effective performance of councils. Most councillors - about 80 per cent - were newly elected thus needed induction. The committee appreciates the support of the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) towards training some of these councillors. However, it remains a fundamental responsibility of Government to train the remaining group of local leaders. 

As past experience of poor performance attests, there should be need to induct the elected councillors, which is long overdue, so as to enable them effectively take on their roles and responsibilities. It was established that lack of induction has been partly the source of numerous and avoidable conflicts between councillors and technical officers in the local governments. In this regard, the ministry should implement a robust induction programme for all the various levels of local government councillors around the country.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (MoFPED) commits and provides Shs 4.2 billion this financial year to enable Ministry of Local Government carry out induction of councillors in the remaining 67 districts so that they learn their roles, responsibilities, legislation and standard rules of procedure. In addition, the Ministry for the Presidency should also induct the appointed leaders like the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) to avoid conflicts that continue to brew between these leaders in the district. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chair, since the Members have the report, just read the subject and recommendation; for instance, “setting the minimum qualification standards for the councillors” and then go to the recommendations.

MR GODFREY ONZIMA: Okay. Thank you. 

Setting Minimum Qualification Standards for Councillors  

Since the Ministry of Local Government is in the initial stages of reviewing the Local Governments Act, the committee recommends that one of the amendments should focus on providing for a minimum standard for district, municipal and division councillors, as well as chairpersons of subcounties at Uganda Certificate of Education (UCE) level.

Strengthening Of Local Governments Performance

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides the required funds to Ministry of Local Government so that routine inspection of local governments is fully functional.

Pending Completion of Busega Market

The committee recommends that MoFPED provides Shs 25.2 billion to enable Ministry of Local Government complete the construction of the market and be able to relocate vendors from the current market place. This will, therefore, enable Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) implement its planned project smoothly without complications.

Operationalisation of New Town Councils

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development secures Shs 20.6 billion as start-up funds for the already approved units for their operationalisation during financial year 2018/2019.

Vacant Positions in Local Government

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide adequate funding to the Ministry of Local Government to ensure that all the above mentioned vacant positions are filled for effective and efficient delivery of services.

The next point equally the same as the one above. So, I will skip that. It is about filling the other lower positions.  

Settlement of Domestic Arrears

The committee recommends that MoFPED secures and provides Shs 40.6 billion to Ministry of Local Government to enable the ministry clear its arrears for taxes and counterpart funding.

Failure to Conduct Local Council I and II Elections

The committee recommends that the Government organises and conducts the LC I and II elections within six months after the adoption of this report.

Vote 147 - Local Government Finance Commission (LGFC)

Local Revenue Enhancement

The committee recommends that there should be enactment of a legal framework to improve on the weak local government tax administration and management process.

The committee further recommends that there should be establishment of a fully dedicated unit focusing on local revenue management within the office of the Chief Administration Officer (CAO). The unit should be headed by a senior officer whose function should focus on local revenue as it is specified in Section 80 of the Local Governments Act.

Loss of Local Revenue

The committee recommends that Government should come up with a clear legal framework that should stipulate clearly how much is collected from a natural resource and how much is supposed to be remitted as royalties to a hosting local government.

Revocation of Some Local Government Revenue Sources

The committee recommends that the Local Government Finance Commission should compile the financial implications emanating from the revocation of the above local revenue sources to show the magnitude of revenue lost.

The committee further recommends that Government should compensate the local governments for the losses of revenue from the above revenue sources to enable them implement their mandate.

Votes 501-850: All Local Governments (LGs)

Perpetual Decline of the National Budget Allocated to Local Governments

The committee recommends that future increments should focus more on service delivery and also address the issue of achieving an increased budget allocation of 25 per cent to local government service delivery. 
The committee further recommends that Parliament enacts a legal provision to establish a minimum share for the local government of the national budget in order to shield the local governments’ share from deductions.

Conclusion

Subject to the above findings and observations and the amendments proposed therein, the committee recommends that the budget for the sector be approved as proposed.

Budget Allocation for the Sector of Public Service and Local Government for Financial Year 2018/2019 

Vote 005: Ministry of Public Service
Recurrent – Shs 20,118,089,000
Development – Shs 4,925,548,000
Total - Shs 25,043,637,000

Vote 011: Ministry of Local Government
Recurrent – Shs 14,604,663,000
Development – Shs 193,251,092,000
Total - Shs 207,855,755,000
 
Vote 146: Public Service Commission
Recurrent – Shs 6,339,513,000
Development – Shs 484,222,000
Total – Shs 6,823,735,000

Vote 147: Local Government Finance Commission 
Recurrent – Shs 4,358,388,000
Development - Shs 571,700,000
Total - Shs 4,930,088,000

Votes 501-850: All Local Governments
Recurrent - Shs 2,484,373,888,000
Development - Shs 456,411,627,000
Total - Shs 2,940,785,515,000

Madam Speaker, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. The report has been signed by the necessary minimum number of members. Can we have a few comments? Two minutes each Member for debate.

5.00
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for the report. Mine is actually a general comment.

Madam Speaker, you directed sometime back that every committee report should have a section on gender and equity compliance and also human rights compliance. Other than this report giving about a sentence or two on gender and equity, there was nothing on how the budget is to further promote the enjoyment of human rights of our people.

Even on gender and equity, other than being told that the certificate was issued, we would like to know how a specific ministry or Government department is complying with issues of gender and equity. We shall then be sure that the resources that are available do meet the specific needs of the people - men and women, boys and girls. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, to add to what hon. Kamateeka has said, I had also instructed that the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) compliance should also be reflected in these reports but so far there has been nothing.

5.02
MS LOY KATALI (NRM, District Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and members for coming up with this report. 

I would like to agree with the committee report about the remuneration of the members of the District Service Commission.  I have actually been wondering why there is a lot of corruption at the district level. Little did I know that these people are not paid or they get paid Shs 10,000. You talked about weeding out corruption but I wonder what we are going to do if we are not paying people. If you are paying them Shs 10,000, these people can go out there and give jobs to those who can pay them and not base on qualifications. I think Ministry of Finance should release funds and pay all board members a retainer on a monthly basis.

About setting the minimum qualifications, I was told that there was an LC III chairperson somewhere who would stamp papers up-side-down because he had never been to school. I therefore think the committee has come out clearly on this, that we should set minimum standards for LC III chairpersons and district councillors. We have witnessed that some of them cannot even swear-in in English and yet they are supposed to be communicating in English.

About the LC I elections, this is long overdue. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide funds because there is a lot of insecurity in the country. People are killing each other and they have lost trust in the leaders who are there. Most of those leaders have become thugs. Therefore, the ministry should release funds for these elections to be held. I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall just have a few Members; others will comment on other reports because we want to move fast.

5.04
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Worker’s Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good work. 

I will go straight to the issue of salary harmonisation. The proposals are a bit unfair to the teachers. I would like to call upon Members to instead take up the recommendation of the committee where they have said the required amount to meet some of the demands is Shs 1.2 billion. They are proposing that at least the arts teachers’ pay should be increased from Shs 600,000 to Shs 800,000. That would be fair and at least it can be explained to the other people compared to the science teachers who are going to be paid Shs 1.6 million. 

I would also like to comment on the issue of the vacant positions. Some of these positions at the district are very critical, for example the labour officers’ positions. Out of 112 districts, only 39 have labour officers. This is unfair to some of the workers who are down there in the districts and their issues cannot be handled at that level. Some issues involve accidents and they need compensation but they cannot be helped.

Therefore, I would like to call upon Government and Ministry of Finance to at least categorise recruitment so that they can recruit workers to serve people at those critical positions. Thank you.

5.06
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  There is a time when we brought up an issue here in this Parliament complaining about people working in hard-to-reach areas who were not getting their allowances. The complaint was majorly that they were leaving out people who are in the town councils of those hard-to-reach districts, for instance Buvuma. They are left out yet they are entitled because Government of Uganda gazetted such districts as hard-to-reach areas.

The aim of the allowance was to motivate them to work in such hard-to-reach places. May I know from the chairperson whether these people have been considered and will get their hard-to-reach allowances?

Secondly, if you take a survey, most of us here are teachers by profession. According to human resource management, you have to motivate your workers if you want them to do good work, not de-motivate them. I am so disappointed when I see the Committee on Public Service and Local Government putting a big disparity between science teachers and arts teachers as far as payments are concerned. Do you want to tell us that the arts teachers are now useless in the country? What are you trying to insinuate? What are you trying to tell the public? Are you going to scrap arts subjects?

If the difference was there because of the need for science teachers, it would be small; but a difference of about one million! That is so big and it is going to be a very big de-motivator to our teachers out there. I would like to ask the committee if there is still chance to look at ways of helping the arts teachers also have morale –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, honourable member. I would like to add to what the honourable has said. Madam Speaker, we have teachers of English, for example; whether you are teaching physics, mathematics or biology, you teach it in English. So, where is the difference between a science teacher and an English teacher?  

Madam Speaker, we must get to the bottom of this. We must decide what we should do. If it means having uniform distribution or a relatively fair distribution, that would work, other than saying it is biology, mathematics or physics teachers to benefit and you ignore the person who actually facilitates the teaching of biology, mathematics, physics and chemistry. That is the information I wanted to give.

5.09
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Madam Speaker, my profession is teaching. I cannot imagine this disparity. If we were promoting only science subjects, would we have a Speaker here, who studied law? Who is going to pay the scientists in the banks; are they not economists? How many of us would not be here - although I am a mathematician?

This is a very serious issue and we cannot take it lightly. There is going to be a problem in the country and I can assure you about that. The arts teachers are being demeaned and they are the majority. If the difference was about Shs 200,000 or Shs 300,000, that would be okay because they can go to the laboratory. However, to have a science teacher getting Shs 1.7 million while the arts teacher is getting Shs 691,000, which is three times more! How many Members here are scientists? We need to clear this disparity. Otherwise, we are demeaning our arts teachers who are teaching judges, lawyers etc. Please!

5.11
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga East County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I extend my sincere thanks to the committee for the good report. I have a specific comment on the performance of local governments, especially the lower local governments at the subcounties.

Madam Speaker, in this proposed budget, there was an allocation for subcounty councillors to be given honorarium. Most of the subcounties pay their councillors as low as Shs 20,000 per sitting and this is very dangerous. Much as we want to put some minimum age qualification, we also need to give better remuneration to these councillors. Most of these subcounties have budgets as low as Shs 30 million or Shs 40 million. If we say that we want to develop our country, imagine a budget of Shs 30 million for a subcounty that has around 40 villages; what are you going to achieve in this subcounty?

The second issue is about the operationalisation of the new town councils. I would like to concur with the committee that money should be found to make sure that these town councils are operationalised. Government created them and they are just idle there. There is no leadership and people are expecting to have leadership and services therein.

The last issue is about the loss of revenue in lower local governments. Madam Speaker, the President made a directive to scrap off some of the revenue sources in these subcounties –(Member timed out.)

5.13
MR FRED BASEKE (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for this report, especially for the recommendations under local governments. 

When you look at observation No.6, where they talk about vacant positions in local governments, they mentioned them but when it comes to recommendations, they do not specify the amount of money required to fill these positions. I would like the chairperson to indicate to Parliament how much money is needed, as he has done with the rest of the priority areas. Thank you.

5.15
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I also join my colleagues to thank the committee. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to submit on the salaries to the subcounty chairpersons and the failure to provide for salaries for district councillors. You may be aware that as political leaders, sometimes because of the circumstances the country undergoes, we have found ourselves being providers of certain services in our constituencies. The same applies to subcounty chairpersons and district councillors. 

I see the salary enhancement proposals here for the LC III chairpersons, who have been getting Shs 300,000. There is a proposal that they should now get Shs 400,000. However, this increment is still subject to taxes. I seek the indulgence and support of this House to support these leaders so that they have their pay increased to at least Shs 500,000.

The district councillors do the same or similar work but they are not provided for here. I would like to move that this House supports these leaders and a provision for a salary of at least Shs 400,000 be provided for district councillors.

5.17
MS BRENDA ASINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the issue of the increment of salaries for teachers and district councillors. One of the problems we have in Uganda is corruption. There is no way a demotivated arts teacher will consider going to class and competing favourably with the science teachers who are receiving a lot of money. It is not only about the teachers but even the headmasters. There is a school where I went to and the headmaster told me that the science teachers have started bragging that they should give them parking spaces where they will be parking their vehicles, yet the headmaster is not hoping to get any vehicle. 

Therefore, to curb the corruption and motivate our arts and science teachers the same way, there should be improvement in salaries of the arts and science teachers, plus the district councillors. Thank you.

5.18
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also share in the agony of the teachers as they have debated. However, what I have read in the report is that this enhancement is temporary, to the extent that in the subsequent years other public servants will be considered. Therefore, I would request the ministry to be clear on the timetable to enhance other public servants’ pay.

My debate, generally, will centre on pensions. Madam Speaker, our fathers and grandfathers have retired. Government has limited resources, as we know, but they do not prioritise pensions. I know that at the age of retirement, most of them are sick and have nothing that can help them in terms of health services and any expenditures required by a retired person. 

We would like to request the Ministry of Public Service to prioritise the liberalisation of the pension sector and start a contributory scheme for Government workers. In that way, whenever Government says it does not have money, at least public servants would have saved enough money to help them after retirement. Otherwise, many people are on the streets looking for different offices and some of their documents are misplaced when they retire and they have nobody to seek help from.

Therefore, to stop this agony, we should have a contributory scheme that would put a fund for all Government workers. I think within no years, it would be one of the richest pension sectors. I would like to urge the Ministry of Public Service to prioritise the issue of contributory scheme because we have spent close to 10 years singing out that public servants are going to be contributing  - (Member timed out.)

5.20
MS RUTH KATUSHABE (NRM, Bukomansimbi North County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Most of the things have been said by my colleagues. I will focus on transport for subcounty leaders like the chairpersons. Most of the motor vehicles for these subcounty chairpersons broke down. Therefore, I would like to beg that these people be provided with transport. 

Some district councillors travel long distances to go for district council meetings and yet they do not have any means of transport. If Government can provide motorcycles to councillors, it would be better. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I will give an opportunity to Members who have not contributed on any report.

5.22
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative,	Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have reports of the sectoral committees on our iPads and I have read some of them. Whereas the Committee on Public Service and Local Government is recommending salary enhancements for different categories of civil servants, the Committee on Education and Sports, on page 21 of its report, recommends that Government halts salary increment for science teachers in financial year 2018/2019. I am wondering which committee recommendation we can take?

On the issue of vacant positions, one time the Committee on Local Government Accounts was presenting in the House and one of the challenges they gave was staffing gaps in the districts. Wakiso and Amudat were among the worst performing districts according to that report. I think the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should help the Ministry of Public Service so that they are able to recruit staff to fill those positions if we are to realise proper service delivery in Uganda.

When we were scrutinising the ministerial policy statements, we interacted with a number of stakeholders. When these stakeholders were introducing themselves to the committee members, many of them were in their positions on acting basis. I think this demotivates the officers. I would like to suggest that public service should confirm these people when they are due for confirmation.

Finally, it has been suggested that salary enhancements be done in a phased manner. What happens to those who will be brought on board in subsequent financial years? Are they going to be paid in arrears? How are you going to handle this? Thank you.

5.24
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I have a problem with the way the salary enhancements were structured, especially when you look at science teachers’ pay vis-à-vis the arts teachers. The gap is almost three times big. I do not know what strategy the Ministry of Education and Sports has got to keep these teachers going to class and motivated.

Article 40(1)(b) of our Constitution mentions ensuring equal payment for equal work without discrimination. You are not going to blame arts teachers if they are going to be absent from class for certain reasons we may not know. For a headmaster who has majored in arts to superintend over science teachers, we cannot rule out the possibility of insubordination. That means maybe the ministry has to come up with another policy where all headmasters have to be science teachers, to try to balance the equation.

My proposal would be to narrow the gap so that the difference should be about 10 to 30 per cent on salary enhancements for both science and arts teachers. That could try to harmonise the situation. Otherwise, if we keep it at this, we are going to run into another problem where we will be having only science teachers present at school and the others will find their ways of survival.

It is a good gesture from the Government but we cannot do without arts completely. Even these science teachers need lawyers like you, Madam Speaker, they need administrators, and you should put it into consideration that they are public servants like any other. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nauwat raised a very important issue. Although we should not be legislating in anticipation, she said the sector committee has recommended that we stay the enhancement. If in this report we agree and then when we come to the Committee on Education and Sports, we stay the enhancement and yet it is the same House debating the same issue - I think we need to find a way of harmonising that. Otherwise, we cannot have two conflicting positions on the same issue. We need to see how to handle that particular area.

5.27
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. Since you have guided on the issue of the teachers’ salaries, I will leave it. Otherwise, I am a science teacher and a scientist by profession but I would not agree with the decision of giving science teachers three times more than the arts teachers. It is unfair. Since we want to improve our education, we need to talk about this in detail. I am a member of the Committee on Education and Sports but we had thought that it should be stayed so that we can discuss it and come up with a better decision.

On the issue of the vacant positions in the districts, it is a very serious matter and as one of the colleagues mentioned here, the committee has not come up with a figure. I think the committee should come up with the amount that is required so that the Committee on Budget can find monies for this and re-appropriate. You know that we have even created many more administrative units. We have few staff in the districts that are already in place and then we have administrative units whose staff are being shared. We realise that this means further inefficiency in the performance at districts.

I know there are so many issues that will be raised; I would like to concur with the committee. Ministry of Public Service at one time came to this House and gave us information that there were over 30 districts that were identified to be hard-to-reach areas. I wanted to find out whether we have funds now for these districts that were identified. The people were informed and are now asking us those questions and I should take answers to these people, honourable minister? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.30
MS PROSSY MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As fellow Members are looking at the salaries of teachers only, I was looking at the salaries of the District Service Commission, where we have Shs 1.5 million for the chairperson and others get between Shs 10,000 and Shs 100,000. I do not know whether those are allowances because when you read through, some of them are sitting allowances and I think that is all they get. However, the chairperson gets Shs 1.5 million, which is absurd. I would like to thank the committee for the recommendation that they have made on this.

Furthermore, on the issue of the teachers, the Ministry of Education and Sports needed to be here and clarify on what they mean when they talk about the science subjects. I happen to also be a science teacher but when you are in a science class, you will find subject combinations such as Mathematics, Economics and Geography (MEG). Now, what do we term economics and geography? Those are the teachers who are going to be getting a low salary. Look at Physics, Economics and Mathematics (PEM); look at Biology, Agriculture and Geography (BAG) and so many other subject combinations.

The Ministry of Education needs to take note and clarify on this if we want to improve on education. When you talk about corruption, those are some of the issues that are bringing too much corruption in the country. The arts teachers will now be waiting for the parents to come and give them something so that they can teach our children very well.

Therefore, we need the Ministry of Education to take up this issue and also categorise which subjects are science-arts and which ones are totally arts. All that they looking for is maybe having more emphasis on science subjects as compared to arts subjects. Thank you very much.

5.32
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I would like to add my voice to that of the other Members in supporting an increment in salaries for all the teachers uniformly, and also considering those in local government for at least something to take home.

I once attended a meeting of local government leaders and they told me that Members of Parliament think that everything that they are working on at the local governments is considered as local. Therefore, we think that they should handle their own affairs in a local way.

Members have spoken about corruption. There is no way we are going to fight corruption when there is an imbalance in payments. There are some teachers we saw who teach in three schools in order at least to cope with the state of the economy. These people take their children to the same schools that we take ours because they want their children to get good grades. How do you compare somebody who gets Shs 2,000,000 to one who gets Shs 800,000 and yet they also want to have good education?

Secondly, these people go to the same health facilities and pay bills like us, Members of Parliament and maybe others who are getting high pay. When we consider the state of affairs in our country, we should also consider the way other people should live. Thank you.

5.34
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two comments. 

First of all, I would like to thank the chairperson for the report. The first issue is about the new town councils. I am wondering what criteria was used in selecting these town councils. To the best of my knowledge, Sironko applied and we have been waiting but I do not know why, for some reason, Sironko has not been granted town council status. Perhaps, we will need clarification from the honourable minister.

The second issue is about pension reforms. This has been a critical issue in this country. I would like clarification. Civil servants have worked with you for 10, 20 or 30 years and you know them very well and where they come from but when they retire, you say you want records or you want them to fill this and the other form. These are people you have been working with. What is now strange when they retire that you have to delay their payments? I think pension reforms should have been brought yesterday. We would like to see this come to the Floor of Parliament so that people gain from their service.

The last issue is about –(Interruption)

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you very much for availing the space. Madam Speaker, we had in this House the Retirement Benefits Liberalisation Bill, which seems to have suffered a natural death. I do not understand why this Bill has collapsed before us. It seems National Social Security Fund (NSSF) is bulldozing everybody to the extent that we have lost this very important Bill. Under that Bill, we were advocating for the liberalisation of the sector and Government had actually already moved to create the civil service contribution schemes.

At the moment, this country is suffering with huge pension bills which we cannot meet. In every supplementary budget that comes here, we have money for pension and there are so many pensioners out there who are not even able to come to the Ministry of Public Service to access their claims.

Therefore, it is high time this Bill came back to the Floor. We should not allow NSSF to stampede a very vital programme for this country. We know how important pension funds can be. It is so important to this economy but we have let it go just like that simply because NSSF has got a problem with it. 

MR WOBOYA: Madam Speaker, my other point is about the hard-to-reach areas. I think Sironko falls in that zone but I saw only Bulambuli and Bududa were included. I wondered why Sironko had been left out and yet it is actually the most hard-to-reach area. The last point is about the induction of the District Service Commission –(Member timed out.)

5.38
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will maybe ask for a few minutes because of my current role, at least for tonight, as Leader of the Opposition. I would like to thank the chairperson and your committee for the report. However, there are quite a lot of gaps. I am going to point them out and also provide a mechanism of gap filling.

First, I know that 90 per cent of us here in this Parliament probably did not go to or get the chance to go for kindergarten or nursery education. However, in this particular report, there is nothing mentioned about what we are going to do with nursery education graduates. You may recognise that we have so many institutions sending out nursery school teachers and yet we have an education system that does not provide them with a payment schedule.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are dealing with the public service and local governments. We are not dealing with education. 

MR KATUSABE: Okay. 

Another point, Madam Speaker, is the female and male gap. I think this committee should help us to make it mandatory that the moment you are in a school and you have a male head teacher, then automatically you should have a female deputy head teacher. In so doing, we would be closing the gap that now exists between female and male leadership roles. 

A case in point is our local councils. We know that the moment you sign up for local executive leadership, it is supposed to serve as a preparatory ground. In this House, we have Members who once served on those local councils. I am happy to hear many Members saying they served as councillors or secretary for production, and that is the reason they are here. We should encourage these local councils to also give the ladies a chance to take up those leadership roles. 

Madam Speaker, I think we are setting a fundamental scene as a country. We are sending our brothers and sisters to school but at the same time, we are telling them they have no space to serve their country. Right now, we have a recruitment ban, and I was made to understand this ban came an executive order from the President. It is painful to see our brothers and sisters go to schools and at the same time, Parliament watches them run around the streets without jobs.

I would like to particularly point out, Madam Speaker, that we have university students who are graduating with first class degrees and because there is a ban on recruitment right now, they cannot find jobs. They are on the streets vending newspapers. Madam Speaker, you are here because you had a law professor at Makerere University. So, who is going to replace the retiring law professors at the university if law graduates are now vending papers because they cannot find jobs?

I would love to live in a country that gives opportunities to these young men who have worked so hard. I would love to live in a country where the moment you get a first class degree, if the Government cannot give you jobs, they will give you scholarship opportunities for a masters or PhD so that you can go back to the university and teach the law students.

Madam Speaker, I come from a unique situation; I have some degrees from the arts field but I also have some degrees from the science field. Basically, there is no distinction between sciences and arts. Sciences are about generation of knowledge and arts are basically about application and utilisation of that knowledge. Knowledge that is not utilised is accumulated ignorance. Therefore, we cannot be in a country that ignores arts and yet we need the arts to provide and guide the interventions of Government programmes.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I would like to pronounce myself on the pay of our local government brothers and sisters. It hurts that when you walk out of this Parliament, the first call will come from your LCV councillor asking for transport to go and attend a council meeting. Why can’t we pay these people? They are Ugandans and they have needs. They educate their children from the same schools and go to the same markets. I propose that LCV councillors be paid a net salary of Shs 500,000; LCIII chairpersons be paid a net salary of Shs 400,000; and LCIII councillors, a net salary of Shs 300,000.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for your gracious opportunity. I would like to thank my senior brother, the Minister of Public Service. I think things are changing. I come from the soon coming government, but we have seen a big change in public service -(Interjections) - It is no longer shadow; it is the “soon coming government”.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR KATUSABE: We need to ensure that we streamline our gratuity and pension systems, Madam Speaker. It hurts everybody in the country, including you, when we lose a teacher - God forbid. However, it takes two days to knock him or her off the payroll but when they retire, it takes five years for them to get their gratuity and three years to get their pension. That is unacceptable in this country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.45
MR WILLIAM NZOHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to remind the House that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and also the Secretary to the Treasury reminded this House to be careful when splitting districts.

Madam Speaker, one of the reasons why we are not realising the money to enhance salaries of workers is the unnecessary and uneconomical split of districts. I would like to give one or two examples; I happened to stay in Kitagata Hospital because that was where my parents were working. At that time, we still had the greater Bushenyi and it was a vibrant district before it was split. As I speak right now, I am in touch with the people in the smaller Bushenyi District and it is even hard for the workers to get fuel to go to the field. 

I also would like to give the example of Kabarole and Bunyangabu districts. Kabarole was split the other year. The budget, in a financial year, for Kabarole District when it was still together with Bunyangabu was Shs 19 billion. However, when it was split, Kabarole District remained with a budget of Shs 12 billion and then Bunyangabu District got Shs 7 billion. 

What does all this translate to? When districts split, the original parishes will become sub-counties, the small villages will become parishes and those that have sub-counties would now want to lift them to municipal status. However, all this goes with costs.

I would also like to remind this House that with such an arrangement, whether the district is small or big, the administrative structure at the district headquarters will have to include a CAO up to a sweeper. This implies that most of our money is going into administration. That is why we are failing to enhance salaries and deliver services. 

The other point, Madam Speaker, is the manner in which the boundaries of some administrative units are determined. A district council sends a resolution to the Ministry of Local Government and tells them the boundaries of the new subcounty curved out of the new municipality that they have defined. I would like to take the case of Kasese –(Interjection)– I will clarify that later; I am still building my point.

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I want to give the example of Kasese District. In April 2011, Kasese District Local Government took a resolution to split Lake Katwe Subcounty to create a new subcounty and –(Interruption)

MR KAHIMA: Madam Speaker, the previous Member gave an example of Bushenyi Local Government. When Bushenyi Local Government was split into five districts, all those districts were able to receive road units and they have all benefited from the –(Interjection)– Yes, they have been able to get their children join public universities on the district quota system. 

Therefore, I do not know whether this Member was aware of the opportunities that come along with the new districts. I just wanted to give information so that he can see how the emergence of the new district benefits the community on the ground.

MR NZOGHU: Let me inform the honourable member that the road unit that he is talking about is from a loan and Ugandans have not yet even started paying that loan. We are simply saying if we can get loans or money and invest, that is better than it going into administration.

Madam Speaker, I was talking about Kasese and specifically Lake Katwe Subcounty where the council drafted a resolution and sent it to the ministry to have a new subcounty created out of Lake Katwe. They gave their boundaries and said they wanted the new subcounty to have the following villages and parishes: Kikorongo, Kahokya -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are not determining boundaries.

MR NZOGHU: I am only asking why the Ministry of Local Government is not doing the right thing to guide the people down there. That is what I am building on. 

I do not know why, for example in this case, the ministry decided to take a different direction by creating a subcounty, which is not even viable economically and which is different from what the district local government had suggested. The district local government had done thorough work and found out which subcounty would be viable and which one would not but the ministry deviated from that. What I am trying to say is that we are having subcounties or local government units, which are not viable because the ministry is not doing their work to do what they are supposed to do in ensuring local administrative units are productive and administratively viable.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, other Members will speak on the other report. Let me invite the Minister of Public Service and then the Minister of Local Government before the chairperson comes. I thought you had spoken - on the commissions? Okay, Let us hear from the chairperson of the Committee on Budget. 

5.53
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, a few days ago we had an interaction with three commissions - the Health Service Commission, Public Service Commission and the Education Services Commission. The Judicial Service Commission did not make it.

These commissions raised very serious issues regarding their salaries. They said that for a long time, their emoluments have not been revised. They are busy handling all these entities, raising their salaries but theirs have lagged behind. Parliament needs to weigh in on this problem to see how we bring them at par with the institutions that they are serving or even better. They are the appointing authorities and so they should be in a better situation than the people that they are appointing.

Secondly, the issue of salary harmonisation needs very serious consideration. We cannot have the same people appointed by the same employer, that is, Government, but some get different pay from others. I am referring to the teachers and the way we pay the science teachers more than the arts teachers. We need to sit down and look at the money available and we divide it to address everybody. (Applause) However small it is, let everybody earn from this increment without discrimination. I beg to submit.

5.55
THE MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Wilson Muruli-Mukasa): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee, members of the committee and indeed members of the House for their contribution towards this very important debate.

Madam Speaker, you raised the issue of the SDGs and human rights compliance. This is noted and it will be taken care of in subsequent reports. 

Allowances for people working in hard-to-reach areas were reviewed. I would like to say, right from the onset, that the review of allowances for people working in hard-to-reach areas has not ended. We have recommended that the hard-to-reach allowances should be raised. This matter was pushed to the Ministry of Finance, which I think is considering it. 

Madam Speaker, it is not that the hard-to-reach allowances were scrapped. They are still there, and it is still part of the policy of the principle of paying and motivating our workers. That should keep my colleagues happy. It has actually been factored in and we provided the necessary information to the finance ministry.

Madam Speaker, on the question of the pension scheme, it is true that we looked at the pension scheme as Cabinet and agreed that we were going to have a contributory scheme, which would be fully funded. It was hoped that this scheme would actually begin in the next financial year, 2018/2019. However, because of the scarcity and the small size of the budget, it is not going to begin. However, we are quite hopeful that it will begin in the subsequent financial year, in which case some of these problems we are experiencing with pensions will be issues of the past

The next salary enhancement will cover all these other public workers whose salaries will not have been enhanced in the budget that we are discussing now –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, comrade, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Public Service, in my understanding, is responsible for service first and not salaries. I have heard here talk from my colleagues about salary payments, forgetting the fact that the core business of the Ministry of Public Service is service. There are certain situations where salaries are paid well but the service providers do not provide services well.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Fungaroo, what is the clarification.

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, the point of clarification is: Has the Ministry of Public Service set up an inspectorate system to see whether service is properly provided even where payments are made, because there is laxity? 

When you go into these offices and health centres, for example at Obongi Health Centre, you may find somebody is well paid but that person is not present on duty all the time as they are required to. Therefore, do you have any inspectorate system to check the delivery of the services for which you are preparing to increase salaries?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do not yield the Floor to anybody until I have allowed you. 

MR MURULI-MUKASA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that guidance. There is an inspection department at the Ministry of Public Service and there is also the overall inspection service, which is carried out by the Office of the Prime Minister. Also, each vote has its own way of carrying out inspection.  

Therefore, the inspection aspect at the Ministry of Public Service is available and inspection has been carried out from time to time, and this culminates into the annual Government performance report. In the case of the Ministry of Public Service, we actually generate a scorecard report, which shows the performance of the Ministry of Public Service all together; it is done annually. Those entities which are rated to have done very well are rewarded while those that may not have done well are encouraged to do better next time. 

On the pension scheme, I would like to say that we agreed on a contributory funded pension scheme. I think, funds permitting, it will certainly begin the other financial year. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, on the question of salary harmonisation, I would like to say that Cabinet agreed that there should be salary harmonisation. You will all recall that in 2006, the PAYE policy was passed, setting in motion salary enhancement, which will go towards realising a living wage. It was stipulated that this would take about 10 years. Well, it was partially implemented. Last year, we reviewed the PAYE policy and agreed on the principles. It is those principles, which form the basis of the enhancement that we are proposing here in the House today. 

What is clear among those principles is that we should have equity, in terms of harmonisation, but we should also go back to the more ordinary salary scale where if somebody is a director, for example in the Ministry of Local Government and at a scale U3, they should earn the same as a director in the Ministry of Health and all other ministries. That is where we are moving to.

However, there have been all these disparities due to the dynamics of our history. We are moving slowly because of what we agreed on. In another two to three years, we are going to realise this harmonised salary structure so that all these glaring disparities are finally laid to rest. Thank you very much.

6.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jennifer Namuyangu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the chairperson of the committee and all the committee members for an excellent report presented. I appreciate the Members of Parliament for supporting it. 

The first issue was on gender equity, human rights and SDGs. As a ministry, we have set up a committee on gender headed by the commissioner in charge of human resource, where we monitor and receive reports. Equity is one of the parameters that we ask the accounting officers to report on, on a quarterly basis. As a ministry we handle SDGs but we shall come out to clearly indicate how far we are in the subsequent reports.

On the issue of payment to the district service commission members, like the committee stated it is only the chairpersons who receive a retainer fee of Shs 1.5 million. The other members only receive an allowance from the local revenue. Therefore, depending on the local revenue generated by a particular local government, some receive as low as Shs 10,000 while others from better local governments receive Shs 100,000. Therefore, I would like to thank the committee for coming up with a figure of Shs 400,000. This should be a good start for the district service commission members; I support it. 

On the issue of minimum academic qualifications, I am aware that as a country we have Universal Primary Education (UPE) and Universal Secondary Education (USE) but I request that you give us an opportunity as a sector to do further consultations with the local governments. This is important because most of our local governments, especially the lower ones, debate in vernacular. I appreciate that we do not have laws translated into the different local languages and it may be difficult for them to comprehend, but we need time. I beg that we do not -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It seems hon. Nambeshe has a burning issue.

MS NAMBESHE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has vividly stated that they have allowed the lower local governments to debate issues in vernacular. However, the annual work plans, development plans and budgets are all in English. How do they interpret those documents given the challenges they have with their minimum qualifications?

MR NAMUYANGU: I appreciate that my colleague, a former LC V chairperson, who ran away from the local government, understands and knows what takes place down there. Anyhow, as I had stated, most of the laws, reports and budgets, like he has rightly stated, are in English but we have technical people who have been - Give us time to do further consultations with other stakeholders on this issue. We shall come back here to take a decision. I really beg you on this.

THE SPEAKER: The minister says that while she acknowledges our proposal, she wants to go and consult.

MS AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, I am seeking clarification. Here you people plan to induct them, after over two years, with a budget of about Shs 4.3 billion. Are we serious? Even if our honourable councillors were educated enough, is this the right time to request for funds for induction after these people have been in office for over two years or when they are about to go for elections?

THE SPEAKER: Do you agree that the induction is necessary?

MS NAMUYANGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My honourable colleague has pushed me to another point on induction. Yes, it is critical because according to the records we have 80 per cent of all the local government leaders are new and we were not able to get money at the beginning. However, even in the local governments where induction has been done, it was done with support from the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) where they had programmes. That is why we are requesting for the Shs 4.2 billion to enable us cover the rest of the districts.

There are a lot of issues in the local governments. You may find a councillor who does not know their roles; for example, some of them want to direct some institutions, contracts committees or district service commissions. Therefore, it is important to induct them even after they have served for two years. 

On the issue of election of the Local Councils I and II, you are aware that the money was given to the Electoral Commission. Therefore, even as a ministry we are eager to have these structures in place because they are important institutions. The LCIs are the courts of first instance; they would therefore reduce on the court backlog. The LCIIs are also courts of first instance in land matters. There are also issues that have been enumerated in the report such as maintenance of security and monitoring Government programmes and many others. That is why we are all still eagerly waiting for the Electoral Commission to conduct elections as soon as possible. 

However, I also want to put it on record that the Electoral Commission had already procured materials and sent them to local governments before the courts of law stopped the process. They are, therefore, requesting for more money –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, protect me from hon. Nandala-Mafabi. 

The other issue is about the money given to the councillors. I would like to inform the House that councillors earn just an allowance, which is generated from the local revenue, and they are supposed to use only up to 20 per cent. Maybe the only way we can support them is by increasing the percentage that they take and also enhancing local revenue. We have already started doing that in the municipalities. We have taken a pilot project to two municipalities - Kira and Jinja municipalities - where we are doing automated revenue collection, and we noticed that the revenue has increased about four-fold from what was being collected manually. However, we have not been able to expand this programme due to financial limitations.

On the funding to new town councils, I would like to inform colleagues that due to budget limitations, 195 town councils are not funded. Some of them got some road fund money, and we have encouraged local governments to second staff to make sure that they start the process but their budget is not available; it is one of the unfunded priorities. 

The other issue was about the vacant positions. A member was wondering why we have not indicated the money required. If you look at the report of the committee, on page 12 we have indicated that we need Shs 1.275 billion for the recruitment of the Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs), town clerks and heads of departments. We also need Shs 2.3 billion to recruit sub-county chiefs and then Shs 1.076 billion for the recruitment of parish chiefs. That information is given. 

Honourable Katushabe mentioned the issue of transport for the LC IIIs, which is a major challenge in the entire local government. We have only been able to secure vehicles for LC V chairpersons and in this budget we are requesting that we be supported to procure 41 vehicles for the municipality mayors and 127 pickups to do joint monitoring. We want all the sectors to use this single vehicle in a local government to monitor Government programmes because they do not have anything - the education sector, health, agriculture or production. They all do not have vehicles to do this kind of work. However, again all these are unfunded. The subcounty chairpersons got motorcycles in the previous term but they have been run down. So, there is no transport yet we do not have a budget for it. 

The Member of Parliament from Sironko said we have not considered Sironko District for town councils, but at least you have Budadiri and Sironko town councils. However, if you submitted new proposals, I will definitely crosscheck when I go back to the ministry and I will update you.

Lastly, my good friend, hon. Nzoghu, was condemning the ministry for creating many local governments out of Kasese. However, I would like to inform him that the procedures for creating local governments were formulated by this Parliament and some of these are constitutional matters. In Kasese where they have rejected districts, we have not divided their district. I would like to also put it on record that these requests come from the people themselves. It is also true that the traditional big districts –(Interruption)

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been constrained to put the honourable minister to order because in the previous Parliament, a request came from my district demanding that our district be split into two. I was a member of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government at the time and we tried in vain on the Floor of this Parliament but we were not given the chance to split that district. 

We heard that some chairpersons were called somewhere in some hotels in Kampala and that that is how districts were granted to other local governments. Is it, therefore, in order for the honourable minister to say that these demands come from the people yet when we demanded but we were not given?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know where they call people in the hotels; it is difficult for me to rule on that. Honourable minister, please conclude.

MS NAMUYANGU: Hon. Alum, it is not true that districts are given in hotels. We run a very transparent system. If you requested for your district to be split, it will come; it may be still in the pipeline. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the committee be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I think we shall find time to harmonise the education report and this one before we go to the Committee of Supply. Honourable chair, do you want to raise anything, because we are done?

Honourable members, earlier there was a point of order raised against the presence of hon. Elioda Tumwesigye here. I have checked and the situation is as follows: The constituency which he represents has been divided and another constituency was created. He is a Member of Parliament for the whole of that constituency. It is common practice that a Member can choose to remain in the old constituency or go to the new one. Hon. Elioda Tumwesigye has been nominated by his political party in the primaries to contest for the other seat. Therefore, he is still a Member of Parliament. He would be disqualified if there was a condition under Article 83 of the Constitution. If there is anybody who has that condition, present it now. Hon. Elioda Tumwesigye, please complete your report.

No, it is not greed, honourable members. When he wins or loses, he will have to relinquish one. He is a Member for the whole of that constituency; you cannot stop him.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FY 2018/2019

(Debate continued_)

6.20
THE MINISTER FOR SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had about four issues to respond to from the report of the Committee on Science and Technology Committee.

THE SPEAKER: Order! You man from the highlands. They should demonstrate by voting him out.

DR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE: There was one regarding the Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development (PIBID) and innovation and also regarding Kiira Motors -

THE SPEAKER: No! Honourable members, he is still a Member of Parliament. There is a new constituency and he is deciding where he wants to go. Honourable members, please take your seats. Let us hear about the innovations.

DR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE: I wish to respond as follows-

THE SPEAKER: Order! Honourable members, listen to the response on science and technology.

DR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE: With respect to Kiira Motors, it is one of the innovations that are going to be commercialized. Kiira Motors was part of the presidential initiative at Makerere University where three prototypes were developed - the Kiira EV, which is an electric vehicle, the Kayola solar bus as well as the hybrid vehicle. These prototypes won awards at international level and have been on since 2004.

As part of Government’s drive for social-economic transformation of our country, we have decided to go ahead to commercialise Kiira by putting up a vehicle assembly plant at Jinja. Money has been allocated for that purpose and going forward, next financial year we shall be able - 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order because there is a stranger in the House, holding the Floor. Madam Speaker, in the event that hon. Elioda Tumwesigye wins in these elections, it will imply that he will have to resign from being a Member of Parliament for his current constituency, for which a by-election will have to be held to fill that position. 

This country does not have money to waste, day in day out. He is already a sitting MP in an area and he has gone to another area. If he wins, then again there will be a by-election in the area where he is a current MP. Are we in order to make decisions, which are not in best interest of Ugandans and to spend taxpayers’ money lavishly?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know why you are excited about this matter. Hon. Elioda Tumwesigye is a Member of Parliament for Sheema. It has now been subdivided and he has the option either to stay where he is or to go to the other part of the constituency. So, there is no problem. 

MR MUGOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. The matter before this august House is very important in legal terms. First, our brother here took an oath as a Member of Parliament – that is very important - of the constituency where he hails from. If he has relinquished that position, he has not taken an oath as an ex officio Member of this House. This is where there is a lacuna in our laws because now, how do we determine that he is rightfully here in this House and therefore, he is able to debate or submit on a particular matter?

Madam Speaker, I invite you to give us a concrete ruling as to whether a Member who relinquishes his position as Member of Parliament -

THE SPEAKER: He has not relinquished; he hasn’t.

MR MUGOYA: Madam Speaker, this is why we want your ruling to guide this House. We are saying that in the event that he has relinquished, what is the position? Does he remain a Member of Parliament? In my humble submission, he does not remain a Member of Parliament. If he wants to remain as such, then he would be required to take an oath as an ex officio Member.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, to the best of my information, he has not relinquished his seat of Sheema. He is still the Member of Parliament for Sheema. It is only that part of Sheema has been taken away, so he remains an MP for the whole until this situation changes. 

MS AOL: Why did you go for nomination if –(Interruption)

DR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE: I am a Member of Parliament of Sheema North; I have not resigned. In addition, most of you when you go for nominations, you do not resign.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as far as I am concerned, hon. Elioda Tumwesigye took oath as a Member of Parliament for Sheema for five years and he is still in that constituency. We shall discuss the future when it happens but he is still a Member of Parliament and he is a minister in that sector. Please, conclude your report.

DR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE: Thank you for the wise ruling, which I expected the lawyers to be aware of. 

I was talking about the Kiira electric vehicle. Honourable colleagues, I would like to let you know that currently, in Uganda, we import 45,600 vehicles every year. Out of those, only 15 per cent are new vehicles and 85 per cent are old vehicles with an average duration of 16 years. Therefore, they come when they are old. In addition, from the East African market, we import about 150,000 vehicles. These vehicles are likely to increase to about 257,000 by 2030 and 500,000 vehicles by 2050. 

Currently –(Interjections)– I am giving a response on Kiira Motors - it is important that we develop Kiira Motors, contrary to what Members were wondering about yesterday. Members asked how we can go on to develop vehicles when we cannot even manufacture simple items. 

I, therefore, call upon this Parliament to support the establishment of the vehicle assembly plant at Jinja and also to support our bid to perform other functions of technology transfer and partnership development with renowned manufacturers of vehicles.

The second point was in respect to the Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has come out clearly to say that there will be no money for PIBID next financial year. Currently, we are working on a Cabinet memo to transform PIBID into a legal entity. Once that is pronounced, we shall come to you and discuss the future of PIBID. Otherwise, as of now, in agreement with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Committee on Budget, there are no funds for this entity next financial year. 

I still want to call upon you to support the ministry’s budget and innovations. We know that countries like South Korea and Japan were able to develop because of science, technology and innovations. Right now, there are many innovations all over the country. We know very well that with time, we are supposed to raise this amount of money to about Shs 500 billion to support all the innovations in your constituencies. 

We are currently working on a plan to have a technology incubation centre and establish community users’ facilities in all the municipalities. We shall also work with the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Business, Technical and Vocational Education and Training (BTVET) institutions to put up common user facilities, and we shall support innovation in the entire country in all the districts. 

I beg to move and wish to call upon you to support the report of the Committee on Science and Technology and leave the rest to the courts. Otherwise, I am a Member of Parliament and minister until further notice. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FY 2018/2019

6.33
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Annet Nyakecho): Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee meetings and other documents attached. This is a report of the Committee on Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2018/2019.

I will not go through the introduction. Allow me to go to the methodology.

The committee reviewed and analysed the following documents: 
    i. The UN Resolution on SDGs, 20l5: Transforming our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development; 
    ii. Uganda’s Vision 2040;
    iii. The National Development Plan II, 2015/2016-2017/2018; 
    iv. The ministerial policy statement for the ministry for financial year 2017/2018 and financial year 2018/2019; 
    v.  The semi-annual budget performance report for financial year 20l7/2018; and 
    vi. The National Budget Framework Paper for financial year 2018/2019-2022/2023.

The committee held meetings with officials from- 
    a) The Ministry of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance; 
    b) National Information Technology Authority-Uganda (NITA-U); 
    c) Uganda Communications Commission (UCC); 
    d) Uganda Posts Limited (UPL); 
    e) Uganda Institute of Communications Technology (UICT);and  
    f) Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC).

Madam Speaker, allow me to go to vote 020, Ministry of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance. I will not go through the mandate and strategic objectives because Members have that in the copy of the report on their iPads. 

Budget Performance and Key Outputs for Financial Year 2017/2018 

Half Year Budget Performance for Financial Year 2017/2018

Table 1 below illustrates the budget performance for the vote by expenditure category for the first half of the financial year 2017/2018. Members could look through the table. The overall budget performance stood of 4l.7 per cent in releases, of which 79 per cent was absorbed. The low release in appropriation in aid, at 33.5 per cent, was attributed to late remittance of revenue (two per cent gross annual revenue) from the telecommunication companies in the last quarter of the financial year. There was a 100 per cent release of arrears, of which only 41 per cent was absorbed. This was attributed to delays in the verification of creditors and audit of supporting documents before the arrears were paid.

I will skip the physical performance for the half year for financial year 2017/2018. I would like to go to the proposed budget allocation for financial year 2018/2019. The proposed budget allocation for the financial year 2018/2019 amounted to Shs 41.796 billion, representing a 10 per cent decrease compared to Shs 46.3l billion approved for financial year 2017/2018 as detailed in Table 2. 

The decrease in the allocation is attributed to a decrease in non-wage recurrent expenditure at 76 per cent and Government of Uganda development expenditure at two per cent. The decrease in the non-wage recurrent budget was due to re-allocation of Shs 18 billion, which had been provided in financial year 2017/2018 for revamping and restructuring the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC). The increase in wage (Shs 4.l93 billion) is to cater for salaries for UBC staff and enhancement of salaries for scientists in the ministry. The increase in the arrears, which is Shs 10.472 billion, is the re-allocation to cater for compensation for UBC land on plots 8-10, 12-16 and l8-20 Faraday Road, Bugolobi.

Madam Speaker, allow me to skip the planned programmes for financial year 2018/2019. I will also not look at the challenges of the ministry but will go straight to the committee observations and recommendations.

The following are the committee’s observations and recommendations:

a) 	Delayed Release of Funds 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development delays to release funds to the ministry hence affecting service delivery. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development releases funds appropriated in a timely manner.

b) 	Sector Statistics and Indicators 

The ministry does not have baseline statistics to match the outcome indicators and as such, the committee could not objectively assess the ministry's performance in line with the National Development Plan (NDP) II objectives. 

The committee recommends that the ministry carries out surveys and realigns its outcome indicators to measure the projected outcomes.

c) 	Compensation for UBC Land

The sum of Shs 11.2 billion is allocated as arrears for financial year 2018/2019 to compensate for the UBC land at Bugolobi as earlier indicated. However, the committee was informed by the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury (PS/ST) that the Ministry of Finance was awaiting interpretation from the Attorney-General on the matter arising from the ruling in Civil Appeal No.03 of 2014.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Shs ll.2 billion be maintained under non-wage recurrent allocation to undertake sector activities, including the revamping of UBC for which there was an appropriation which was not fully released in financial year 2017/2018.

d) 	Establishment of the Uganda Communications Tribunal

Despite previous recommendations to appoint the tribunal in compliance with Section 60 of the Uganda Communications Act, 2013, to date the tribunal has not been appointed. The ministry cited the lack of a judge to head the tribunal yet the sector frequently faces several complaints and disputes that require arbitration.

The committee recommends that Government expedites the appointment of the tribunal in compliance with the law.

e) 	Regulation of Media

The Press and Journalists Act, 1995 mandates the Media Council to regulate the conduct and promote good ethical standards and discipline of journalists, and to arbitrate disputes between the public and the media as well as, and between the state and the media. The Media Council is under the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance but without any budgetary provision. Consequently, the Media Council has not been able to undertake its mandate under the Act.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance amends the Press and Journalists Act to enable the Media Council deal effectively with the challenges of regulating the media. The committee also recommends that the Ministry of Finance creates a vote for the Media Council to cover their recurrent costs.

Vote 126 - National Information Technology Authority (NITA-U)

The mandate of NITA-U is to coordinate, promote and monitor Information Technology (IT) developments in Uganda within the context of national social and economic development. Its mission is to transform Uganda into a knowledge based society by leveraging IT as a strategic resource to enhance Government services and to enrich and empower citizens.

Madam Speaker, I will not go through the objectives; I will go straight to 5.3, which is about the budget performance and key outputs for financial year 2017/2018.

Half-Year Budget Performance for Financial Year 2017/18

The half year budget performance for NITA-U by expenditure category is shown in Table 5. I request Members to go through it. 

By half of financial year 2017/18, the total release to NITA-U was Shs 4l.32 billion, which was 45.9 per cent of the approved budget, and 72.3 per cent was absorbed. There was low absorption of external development at 53.7 per cent, attributed to ongoing procurement processes for the Regional Communications Infrastructure Programme (RCIP).

I will skip physical performance and go to 5.4 on proposed budget allocations for financial year 2018/19.

The proposed budget allocations for the financial year 2018/2019 are estimated at Shs 139.27 billion, representing a 54.8 per cent increase compared to Shs 89.95 billion approved for financial year 2017 /2018 as detailed in Table 6. Members can go through it.

The increase in the budget is mainly under external development, which is 175 per cent, and is attributed to the Regional Communications Infrastructure Programme (RCIP) that will take off in financial year 2018/19. There were decreases in allocations for:

    a) Government of Uganda Development at 15.2 per cent;
    b)  Arrears, 56.7 per cent; and
    c)  Appropriation in Aid (AIA), 36.0 per cent.

The significant decrease in AIA is attributed to reduction in projected revenue from the certification fees collected by NITA-U, due to the decrease in domains for IT and the reduction in the cost of internet bandwidth from US $300 per mbps to US $70 per mbps.

I will not go into planned programmes for the financial year. I will also skip the unfunded priorities and go straight to the committee observations and recommendations.

Committee Observations and Recommendations

a) 	Staffing Gaps

The unfilled positions such as the unified communications architect, the strategy and business performance monitoring manager in the authority affect service delivery. The committee recommends that Government should avail additional funds for the wage bill to close the staffing gap currently at 60 per cent of the approved structure.

b) 	Free Internet Access in the Central Business District (CBD)- My Uganda.

The National Information Technology Authority-Uganda provides free internet in the central business district of Kampala and Entebbe. However, the access points are few and not easily noticeable to ordinary citizens. The committee recommends that NITA-U undertakes a sensitization programme for the activity to enable access and recognition of the services.

c) 	Over 730 Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) and local governments do not have budget lines for ICT hence affecting service delivery. The committee recommends that NITA-U increases the rate of connection of MDAs and local governments to the National Backbone Infrastructure (NBI) to motivate the effected entities to make budgetary provisions for ICT.

d) 	Commercialisation of the NBI

Despite the increase in the number of MDAs connected to the NBI, the revenue generated from this project is still low due to low levels of commercialisation. The committee recommends that the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance should fast-track the policy on infrastructure sharing so as to encourage use of existent infrastructure, which will promote the commercialisation of the NBI to repay the investment.

e) 	Low Uptake of ICT by Rural Women

Madam Speaker, the committee notes that there is a low level of use and uptake of ICT by women in rural areas. This affects access to services and undermines access to information, which is a constitutional right. The committee recommends that NITA-U undertakes activities to promote uptake of e-services by women in rural areas to promote socio-economic transformation.

Uganda Communications Commission (UCC)

The Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) was established by the Uganda Communications Act, 2013 as the regulator for communications services in Uganda including telecommunications, data, radio and postal communications and broadcasting. It is also mandated to license operations of cinematography theatres, video and film libraries in Uganda, in addition to management of UICT. 

I will not read the strategic objectives. I will go straight to 6.3 about the budget performance and key outputs for financial year 2017/18. 

The Half-Year Budget Performance for UCC

The half-year budget performance for UCC by expenditure category is shown in table 9. Please go through it.

The approved budget for Uganda Communications Commission for financial year 2017/18 was Shs 107.187 billion of which Shs 26.824 billion was spent by the end of the second quarter, representing 25 per cent absorption of the total budget.

Madam Speaker, allow me skip the physical performance and go to the proposed budgetary allocation for financial year 2018/19.

The proposed budgetary allocation for financial year 2018/2019 amounts to Shs 110 billion, representing a 3.1 per cent increase from Shs l07.l87 billion for financial year 20l7/18 as indicated in table 10. Please go through the table. 

I will also skip 6.5, which is about the planned priority areas for UCC. I will not read the unfunded priorities as well challenges and go to the committee observations and recommendations.

Committee Observations and Recommendations

Rural Communications Development Fund

Uganda Communications Commission launched the computer laboratory project for Government schools in 2007. The aim was to inculcate ICT and impart skills to learners. Subsequently, computer studies were introduced in secondary schools' curriculum and are examinable at Advanced Level. Despite the achievements of the project over time, the committee noted that the following challenges still persist:

    a) Lack of qualified ICT teachers. 
    b) Lack of resources within schools to maintain the computer equipment.
    c) Limited or no internet connectivity in some places which makes it difficult for schools to access the Internet.
    d) Inadequate space to accommodate the computers.
    e) Limited access to electricity in most places.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should deploy ICT teachers and technicians in schools since ICT is an examinable subject. The schools’ budgets should be enhanced to maintain the computers. Government should ensure adequate and stable power sources in schools to operate the computers. UCC should involve communities where they supply computers so as to enhance sustainability and ensure local ownership of the projects.

Uganda Post Ltd

Uganda Post Limited was established in 1998, under the Communications Act with the mandate to offer communications and logistical services to domestic and international customers and clients. I will not read the strategic objectives but I will go to budget performance and key outputs for financial year 2017/2018.

Half-year budget performance for Uganda Post Limited

The half-year budget performance for Uganda Post Limited by expenditure category is shown in Table l3 below. Please, read it. The approved budget for Financial Year 2017/2018 was Shs 20.457 billion of which Shs 7.114 billion was spent by the second quarter, representing a 35 per cent performance. I will not go to the physical performance.

Proposed budgetary allocation for Financial Year 2018/2019

The proposed budget for Uganda Post Limited for Financial Year 2018/2019 is estimated at Shs 20.454 billion, representing a slight decrease compared to Shs 20.457 approved for Financial Year 2017/2018 as detailed in Table 14 below. The decrease in the institution's budget for Financial Year 2018/2019 is mainly under non-wage (l3 per cent) due to business remodelling and cost containment within the company. There is an expected increase in the Government of Uganda budget (55 per cent) which was attributed to the company’s plans to purchase computers and requisite software to facilitate the automation drive at the General Post Office in Kampala and upcountry.

Madam Speaker, allow me jump the planned priorities for Financial Year 2018/2019, the unfunded priorities and challenges. I will go straight to committee observations and recommendations.

One-stop Centre for Service Delivery (Huduma) 

The committee bench-marked the concept of a one-stop centre under Huduma in Kenya to deliver Government services at the grassroots using the postal network. This would leverage the adoption of technology and automation in order to transform service delivery through Posta Uganda. To date, the project remains unfunded, hence delaying implementation. The committee recommends that Government adopts the Huduma model to revolutionise service delivery throughout the country using the infrastructure of Posta Uganda.

Uganda Institute of Information and Communications Technology 

The Uganda Institute of Information and Communications Technology (UICT) was established by the Ministry of Education and Sports with the mandate to provide training in information and communications technology so as to support national strategic objective of increasing the use of ICT to enhance development. However, the Uganda Communications Commission Act, 2013, mandated UCC to manage and operate UICT.

Budget performance and key outputs for Financial Year 2017/2018

Half-year budge performance of UICT

The half-year budget performance for UICT by expenditure category is shown in Table l7 below. The approved budget for UICT for Financial Year 2017/2018 was Shs 3.964 billion of which Shs 1.051 billion had been spent by the end of the second quarter, representing 27 per cent performance.

Proposed budgetary allocations for Financial Year 2018/2019

The proposed budget allocation for UICT for 2018/2019 is Shs 4.332 billion, indicating a nine per cent increase from Financial Year 2017/2018 that was Shs 3.964 billion as indicated in Table 18 below. Madam Speaker, I will jump the planned priorities and challenges and go straight to committee observations and recommendations.

UCC embarked on an initiative to transform UICT into a centre of excellence for ICT training. The initiative is meant to build capacity in the ICT sector and also create employment opportunities for the youth. In order to achieve this, the committee recommended that UCC provides Shs 6.5 billion to UICT annually. However, only Shs 1.5 billion was provided in the budget for the Financial Year 2017/2018. The committee noted that investing Shs 1.5 billion annually will not transform UICT into the desired centre of excellence.

The committee recommends that UCC should provide Shs 6.5 billion annually to finance implementation of the five-year strategic plan in order to transform UICT into a centre of excellence. The committee further recommends that Government provides a vote to cover the recurrent wage and non-wage costs of UICT and also sponsor students to UICT, under the Joint Admissions Board.

Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) 

The Uganda Broadcasting Corporation Act came into force in 2005, merging Radio Uganda and Uganda Television and designating UBC as the national broadcaster. Its mission is to inform, educate, guide and entertain the public through maintaining a sustainable national coverage. I will jump the strategic objectives and go to the budget performance and key outputs for Financial Year 2017/2018

Half-year budget performance of Financial Year 2017/2018

The half-year budget performance for UBC by expenditure category is shown in Table 17 below. The approved budget for Uganda Broadcast in Corporation for Financial Year 2017/2018 was Shs 30 billion of which Shs 5.058 billion had been spent by the second quarter, representing a 16.9 performance. I will jump the physical performance for Financial Year 2017/2018 and go straight to the proposed budget for Financial Year 2018/2019.

The total budgetary resources available for UBC for Financial Year 2018/2019 – shown in Table 20 below – is Shs 25.7 billion, including an allocation of Shs 3.5 billion for wage and Shs 11.2 billion for compensation for the Bugolobi land, both appropriated under the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance. The table shows the proposed budgetary allocations for Financial Year 2018/2019. 

Challenges faced by UBC
    a) Inadequate funding 
    b) Old transmission equipment 
    c) Inherited debts 
    d) Low advertising revenue 
    e) Uncompetitive programming
    f) Unmotivated staff

Committee observations and recommendations

Revamping and restructuring of UBC 

Parliament appropriated Shs 18 billion for the revamping and restructuring of UBC in Financial Year 2017/2018. In June 2017, the ministry together with Board of Directors of UBC embarked on the revamping process with the following core pillars: 

    a) Restructuring UBC and putting in place an appropriate staff structure 
    b) Reviewing and improving UBC's programmes to meet the requirements of a national broadcaster and interests of the different audience segments 
    c) Undertaking a technology/engineering audit and recommending suitable equipment to improve UBC's service.
    d) Developing and instituting skills and marketing strategy to improve UBC's revenue generation capacity.

The committee observed that the revamp process is ongoing despite being constrained by inadequate funding. By the end of Quarter 2 of Financial Year 2017/2018, only Shs 6.4 billion, had been released out of Shs 11 billion, that was appropriated which has greatly affected the exercise. The Ministry of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance had requested the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to front-load the amount appropriated for the Financial Year 2017/18 in quarter one, to streamline UBC operations. However, the funds were not released as requested.

The committee recommends that the sum of Shs 1l.2 billion be re- allocated from arrears to non-wage recurrent to finalise the revamp and restructuring process of UBC to enable it undertake its mandate as a national broadcaster contributing to socio-economic development with emphasis on national unity in cultural diversely.

Under-utilization of UBC Assets

UBC has various assets across the country including buildings, offices, land, studios and transmission equipment. Most of the assets, especially lands are recorded of their historical cost instead of current market values. Furthermore, most of the assets are not well managed by UBC and are prone to abuse. Most of the equipment are obsolete which has affected the operational efficiency of UBC and hence its ability to compete favourably in the broadcasting market.

The committee therefore recommends that a thorough audit and re-evaluation of UBC assets be undertaken to provide a plan on how to efficiently utilise them for economic gain and to improve the efficiency of UBC. Consideration should be given for disposal of some of the assets to re-capitalise and or settle UBC debts.

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, the committee calls upon Government to recommit to its position envisioned in Vision 2040 and the NDP II that ICT is critical in stimulating socio-economic growth and transformation of Uganda. Considering the dynamic nature of the sector, commensurate funding to match the constant technological changes in the sector is required. For the identified infrastructure projects in the sector, Government should front-load the required resources so as to maximize returns to the economy.

I now present this report and the recommendations therein for consideration and adoption by the House and approval of the proposed appropriations of the ministry and its departments and agencies for the Financial Year 2O18/2019.

Vote 020: Ministry of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance 
Recurrent Expenditure -	Shs 25,167,063,376
Development Expenditure - Shs 16,628,731,076
Total - Shs 41,795,194,452

Vote 126: National Information Technology Authority (NITA-U)
Recurrent Expenditure - Shs 42,346,917,898
Development Expenditure - Shs 96,927,307,425
Total - Shs 139,274,225,323	

Uganda Institute of Communications Technology (UICT)
Projected Revenue Collections -	Shs 4,332,000,000
Recurrent Expenditure -	Shs 3,948,000,000
Development Expenditure - 384,000,000
Total Expenditure - 4,332,000,000

Parastatal: Uganda Communications Commission (UCC)
Projected Revenue Collections -	Shs 110,623,162,431
Recurrent Expenditure -	Shs 46,903,271,305
Development Expenditure - Shs 63,719,891,126
Total Expenditure - Shs I10, 623,162,431

Parastatal: Posta Uganda Limited (UPL)
Projected Revenue Collections -	Shs 20,454,672,000
Recurrent Expenditure -	Shs 17,187,630,032
Development Expenditure - Shs 1,038,800,000
Total Expenditure - Shs 18,226,430,032

Uganda Broadcasting Corporation
Projected Revenue Collections -	Shs 12,000,000,000
Recurrent Expenditure -	Shs 11,503,000,000
Development Expenditure - Shs 405,000,000
Total Expenditure - Shs 11,908,000,000

I beg to report

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair and Members of your committee. Are you tabling the minutes?

MS NYAKECHO: I have already laid the minutes on the Table but I need to lay the report. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Sectoral Committee on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimate for Financial Year 2018/2019 for the Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the report has been signed by the necessary minimum required number of Members of Parliament. You are free to debate. We are using two minutes each.

7.08
MR CHRISTOPHER KALEMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the report and thank the committee. My worry is that as we talk about communication, most of our rural villages do not have networks. People have tried but you cannot communicate to some of these villages through   MTN or Airtel network.

The other issue is the confusion brought by the Uganda Communications Commission regarding the charges. People are complaining bitterly. They come to some of us and I do not know what we can do. The costs include for Internet, Facebook among others. Is this true or a rumour? (Interruption)

MR MUGOYA: Thank you, hon. Kalemba, for giving way. The information I wanted to give you relates to Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) which recently switched off 23 radio stations, on purported grounds of publishing deceitful or wrongful media content relating to witchcraft.

When efforts were made by the proprietors of these radio stations to be heard, they were denied the right to be heard. There is no direction where they should go. When you go to the Executive Director of UCC, they direct you to the Director, Contents, Mr Medi Kaggwa. When you go to Mr Medi Kaggwa, he says he is attending a meeting but that is a matter that they will consider as and when they convene.

Therefore, the information I am giving you is that there is mismanagement in as far as the Directorate of Media Content is concerned in UCC and we shall need a concrete answer from the sector minister.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, just to compliment what hon. Mugoya has said. I received two petitions from what they call the “Eastern broadcasters” a number of radios in the eastern region are complaining about the same issue and pointed out that there are so many people employed by their radios. So many people depend on them for livelihood, that the two months they have been off has caused serious stress. Therefore, I hope you people can address it.

MR KALEMBA: Madam Speaker, I feel that UCC is not doing its work to help the people to improve communication. Most conflicts have been raised because of lack of information. If someone cannot communicate in Kakuuto to other people, that raises a complaint and suspicion of a lot of things. Therefore, I appeal to you that we need to improve that. Thank you.

7.11
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two quick comments. First of all, I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for the good report and I am here to support it. However, the quick comments are as follows.

First, I am concerned, honourable minister, by the very miserable half-year budget performance by UCC, Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) and Uganda Institute of Information and Communications Technology (UICT). I need to get clarification on why their half-year budget performance is very miserable; all of them below 30 per cent. What is the reason for that?

The second issue is on the Rural Communication Development Fund. I see the committee indicating here the challenges with the Computer Laboratory Project for Government Schools. In my interaction with my schools in the district, the biggest challenge we have is that even when we started implementing this – yes we appreciate – but the computer-student ratio is very bad. 

In one of my seed schools, Bumadu Seed School in Bundibugyo Town Council, they have less than ten computers. You find they have one class attending computer lessons and they are over 200. The teacher or instructor has difficulty attending to all these students using less than ten computers.

We have personally delivered requests from these schools but we are not getting a response from the ministry and UCC. Therefore, one of the challenges actually is that we have very few computers, leave alone the issue of maintaining them for them to be able to serve the purpose. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, as the honourable member comes, you know I have been reporting to this House about the difficulty of the people of Sebei who do not get signals from Uganda. They only get signals from Kenya. I have reported here and requested for help. I hope you can assure us, even Bududa? They do not receive signals from this side. They only access the Kenyan radio and television signals. Each time I go, they complain. They say they hear from Kenya and are cut off from Uganda.

7.14
MR NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, I support the report and I welcome the proposals being made. I was particularly instrumental in the formation of Uganda Broadcasting Corporation. That was after we had travelled around the world and being able to see how governments were investing in their national broadcasters.

There is no country in the world that is serious that does not invest in its national broadcaster because a national broadcaster is the epitome of values of that society. It promotes a lot of imagery and positioning of a nation. It is such an important resource that any serious Government must take seriously.

It is very sad indeed when you look at Uganda Broadcasting Corporation; it is not what it should be. When you look at its infrastructure, when you look at the personnel, when you look at the entire situation that is prevailing within UBC, you realise that this country has a long way to go.

I would like to take issue with those who are in charge of our national purse for their failure to appreciate the importance of having a national broadcaster. I would wish that this House takes into account the importance of having a national broadcaster.

The other issue, Madam Speaker, you have made reference to. I come from Kisoro which is in the south-west of Uganda. We border the Republic of Rwanda and also the Democratic Republic of Congo. We have issues with the signals there. I have informed the minister concerned. He is here. I do –(Member timed out)

7.16
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the Minister of ICT and Information. Two years ago, he wrote to Members of Parliament to submit to him the list of administrative units and areas in our different districts and constituencies without telecommunication networks.

We did this and we wrote. Actually I wrote three times to ensure that they reach and I copied to all other departments in this ministry. However, to date, nothing has taken place. Most of our rural areas are turning into administrative units, parishes and sub-counties but without communication networks. Minister, were you telling us to write this for the sake of it? What were you telling us to do? (Laughter)

The other issue – and I do not see it in the planning. I do not hear about it and yet we talk of ICT as the backbone of the development of a country. I do not see the structure that you are planning. Unless you know somebody, this business of coming to your offices that until I know you. What about if I do not know you and yet my people need the services? There should be a clear structure of how we do things in this country. 

The other issue is the control of information or even what is aired out on the television stations. Sometimes, I trust UBC now that maybe it is the only one that can give us something that is good and that I can sit with my daughter to watch and you do not see anything wrong there. However, sometimes you see people dancing and you wonder whether there is control. Is there any department in your ministry that controls the quality of what comes out of these television shows that are being shown to people?

That is what is also sometimes bringing conflict between the ministry and the owners of these telecommunication industries. It seems there should be –(Member timed out)

7.19
MS PAULINE KEMIREMBE (NRM, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for its report. My issue is on UBC’s old equipment which is not matching the current trend. When you say there is low advertising which is bringing in low revenue, it is because you are not modernising the kinds of programmes you are airing out; they are archaic.

Another problem is that even the government agencies, when they are advertising or passing on information, they use NTV but we are not using our mother TV station. On this, I would like to thank the Parliament to see that on a daily basis, people are forced to watch UBC because that is where our debate is viewed. Information is allowed.

MR WOBOYA: Madam Speaker, I sit on COSASE and at one point, we went to UBC and we were able to see some of the state of the art equipment that was imported in the country. It is lying idle in UBC. We were told some technical support was required.

When we talk about obsolete equipment, I do not think we are telling the truth because we saw that equipment lying there. It is actually the state of the art equipment. Therefore, we would like to find out from the chairperson of the committee whether she has done a due diligence and found out the type of equipment and whether it is not really up to date. Thank you.

MS KEMIREMBE: Thank you for the information. Another thing is on Rural Communication Development Fund. Most of the schools in the rural areas have no electricity and some of these computers are lying idle. Some schools in my district have no power and some have got over 10 computers which are lying idle. Then, there are no computer laboratories and these computers are not properly kept.

Another thing is on the regulation of information to the public. There is a lot of pornography. People who are on Facebook and WhatsApp; there was this recent –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Do not heckle the member, please.

MS KEMIREMBE: There was a picture of a nude girl that went viral which was not really good. So, I do not know how such information can be controlled. I beg to move.

7.22
MS ANITA AMONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to agree with hon. Woboya that UBC has one of the best equipment. We visited that equipment; maybe what we need to do is to see how they can be used effectively. 

UBC being a national broadcaster, as Government, we need to encourage all the MDAs to do advertising through it. I am also aware that Parliament of Uganda is going to open a TV/radio station; why don’t we get a channel from UBC and make use of that other than using other channels? We would be boosting UBC.

We visited most of the lands of UBC; it is one of the richest institutions with a lot of land but they do not keep records of their land. They have so many acres of land in Dakabela, Soroti; they have land in Naguru here which has been encroached on. They have land in Bugolobi which has been encroached on. Now, for us to be able to help UBC, let UBC first helps itself.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to find out from the Minister of ICT the role of NITA-U vis-à-vis UTL. As much as I know, NITA-U is the only institution that is authorised to provide internet services. However, of recent, I have been seeing some communication that UTL is supposed to provide internet services to MDAs. Does it have the capacity to do that? 

UCC, I wonder how the Rural Computer Scheme is being run. I would like to understand which procedure is being used to give these computers to schools. There are schools in my district they visited and to date they have never delivered the computers. What criteria do they use to identify the schools and districts which should be the beneficiaries?

I have also looked at your report; it is a very good report and I must thank the committee. However, I see some kind of inconsistencies. I am the vice chairperson of COSASE and we brought a report to this House under COSASE on UBC and you gave us a go ahead to recover a land title which was stolen from UBC. We recovered it and the land title was given back to UBC. The order which was given by this House is that we must refund the Shs 11.5 billion. However, when I look at the report, it is inconsistent with parliamentary recommendations. So, which one do we take; the recommendation of Parliament which was chaired by none other than the good Speaker, Rt Hon. Kadaga? 

We have also not got the Treasury Memorandum to the effect –(Interjections) - You were not yet in the House at that time. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, -(Hon. Frank Tumwebaze rose.) – Frank, can you have a seat? 

Madam Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table the report of the committee, the receipt of the payment that was made to UBC of Shs 11.5 billion. 

Madam Speaker, now that takes us to what my other colleagues had said previously. We need to be consistent in whatever decision we take. At the end of the day, we end up conflicting with Parliament’s resolutions and this is what happens. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on that one, I just would like to remind the members that actually the title deed is in my custody. I am not comfortable keeping that title deed; I would like to give it out but I would like us to conclude this matter. I have had it for about four years; it is not right.

7.28
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am concerned about Parliament being one institution and working through committees. Once a committee is given a mandate, - It is because COSASE, on which I am a member, was considering audit queries that came through the Auditor General’s audits. They were tabled on the Floor of Parliament and COSASE was given mandate to go and investigate. We went deep to investigate the UBC assets, land and so many others that were tabled on this Floor.

In that process, we recovered a land title. This is where my concern comes in. the committee says compensation for UBC land. The sum of Shs 11.2 billion is allocated as arrears for the Financial Year 2018/2019 to compensate for the UBC land at Bugoloobi as earlier indicated. I don’t know where it was earlier indicated.

You go on to say “However, the committee was informed by the PS/ST that the finance ministry was awaiting interpretation from the Attorney-General on the matter arising from the ruling in Civil Appeal No.3/2014. The committee therefore recommends that Shs 11.2 billion be maintained under nonwage recurrent allocation to undertake sector activities including the revamping of UBC for which there was an appropriation which was not fully released.” The Committee does not indicate the interpretation as stated earlier in your submission but you go ahead to make recommendations.

Finally, the committee is recommending a full authentic audit in their final submission of all UBC assets. I am noting the inconsistences in the recommendations we are making. As you note, we already recovered a land title which is in your custody as you have indicated. Now which is which?

7.31
MS SANDRA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker and the committee for coming with this report. My first concern goes to the minister; as noted by hon. Ayepa, you indeed told us to write the areas in our respective constituencies/districts that have the weak internet connectivity or internet and network conductivity.

I went to one of my sub counties which have no internet or network and the woman had died. In that sub country you cannot use a phone to ring and call for the ambulance. Then I stood up and spoke with all the authority that I am given and coming from Parliament that very soon the ministry will work on this. Up to now, I even fear going back to that sub country because of what I mentioned before the people.

Therefore, my question to you honourable minister, when are you coming to our rescue? Because this is affecting the women; you know when the woman is pregnant and she gets complications, they need the phone to call and then the ambulance comes to their rescue. Why are you doing this and mistreating the women?

Secondly, as I was reading the report on page 16, the committee made mention about the physical performance of 2017/2018 and they said that the ministry implemented the school ICT lab; in conjunction with the education ministry they were involved in establishment of ICT Lab in government schools, provision of Internet, skilling of teachers.

On page 18, they made mention of the challenges; lack of teachers, very weak network and inadequate space to accommodate computers; now my question is, if you really work with the ministry –(Member timed out.)

7.34
MR TONNY MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonzo County East, Kasese): Thank you Madam Speaker. I want to address myself to the observation and recommendation on page 18; rural communications development fund. I take this to be critical given the young generation that benefits and considering the innovations now in the ICT area.

We are over 10 years since the establishment and I know that since then there are a number of innovations that have come up. I wanted to know whether the ministry has liaised with the education ministry to ensure that the curriculum accommodates the innovations.

Then the other area is where you indicate that because of network, lack of enough space, how many centres are still functional and how many have failed? This gives the picture of how many or how much this programme is benefiting the Ugandans.

I would like to know from the minister that while he indicated to us the areas that do not have the tele-networks, I also wanted to know the plans from the ministry of how and when the communities will receive television masts because at least now many homes have solar connections. They can be able to connect to television service but what is lacking is Government to provide the masts. Otherwise the community is left at the mercies of the service providers that are rather costly. Are we having any provision within this one?

Lastly, I would like to add my voice to the rest of the Members that we would wish the ministry to come to the rescue of Ugandans as far as connecting them to the tele-network is concerned. I thank you so much.

7.37
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke North County, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to the colleagues who have spoken earlier in thanking the committee for the very good report. I have three concerns: first of all is the quality of service of the so-called national broadcaster. 

This is an embarrassment to Government because as a national broadcaster, they are supposed to take the lead and be self-sustaining. However, because of the poor quality of service, they are not generating the money and are therefore a permanent homologue on the budget. When is the quality of this service going to be improved? It is so amazing that when Government departments are putting out advertisements, they prefer other radios over UBC because they have lost listenership because of the poor quality. 

I would like to know when the rollout of the national backbone is going to be completed. When this backbone project was started some years ago, it was supposed to connect to other countries. In fact some of our neighbouring countries were expected to be customers. However, I understand that because of the slow pace and slow movement they have set up their own and the expected revenue is lost.

My last one is the roll out of the internet and voice services to the rural areas. Nakasekke is not too far away from here but many of my areas do not have -(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Please a half a minute to conclude.

MS BUMBA: I have walked to the service providers and they give all sorts of reasons. Under the rural communication strategy, all the sub counties are supposed to be covered. How are the children in these rural areas going to compete with children from other schools who have the service and yet they sit for the same exams.

The milk produced in my area goes bad because they cannot call the milk tankers to come and collect it. If they want to communicate they have to take the high risk of climbing on the top of very tall trees to be able to get the scanty network. Thank you.

7.41
MR PATRICK OSHABE (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity and I would like to thank the chairperson for the report. I have a few issues to raise. The ICT backbone was one of the core projects this country talked about and we heavily invested in it. 

Among the key things were access, reduced costs of internet. The report should have given us some little bit of information on how much the investment we put into the ICT backbone is yielding.

We talked so highly about it but after investing in it we have stopped talking about it. Ugandans want to know how it is translating into reduced costs of internet. 

When you look at the companies providing the services they are making huge sums of money. They report lots of money every financial year. This is one of the ministries that are collecting lots of monies but when you look at their accounts they keep depending on Government for their survival instead of using the money that they are receiving. We keep servicing a sector that would at least be saving -(Member timed out)

7.43
MR PAUL AMORU (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and members of that committee for the job well done. I have three areas to handle.

One of the vehicles that we need to take us into the middle income status is the ICT. As a serious economy or Government you cannot think of modernising your labour force and other services without seriously investing in ICT. This is one of the ministries that need our full support for us to move forward as a country. 

The report is recommending retooling instructors in schools to handle the computer programmes should be handled by the Ministry of Education, which is true. But I do not think there are any serious steps being taken by the ministry to ensure that the schools across the country have the necessary support in terms of equipment and teachers to help train our students. 

I cannot think of any job now which does not require basic skills in computer. Even gate keepers sometimes require entering data in the computer. We need to give the money which is needed so that at least schools have adequate computer laboratories, otherwise our labour force might run into a big challenge.  Thank you.

7.46
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the report of the committee however, I have these observations. ICT services are a necessity in every ministry. Communication in terms of internet, radio and television is a necessity for everyone. What is the plan of the ministry to distribute these services? 

The Ministry of Health has a formula saying that in every parish there must be a health centre II, a health centre III for every sub county, a health centre IV for every county and a district hospital for every district. What is the equivalent of this in your ministry, hon. Tumwebaze? 

The minister of education has somebody to call in the district; the district education officer and he can call the inspector of schools, the head teacher of a primary school through district education officer. 

Honourable minister of ICT whom do you call in the district, sub county, villages as an extension of your ministry structure what are you doing there?

These private companies like MTN have not come here to dance and to enjoy life; they have come to make money here in Uganda. Why don’t you make this money yourselves, you want to sell UTL!

Secondly, licencing, in West Nile there is no television, we have radio stations which have come up but have not been issued licences.

In Yumbe a radio station offered by the Uganda Muslim Supreme Council and given by the Turkish Government has be lying there since 2015. They have failed to get a licence – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Odria seems to be on fire.

MR ODRIA: First of all, I do not know whether the minister is informed. The people of West Nile wonder whether this region is in Uganda or in South Sudan or Eastern Congo. 

I have evidence and a letter from the District Khadhi of Yumbe commanding us, the Members of Parliament to pay Shs 3,000,000 each to facilitate the lobby for a radio station to be licensed – (Interjections) – Yes, I have the letter in my pigeon hole and I can bring it to the Floor of this Parliament. All of us have been commanded as Members of Parliament to pay the three million for lobbying for a radio station to be licensed. 

I share a border in my constituency with hon. Fungaroo, you cannot make a phone call in my entire constituency; you cannot communicate. There is nothing like a television network signal I am even shocked by this report today that there are some schools which have computers in Uganda.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, my brother. Madam speaker, this is the dilemma we are in as West Nile. I would like to close that we had a good beginning as people of West Nile and people of Uganda. In 1976, His Excellency Field Marshal Al Haji Dr Iddi Amin Dada – (Laughter) - the president put the best satellite station in East and Central Africa at Ombachi. This Government has failed to rehabilitate that but the dishes have been stolen from around 2,000. How can Government allow a facility like this to be stolen and you cannot recover it when you have the police? This is malice against the people of West Nile.

7.51
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by commenting on this one stop centre of excellence for which our Members of Parliament went to bench mark in Kenya. Our people still have to travel, for example, when the people of Gulu want to find something about their pension; they have to travel from Gulu to Kampala then to the Ministry of Public Service. Why do you give only Shs 1.5 billion to that one stop centre like that one of Kenya? Why can’t we be serious and serve our people better so that they do not travel far and wide but they go to those one stop centres in those big towns? If you are serious, you put it in all the big towns and it serves our people better. You need to think about that one stop centre and you tell us why you have given so little to it. 

Secondly, I would like to get clarification on this compensation; on one page they put Shs 10.4 billion compensation of the Bugoloobi Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) land and then Shs 11.2 billion; why is it that Government has to compensate whoever that person is? I need proper explanation maybe I did not follow. 

Regarding the telephone network - at one time I was also in Omoro. Much as I am no longer there, Omoro people still follow me. If you go to areas of Alokolum, Gwenotwom, you find that there has been no network for a long time. Once, even the honourable minister asked us what the problem is; people have already said a lot about that. We need you people to serve us better. Let me not repeat what – (Member timed out)

7.54
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek protection from hon. Nandala Mafabi. I thank the committee for this report and I have three observations. 

The first one is about digital migration. In the Ninth Parliament, Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) came and read its roadmap on how it was going to implement the digital migration that by August last year, they would have covered the whole country. I would like to get clarification from the minister to tell us how far. You have heard people crying that they have no radio stations in their areas because, I think, that programme is now stuck. Please clarify that. 

Secondly, as the honourable member has said, getting a licence is now a problem. We hear that is why UCC is going around purporting to close radio stations to be able to sell their frequencies. When these people come – I wonder, how can a radio station of somebody who has invested a lot of money in it be closed for more than three or four months? Is the honourable minister in charge? Where should these people go to? When you go to UCC, they toss you around; you go to the permanent secretary nothing is done. Honourable minister, are you in charge? Yes, people are crying, they have lost jobs and nobody is coming to their rescue. 

Thirdly, there are inconsistencies in our committee work. When a committee passes a resolution that is supposed to be implemented, then another committee comes up to challenge the resolution of a certain committee. We need to get clarification from you, Madam Speaker. The Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) did its work, now Committee on Information and Communications Technology (ICT) is challenging what COSASE is doing. We would like to get clarification from the minister and you, Madam Speaker. 

Lastly - (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: On that issue, a resolution was taken in this House; there has been no motion to rescind the decision so we cannot just casually – that is not how Parliament works, we have requisitions relating to that matter of the 9th Parliament which has not been rescinded. 

7.57
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me thank the chairperson and her committee for producing this report. I have two issues for clarification; first, when you read the name of this ministry, it is the Ministry for Information and Communications Technology (ICT) and National Guidance but I have always looked for the issue of “national guidance” which apparently is silent in the ministry. 

For me I would be interested in understanding what kind of activities the ministry is engaged in terms of guiding us nationally. That one does not come out ever and I do not know why. The minister can help us to clarify that. What do you nationally guide us? 

Secondly, I would like to understand the linkages between the Ministry of ICT and that of education. A member has already alluded to that but just by way of emphasis; I know these computers have been given to the schools. We have been visiting some of these schools where the computers are spoilt and they are not operational yet I am not seeing any kind of appropriation in terms of the repair of those computers. 

If you take statistics, I know almost 70 to 80 percent of those computers are not operational now. How are we going to continue saying that we are distributing these computers yet we are not able to repair even a single computer for functionality? –(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Thank you, honourable for giving me a chance; next time you need one, I will give you too.

 Madam Speaker, the information that I would like to give is, the minister needs to distribute the computers equally per district; this should be known. If we are getting 10 per district, we shall sort out how to fix them but let them be there per district for equity. I think that is in order.

In terms of giving international coverage, we have seen people going to Geneva - Last time, Madam Speaker, you were there but the people who covered you were not from UBC but from private television stations. We want to see UBC staff boarding planes to cover events abroad. That will change this country and we shall see something coming from our own. If BBC is ruling the world and it is a Government entity, what about UBC? Moreover the two entities share some letters of the alphabet; there is BBC and UBC.

Madam Speaker, the languages that we use on UBC are not balanced. You find the same languages but Ateso is not there on UBC yet we belong to this country. We are maybe number two in population, what is happening? That is the information I wanted to give you but there is also additional information.

Madam Speaker –(Interjection)– I am also giving information. There are so many redundant assets – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Your time is up. Hon. Mugeni -

8.01
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the report. Many Members have been asking about the issue of compensation. I think the right question is, who is to be compensated because that person has not been mentioned in the report. Who is this person who is hidden?

Secondly, I am a former employee of UBC; I know it all because I went through it all. Madam Speaker, there are so many things that are happening in that institution that maybe this Parliament does not know. I would like to interest the minister to find time and not only sit with the top management but also sit with the workers at UBC and listen to their ordeal.

When I resigned, I was lucky to be given my benefits but there are some people who have even died without getting their benefits from UBC.

Madam Speaker, when it comes to quality and content, when we allowed this county to go through liberalisation, maybe that is the mistake we made. First, what we did was like allowing a co-wife to access your house. Whatever she does there has bitter consequences. That is what we did to our UBC. We allowed UBC to compete with others but we did not take care of the content. You will find that the same engineers at UBC are used by private radio and television stations. Why is it that the content is not the same?

Madam Speaker, we have the best equipment at UBC. However, why is it that Government has failed to employ people who can use this equipment and yet we have people who have gone to school? We have the best engineers in this country from Makerere and other institutions. Why has Government failed to employ good people who can use this equipment - (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

MS MILLY MUGENI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I heard the chairperson of the committee talking about the meagre resources that UBC is given. I would like to interest her and the minister to investigate the salaries of workers at UBC. Some of these workers go for three months without pay. In fact, UBC has become another constituency for us who have ever worked there because workers call us and say, you know we are going without food, they are chasing us out of our houses and we have to provide, as Members of Parliament.

Lastly, as a minister, you should also find out whether this broadcasting corporation remits NSSF benefits for their workers. Thank you, honourable minister.

8.04
MR GEORGE KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report, which has been articulated before us. However, I have some concerns.

First, Ugandans seem to have lost interest in listening and watching UBC. I do not know what steps the minister is taking to recover this listenership. I need to know that.

Secondly, private radio and television stations have opened in almost every district and their concerns have been articulated in this House. However, I do not know what steps this ministry is taking to open their offices and transmission in every district in this country and moreover in the local languages. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

8.05
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the minister to comment on what I perceive as sometimes a lapse of judgment by the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC). The knee-jerk reaction to many issues has made UCC a joke in the country in whatever decision they come up with.

We had the circus around SIM card registration, the talk of verifying SIM cards within seven days, the shutting down of the Internet sometimes during elections, the machine that has been bought to track pornography - I now hear that they are going to disable what they regard as fake or Chinese phones, the ban on the sale of airtime on the streets, the talk of registering all phone dealers and sellers, the ban of certain radio stations that they are promoting witchcraft, which then leads to electronic fraud -

In all these things, they just say, from today we are doing this and that. I sometimes wonder whether they think they are managing a home or a country. I do not know whether this is because of political interference or these are decisions coming from our technocrats at UCC or it is a combination or lack of understanding of the sector.

As a matter of fact, Madam Speaker, UCC has become a joke in the country regarding whatever decisions they come up with. All of their decisions tend to show lack of coordination with their stakeholders. Madam Speaker, I beg to have an explanation from the minister.

8.08
MR GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will try to be very brief because of the time factor. I have about 15 points but I will be very brief.

First, the minister’s report talked about Uganda Institute of Communication and Technology. I would like to know when this institute was - (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since you are the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Commission, I do not know if it has occurred to our good commissioners to see ways of helping this House to get a translator when our honourable colleague is speaking in this House. Honestly speaking, I have a lot of difficulty in understanding what he is saying. (Laughter) Yes, we need an accent translator. I seek for your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Of course, we have not considered that. Can I ask the Member to speak a bit more clearly? (Laughter)

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, that is not the first time that my senior brother makes a good joke. Mr Minister, I would like to know when the Uganda Institute of Communication and Technology was established and under what legal arrangement and framework.

Secondly, I am interested in knowing the vision, mission and scope of this particular institute. Furthermore, I would like to know what the mode of delivery could be in terms of production; what is it producing and who consumes the products from this institute? 

Mr Minister, you should interest yourself about research in radio dissemination or systems. 

Madam Speaker, all these universities, especially national universities, are responsible for knowledge production and generation. We need this knowledge as a country to guide our interventions. Makerere University conducts a lot of research but who are supposed to be the consumers? Definitely, it is Government but we do not have the communication channels through either Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) radio or UBC television regional stations in terms of radio and television. In Busoga, please let us have UBC Busoga or UBC radio and the same elsewhere in the country.

I am still wondering why Uganda Telecom Limited (UTL) is still under a parastatal yet it is supposed to serve as the engine of communication.

Lastly, on the national school computer policy, to begin with, each Government-aided school should have either two or three computers and that should be countrywide not just in selected communities. In the interest of time, I am looking at Information Communication and Technology (ICT). One, where is the information? Two, what could be your communication strategy? 

Concerning technology, what do you mean? Be specific in terms of technology right from adoption and transfer –(Member timed out.)

8.12 
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification on the following issues. The report is very clear that in this running Financial Year 2017/2018, their budget was Shs 107 billion. The projected budget for Financial Year 2018/2019 is Shs 139 billion. They are also saying that they are facing a financial challenge but I am one of the members on the select committee, which investigated UTL. 

In the investigations that we made, we realised that Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) has reluctantly failed to license media houses; radios and televisions. The licence is a legal aspect and the ministry is not getting money because they have either reluctantly or intentionally failed to license these media houses. 

Madam Speaker, what is the motive of this when they want money but do not want to license the media houses from where they can generate money?

Secondly, according to the chairperson of the committee, they have failed to constitute their authority at the tribunal because there is no judge. I do not know what type of judge they have failed to come across because I know that this country has so many qualified people -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, that point is important. Is it a special judge? Have they requested and Government has not given them?
             
MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, there are certain things, especially with the Ministry of ICT - Given the current trends that the world is taking we must position ICT as a priority for this country.

Finally, I would like to address myself to the issue of schools which do not have solar and those that are not connected to the national grid. These schools have Ugandan children, some in private schools while others in Government schools. The ultimate thing is that they are Ugandan children. I do not know what the strategy of the ministry is, especially in those isolated areas yet these schools have ordinary and advanced levels and they have to sit for exams with the schools, which are privileged. 

Madam Speaker, how are we going to reconcile a student from Bundibugyo, Kasese and Kapchorwa competing favourably with the privileged schools here? (Interruption) 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate hon. William Nzoghu for allowing me to give him this very important information. It looks as if the Ministry of ICT is accounting for specific money in the name of supplying computers to schools. I have a school in my area, which was given computers but the school does not have any source of power. How do you expect such a school to utilise those computers?

Secondly, you are taking computers to various schools but you are not liaising with the Ministry of Education and Sports to train teachers who can instruct the students on the use of those computers. You take the computers and leave them there without instructors. The Ministry of Education and Sports should employ teachers who can instruct students on computer skills. Thank you.

8.18
MR ALIONI ODRIA (Independent, Aringa South County, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When I saw the report, I was surprised –

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member. Do not go into another debate. You wanted to lay evidence that someone has asked you to contribute money. That is the point. 

MR ODRIA: Madam Speaker, that is true. However in Aringa South, Yumbe and the entire West Nile, we have a very big challenge with communication. You cannot make a phone call in my –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have already said that. Minister, can you please come to the Floor?

MR ODRIA: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a requisition from Uganda Muslim Supreme Council, P.O. Box 129, Yumbe District, addressed to hon. Alioni Yorke Odria, area MP Aringa South Constituency. 

It reads, “Dear honourable member of Parliament, requisition for your generous contribution towards FM radio station operationalisation.” Remember, we do not have a single radio station in Yumbe District. It continues, “The management committee of Yumbe Muslim Supreme Council and Radio FM …” (Interruption)

MR BUTURO: Madam Speaker, progressively the authority of the Speaker is being chipped away and I do not know what this new development means. 

I have been here for quite some time. There was a time when once the Speaker spoke, that was it. Now we are seeing a new situation that threatens the Speaker’s authority where a Member insists he must speak. The Speaker says, “Sit down” and the Member argues. This is something new, Madam Speaker. I believe that it is a threat to the integrity of this House that a Member should defy instructions of the Speaker. 

Is this in order, Madam Speaker? You spoke and directed the minister to come up and deliver his response but the Member is continuing with his submission. This is not a classroom situation where anybody can say anything. (Laughter) Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: The Member is out of order. Let me invite the minister to respond.

8. 21
THE MINISTER FOR INFORMATION, ICT AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you so much for your comments, honourable Members of Parliament and for your feedback in regard to the work of the sector I lead.

Much as I will attempt to respond, I realise that I need much more time with Members in different fora to really give them a full exposition of the ICT sector, the challenges we are facing and the opportunities we have started to exploit. I will work with the Commission to organise meetings in the Parliament Conference Hall to have an interaction so that you can understand our sector. 

I will answer three general points and then get to the specifics. There is the issue of network, starting with the issue of the Eastern region where you, Madam Speaker, directed me some time back. The network we are talking about is mainly voice network of telecommunications; the same that is in Obongi, which my friend and I were able to go and see. At least he has a mast although he did not acknowledge it and that mast was constructed by Government. 

Most importantly, the problem we have is that this infrastructure is not financed by Government. The money we have is Shs 26 billion for recurrent expenditure and you know what recurrent expenditure does. The Shs 15-16 billion that was introduced last year is our Innovation Fund for the hub and for our innovators, which is performing very well. 

When I wrote to you, I wanted to do a baseline and know where there is no network. The only intervention I have is to direct the telecom companies to intervene in those areas. Truly, I cannot effectively do that but it is the solution I have because I do not have money. This is because one station of a mast, fully powered by either a generator or solar, will cost close to US$ 1 million. That is what the engineers are telling us. 

For some reason, ICT infrastructure is not yet given much priority so we still depend on the private investment of the telecom companies. That is a challenge. The solution I am proposing to Cabinet is, we are revising our ICT policy, which I beg to lay on the Table -

First of all, I beg to lay on the Table, in response to hon. Fungaroo, the ICT sector strategic and investment plan - (Interjection). That is one of them. I am laying it on the Table for you to access and read and that is good for you. 

I am laying on the Table the Ministry of Information and Communications Technology National Information Telecommunications Technology Policy for Uganda, with a Cabinet extract. (Interjection) It is a property of Parliament and I hope it can be accessed by Members.

The revision we are going to make in the ICT policy is, we are bringing a specific broadband policy, which will define infrastructure. Infrastructure for data can be delivered in three ways: one is laying optic fibre, which hon. Oshabe correctly pointed out as the backbone. The backbone connects one point to another. You dig the ground and put the pipe. That is the traditional way.

However, there are places where the backbone cannot reach like in the mountains as it is very expensive. The backbone cannot connect home to home as it is also very expensive. The other method now, with improved technology, is satellite. Therefore, we are adopting satellite to compliment fibre. 

Last week, an organisation called International Telecommunications Satellite Organisation (ITSO), which is headed by a Ugandan engineer, Eng. Patrick Masambu, whom we campaigned for and was elected, together with UCC, have partnered and are piloting satellite. We have started with the remote village of Ntoroko and we are testing its effectiveness. 

We know it works and the question really is financing. In the broadband proposal we are taking to Cabinet, we are going to condition telecom companies that if they want to do business in Uganda, they must operate everywhere in the country. You are going to hear chaos and they will be coming to appeal to you that the policy is going to chock them. We will condition them not to be Kampala-based or metropolitan-based. Rather, we will give them benchmarks of covering the whole country. This is a broadband policy before Cabinet and I will request friends to support this. 

Alternatively, we have to find billions of shillings, as a country, to construct these masts per sub-county. Therefore, pardon me friends. My letters to you were not Kiwaani or meant to hoodwink you. In some areas like Ntoroko - and hon. Ibanda can tell you - we have directed some telecom companies to go there but we cannot force them to respond as we want. They will respond according to their business plans. 

For example, MTN is reviewing the expiry of their license and they will be seeking another license in October. Fortunately, the licensing regime that the policy will introduce is national coverage for both voice and data. Data will also come - If it is possible, we will list it on the stock exchange but that is something we will brief you about, if Cabinet approves.

Someone talked about 3G. There is 2G network, 3G network, 4G network, 5G network and they are even going to 6G. That is the speed and reliability of the internet.  When we are talking about cost, it must match the reliability. You may get a very cheap connection when you cannot even open a video. 

Therefore, we are conditioning telecom companies that the minimum they should offer in our rural Uganda is 3G and for the urban areas, 4G and above. We are not despising the rural areas but we believe that business activity is more in the urban areas than in the rural areas. 

Therefore, the only force of intervention we have, as a ministry, is through policy instrument, which we are proposing. Beyond that, no country has enough money to invest in the entire system. I therefore beg for your patience as we move through the regulatory environment to cause telecom companies to reach your constituencies. However, your letters are very important. If you have not written to me, write to me because it helps us to know which areas are deficient of voice network – (Interjection) - With the permission –

THE SPEAKER: Please, we need to wind up. You can meet the minister in the corridors or in the canteen. (Laughter)

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, on UBC, I would like to thank Parliament, especially the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE), for having taken time to understand the issues of UBC. In summary, UBC had three problems.

Hon. Nsaba Buturo mentioned the first problem as the pioneer of the Act. The Act joined UTV and Radio Uganda and created a corporation. Most of these corporations, as you know, survive on Non-Tax Revenue (NTR). UBC was to survive on NTR; the famous popular or unpopular TV tax, which never materialised. Therefore, UBC was chronically underfunded. It kept on getting Shs 1 billion subvention through the then Ministry of Information and National Guidance for salaries. 

Secondly, it is a fact that UBC, for some years, was a bit mismanaged. People did not focus on the core mandate of TV production but instead went to manage land and many other things. The wage bill of UBC was bloated because of not having a clear structure. That is why some of the staff could not be properly paid. That is also why some of the statutory deductions such as PAYE could not be remitted. COSASE found out much about that.

However, I have good news for you, friends. You gave us Shs 18 billion last year. The committee reported that we have so far received Shs 6 billion but my permanent secretary told me that before we came to this quarter, another Shs 3-4 billion had been released. If you go and watch UBC, there is some improvement – (Interjection) - I would like to thank you for acknowledging that. We have bought transmission equipment.

On the observation that UBC has the best equipment, I would like to say that, that is only the studio. Members of Parliament visited the studio and I think that is the studio that was constructed using the money you are hearing about – (Interjection) – I will come to that because digital migration was not completed.

Apart from the studio, UBC had no cameras, no OB Van, no live transmission equipment - Everything was broken down over the years. With the money you have given us, we have now improved on the engineering part. Unfortunately, this money is a one-off yet we still have a lot of gratuity to pay for many staff. That is the challenge we have. 

The signal has improved and our revamp team has put up an advert and they are going to employ professionals with the ability to source content that is of national character. National broadcasters world over do not compete with commercial TVs because the contents are different. UBC will have to present and cater for a language of every minority group in Uganda, which most commercial TVs do not do. The commercial TVs appeal to the elite and use the common language - Luganda. 

Therefore, we have to make sure that our Ngeya station, Elgon station, Lugbara station and the Buruli station for Nakasongola are all restored. I am glad to inform you that transmitters have been bought for those stations.

Our challenge with digital migration, which hon. Mawanda talked about, stopped half way. UCC only financed digital migration for Kampala Metropolitan area because the Government then was to acquire a loan of Shs 70 million – hon. Syda Bbumba could recall this – but that loan was stopped. Therefore, we kicked off digital migration for the whole country but only 17 sites were built by UCC. UCC was hoping to roll it over the whole country with the extra one per cent levy you passed in the law for telecom companies. Unfortunately, that levy was taken to the Consolidated Fund.

There has been a proposal to look for a private developer under a Public Private Partnership arrangement but that has also had its challenges. When I came into the ministry, I found an investigation by the IGG over allegations of corruption. Therefore, it has been halting. Cabinet is yet to make a decision whether Government can find funds to roll out digital migration or whether we can change the policy and bring in private players. 

However, if you bring in private players, the national broadcaster will die -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, try to wind up.

MR TUMWEBAZE: As I wind up, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank friends. 

On the issue of licensing, I will investigate the complaints by Members but the brief I have from UCC is that licensing a TV or radio is not a problem but they cannot license you where there is no spectrum. Spectrum gives you frequency to operate otherwise you will go to West Nile and encroach on the already awarded spectrum to other licensees. 

Therefore, if you apply in a circulated area like Bushenyi, they have to make sure that the frequency they give you does not interfere with Bushenyi FM or the other FM stations. 

On the issue of Yumbe Radio, my boss Gen. Ali has given me instructions to pursue this but the challenge, which UCC is telling me, is spectrum. I pledge to Members that we should get together. I am one of you, I am very easy to access. Let us meet and go to – (Interjection) - That we have not heard - (Laughter) I can summon the engineers from UCC to audit the spectrum of West Nile. If it is there, we pledge that you will have it.

UCC also has the mandate that if another person took the spectrum and is not utilising it - [Mr Fungaroo: “Information.”] - I cannot defy the Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Fungaroo.

MR TUMWEBAZE: We shall audit the spectrum of West Nile and see the level of circulation. If there is – (Interruption)

MS ANNITA AMONG: Honourable minister, the radio frequency has been given but you must appreciate that we do not give frequencies for free; it has to be paid for and that is what you are supposed to do. The minister is labouring for nothing. The frequency has been given but they have to pay for it. We have to raise money for the institution - (Mr Fungaroo rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, go and audit. Let us carry out an audit.

MR TUMWEBAZE: I will find out - [Mr Fungaroo: “Do not just talk for the sake of talking.”]

THE SPEAKER: He is talking sense.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Of course you would be having a problem not to see sense in what I am talking. You invited me to Obongi and I spoke sense there and you know it. However, let us take that issue. If you have applied for a licence and it has been awarded and they want you to pay licence fees, maybe that is why they are fundraising from you. 

UCC cannot refuse if there is a spectrum. I have power to call them to act unless they show me that the spectrum is saturated. Madam Speaker, with your guidance, I will go to my ministry and compile the issues raised by Members.

Let me make two final points. Regarding the issue of national guidance, UCC is guided by an Act of Parliament. Hon. Ayepa and another colleague talked about content. Regulating things of communication is not something easy and popular; you will be blamed for any mess. It is the work of UCC, in accordance with the law, to ensure that the licensees or operators observe minimum broadcasting standards. Airing of witchcraft content is illegal and offends public morality.

Madam Speaker, most radios stations, which were closed and involved some colleagues here, have been having an interface. I think about two or three have been opened like hon. Babu’s radio station and others. Let me know of a radio station, which is still closed. Maybe it has not complied with what it is supposed to do because UCC acts in accordance with the law. If they act illegally, they will be fined.

On the issue of Uganda Telecom Ltd vis-à-vis National Information Technology Authority (NITA-U), NITA-U is an agency of Government created by an Act of Parliament. It is mandated to give ICT advisory, set standards and handle certification across the entire Government. When we hosted Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM), the broadband levels of the country were very low. That is when we borrowed money to put the backbone in the ground for the first time. It was a condition for hosting CHOGM; for internet connectivity. They gave the backbone to NITA-U to manage and because the backbone is a pipe for internet, you buy internet from somewhere. Therefore, NITA-U was procuring internet for Government agencies.

There has been a proposal, which has been endorsed by Cabinet, that in a bid to revamp UTL, UTL will supply Government internet because it has shares in a company that owns sea cable and they affirmed that they will do it cheaply. We are saying, thank you very much.

Madam Speaker, we shall regulate UTL. If you do not offer it as you have pledged and if you do not upgrade your connectivity to the modern network of 4G or 5G, they will have nobody to blame. However, Cabinet has taken that position in a bid to revamp UTL.

Colleagues, with guidance of the Speaker, I beg that I respond to the queries fundamentally in writing - (Interjection)  

On the issue of national guidance, we guide the country through press briefings. Honourable members, differentiate between political activism and citizen awareness about Government programmes. Free-to-air decoder is not there because digital migration is not complete and I have answered it. 

The ministry would be meeting your district leaders and disseminating all these Government programmes but we are constrained. Perhaps the way Members of Parliament are constrained to reach out in their constituencies is the same way the ministry is constrained.

Nonetheless, every Tuesday, we hold press briefings to tell the country what Cabinet is all about. Previously, Cabinet was conducting business in secret but now we publicise it. National guidance involves disseminating information that is vital to the public. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will follow up all the issues since I have written them down. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: I have two more points –(Interjections)- I was not yet born when it was installed but I will come to it. 

Hon. Oshabe noted that we invested money rightly in the backbone. How has it helped us? In 2006-2007 when we borrowed money as Government to build the backbone, I think it was about $105 million from the China Exim Bank, Government was buying one Mbps per month at US$ 1200. When we put the backbone in the ground in 2013/2014, it was US$ 600. In the budget estimates for Financial Year 2014/2015, it came to US$ 300 and for Financial Year 2017/2018, it is US$ 70. 

However, this could have been much lower, even to the citizens, if this backbone was being used by telecom players. When we were putting ours in the ground, they had already invested in their own and we did not have a policy in place to force them not to invest. Therefore, the investments they made had to be recouped on what they charge us. 

The policy we are bringing is to curb duplication in deployment of infrastructure. Madam Speaker, I will get more time to elucidate on these issues. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members.  Honourable chair, I would like you to address the need to withdraw this recommendation on page 7, on the issue of compensation, because it is at variance with the resolution of this House before we take a vote.

MR TUMWEBAZE: As a ministry, we did not study much about the compensation issue but Parliament had followed it up. However, our request, which we even made to Cabinet - my colleague hon. Aida Nantaba presented it to Cabinet – was that, that compensation be handled through the channels of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. This is because if it comes to the Ministry of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance, which only has a recurrent budget of Shs 26 billion and development budget of Shs 15 billion, the money will be coming in the tranches of our ceilings - (Interruption)

MS ANITA AMONG: It is a correction of English. It is not compensation. It is a refund of money that has been given to an institution. In actual fact, you are not compensating. Rather, UBC is refunding. 

THE SPEAKER: I think the language is “refund”. Are you saying that –

MR TUMWEBAZE: Our constraint as a ministry is the budget. If you look at our budget, the proposed amount is Shs 11 billion. Assuming the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development finds this money and channels it through UBC, the following problems will happen: Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) will garnish it off because of the current problems in UBC - I am giving you practical issues. 

Our proposal is that the money should go through the Office of the Solicitor–General, which handles compensations or refunds. That is my proposal.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think for now let us agree on the principle. When we come to Committee of Supply, we shall go into the details of how to move. Hon. Nyakecho -

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before the committee came up with this recommendation, this issue was highly consulted upon. We had interactions with the Permanent Secretary/ Secretary to the Treasury (PS/ST) and I would like to read this letter verbatim.

It was written on 23 April 2018 to the Solicitor-General, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Kampala.  
 
It reads, “Re: Resolution of Parliament regarding UBC land. Reference is made to the attached letter reference AD145/324/01 dated 6 April 2018 from the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament on the need to settle the refund of Shs 11.5 billion to the claimants with regard to the impugned sale of UBC land in LVR 211 folio 18, plots 18-10, 12-16 and 18-20 Faraday Road, Kampala in Bugolobi as well as interest accrued on the claims since the year 2010.

However, I have seen a Supreme Court ruling on Civil Appeal No. 03 of 2014 delivered on 29 October 2015 on this matter. The purpose of this letter therefore is to urgently seek your opinion on the issue.” 

Signed, Keith Muhakanizi.

Madam Speaker, we invited the PS/ST before the committee to explain and give us guidance on this particular issue of the Shs 11.2 billion. This is what he said and we quoted it in the committee report. He said that he had received information that the Supreme Court had ruled against this compensation as it was a fraudulent process. Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know, I am a lawyer. If you are writing about cases, you actually name the parties. Who are the parties in Civil Appeal No. 3 of 2014? It is devoid of parties. 

I have followed up this matter. I also refuse that I received that letter. I asked the Office of the Attorney-General and actually, they had not received that letter. Even today, that letter which he has written has never gone - 

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Speaker, if I may conclude – (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: If I may come in before you - Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. For the record, as a practising advocate and as someone who has been here for four terms, I think the issue is not whether there is a court judgement or whether the amount is in dispute. The issue is about resolutions of Parliament. 

There is what we call in law the notion of functus officio; that the moment you pronounce yourself on some matter, your hands are off that matter. In relation to parliamentary precedent, it is even more interesting because the day we resolve something and we do not become functus officio and we want to revisit it tomorrow, we shall be legislating here in vain.

Therefore, in the circumstances, if this Parliament pronounced itself on the issue of that money, there is no way this Parliament can revisit that decision because the moment we set the precedent, whatever we are talking here we shall revisit tomorrow. 

Therefore, in the circumstances, Madam Speaker, I need you to come out clearly on this matter in relation to my humble legal opinion that we cannot legislate in vain. We pronounced ourselves on that matter and so be it.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Odonga Otto. I said it earlier that this matter was resolved. If we wanted to revisit it, it should have come with a motion to review this matter and to rescind our decision. We cannot be moved back and forth, this is a House of record. Please move for the deletion.

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Speaker, finally I would like to say that if this House has decided that we withdraw the recommendation on page 7, I cannot state otherwise. We were doing work as a committee and on behalf of the House without any due – (Interjections) – No, we did work as a committee.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the committees work on our behalf and that is why you report here. Otherwise, you would be deciding there and simply say, “We have finished.” It is a delegated responsibility. You report to us, we discuss and take a decision. We are saying, we have not formally revisited this matter. We cannot change the decision of this House casually.

MS NYAKECHO: That is why, Madam Speaker, I am trying to tell this House that if the House has decided to withdraw, who am I to say otherwise? 

On behalf of the Committee of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) and following the guidance of the Speaker and Members who have debated this issue, as the Chairperson of the ICT committee, I withdraw recommendation (c) on compensation of UBC land. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report be amended, as proposed.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report amended.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. We have done quite a lot but we shall resume tomorrow. However, hon. Lugoloobi raised an issue about a Bill on the pension sector, which has been around us for about six years.

I would like the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to report tomorrow on what progress they have made or not made. We cannot continue in this kind of limbo. Therefore, the finance committee should report to us tomorrow on this issue. The House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 8.54 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 10 May 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 


