

Tuesday, 9 May 2017

Parliament met at 2.46 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I want to thank the sectoral committees for the work that has been ongoing. I urge you to expedite it so that we can meet our constitutional deadline for the passing of the budget and then do other work.

Secondly, we have been invited for a yoga programme tomorrow in the Members’ lounge. Those who are interested can go there tomorrow. The Sergeant-at-Arms has made the necessary arrangements for that.

Thirdly, honourable members, I bring you greetings from the Federal National Council of the United Arab Emirates (UAE). I have just returned from a visit at the invitation of my colleague, Dr Amal Al Qubaisi, the Speaker of the Federal National Council. We signed a memorandum of understanding between Parliament of Uganda and the Parliament of the United Arab Emirates to collaborate on knowledge, information gathering, exchange of information, and visits and other experiences, both economic and social. In my other capacity as the President of the Inter-Parliamentary Union, Africa Group, I signed another memorandum between the Africa Group and the United Arab Emirates and other Gulf states.

Honourable members, during the course of our visit, we learnt so much from the UAE. They have a target to transform that dessert into something different by the time of their golden jubilee. There are some areas of very crucial concern; for instance, they have refined their monitoring process through technology. They even have a minister for happiness whose work is to assess from the citizens their satisfaction with Government services. (Laughter)- It is true. 

Her work is to inquire into accessibility of services, timeliness of these services, their adequacy and quality. They have to get that information every month from the population. If you have gone to the hospital, for instance, they will find out: did you find the doctor there; how long did it take him to treat you; did you get the medicine; how long were you at the hospital; did you get an ambulance to take you. These are the things that the minister is required to do, and the public response about services is quite good.

The Prime Minister walks with an iPad all the time and at any one time, he can check on anything. If it was here, for example, he could check on how much water you supplied to Kitgum this year and if it is enough. He could check on Karamoja - how many people are studying? We were given an example that early this year, there were children who had not been admitted to primary schools - 540 of them. He told them, “I am giving you 100 days to find out why these children are not in school and you fix them.” Within 30 days, they had found schools and additional places for these children. That is how responsive they are.

The ministers are supervised and given stars. If you are a five-star minister, it means your ministry is running well. They assess the minister and the ministry. If you are a one-star minister, then you know that you are on the way to exit. That is how they are managing their country.

Honourable members, they have had many advances in technology. They have Masdar City, which is a technology city where so much invention has gone on. They actually have a driverless car. I was able to sit in it, press a button and I was driven. That is how far they have gone. They are able to manufacture rain using technology; they shake the clouds and it rains. That is of interest to us. 

They also have the Zayed Future Energy Prize competed for by countries, schools, individuals and non-governmental organisations. In the ten years that it has been on, Uganda has never participated and, therefore, never won that money. I would like to encourage Ugandans to apply and participate in that competition. Tanzania, Kenya and Malawi have benefited; we are the only ones who have not. I would like to therefore encourage Ugandans to apply for that facility.

Finally, we met the Sharjah Chamber of Commerce. They are coming here in November and we asked them to come with Members of Parliament, so that they can also have an exchange visit in our country and find out our potential and capacities. The full report will be tabled and we shall discuss it.

I also requested the Minister for Climate Change to come to Uganda and speak to us, and the Minister for Happiness as well to come and tell us how they are monitoring service delivery so that we can pick up some examples. However, ICT is very crucial in their governance. Thank you.

2.53
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the ongoing degradation of the wetland along Masaka Road right after Busega roundabout in Kampala.

Madam Speaker and Members, a seemingly very powerful investor - basing on the kind of machinery that is being used - is carrying out this activity in the wetland. This wetland is where Lubigi drains its waters. Actually, if it gets depleted, the effect will be very dangerous and disastrous floods and yet the Government is just looking on. It is just on the main road. The wetland is also the origin of River Mayanja and this river has attachment to culture and traditional beliefs in Buganda, making it also a tourist attraction. 

My request, Madam Speaker, is that Government explains under what circumstances this wetland is being degraded.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last night we were coming from Masaka and I also noticed some iron sheets in the wetland. Of course, I had no one to ask but I think it is what the honourable member is talking about.

2.54
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) because when the people of Kasilo wrote to this office to provide some assistance after the winds had blown off the roofs from the churches last year, they responded. I am happy that on 17th I received a letter from the OPM that they were delivering iron sheets to Serere District to be distributed to those areas of Kasilo and Serere County.

There was a note at the end of this letter: “the purpose of this letter, therefore, is to request you (CAO) to receive and acknowledge receipt of the above items for the beneficiaries in your district. Please take custody of the items until we advise you on the modalities of handing them over to the beneficiaries. Thank you for your usual cooperation.” It was signed for the permanent secretary. 

Madam Speaker, we were so happy and we met as the caucus of Serere District - hon. Adoa, hon. Okabe and I - and agreed on when we would follow up and distribute these items. However, to our dismay, one of the ministers from the Prime Minister’s Office went to the district without informing us, picked the stuff and started distributing it.

We have a rule in this House that if a minister is visiting a constituency, it is courteous for that minister to inform his or her colleagues that they will be in their constituency. What is more disturbing is that the list of the beneficiaries is attached here - the churches, individuals or groups that were supposed to receive the ox-ploughs - but we have been receiving calls from churches. 

I can specifically speak for Kasilo; Kadungulu PAG Church was to receive 120 iron sheets. However, when the minister reached this church, she found it already roofed because we had fundraised for the roofing, but there was the reverend’s house which still needed roofing. The minister however decided to drive back with the iron sheets. To date, we do not know where they are. We need to know from hon. Akiror where they have taken the iron sheets. 

As leaders of the district, we had agreed to take these supplies when the school term is running and when the churches are organised, so that we can distribute these things. Madam Speaker, this type of behaviour from our colleague is uncalled for and-(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, hon. Okupa, for giving way. We also received that kind of assistance from the Office of the Prime Minister under the Ministry for Northern Uganda Rehabilitation. However, the Minister of State for Northern Uganda, hon. Grace Kwiyucwiny, organised for a meeting with all of us who come from northern Uganda. 

She sat us down and gave us a list of those items and informed us about the dates she would be in our respective districts. Most of us, if not all Members of Parliament from northern Uganda where these items were distributed, were there in person and we really appreciate that. (Applause)

MR OKUPA: That is how we are meant to operate, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. What is more disturbing is that the items were taken away. Even if they had found that the church was roofed, the headquarters of the PAG Church could have donated them to other churches. 

We need to know where these items have gone to, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. The churches need the items which you sent. Madam Speaker, I had another item regarding the issue of rice but I will raise it later. 

THE SPEAKER: We would like hon. Akiror to come and explain that issue. We have had a practice here of treating colleagues with courtesy. You cannot just wake up and drive to somebody’s constituency when they do not know about it; that is unacceptable. 

3.00
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to raise a very important matter that concerns this Parliament. 

I remember sometime back, one of our colleagues, hon. Nagwomu, presented a petition here about Dott Services. It was specifically directed that the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) handle the petition. However, you may have read from social media and print media that our good President had recommended the blacklisting of Dott Services and yet COSASE has not produced its report yet. Madam Speaker, I do not know where to go. I am therefore raising this matter so that you can guide us as a House. Thank you. 

3.01
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague from Soroti – (Interjections) – It is the same area as Serere. I did not mention another area; you are still within.  

I thank my colleague for raising the issue of the items that were allocated to them. However, what is also important to note is that this minister is a Minister for Teso Affairs and these are MPs from Teso. So, who is supposed to inform the other? If the minister is going to her home, must she inform all the Members of Parliament? (Interruption)

MS OSEGGE:  Madam Speaker, you have rightly guided this House, not once or twice, that this should be done as a matter of good manners and acknowledging that we are all colleagues. You have repeated it in this House that if a minister is going to any constituency, it is important to inform a colleague. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, these actions are common with ministers without constituencies and you can only guess why they are doing it. Is the honourable Prime Minister in order to make a joke of the directive of the Speaker instead of responding to the queries of the Members of Parliament? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it has been our practice from the Seventh Parliament that no minister should go to our constituencies without informing us. (Applause) Why do you want to go there without informing me? Let me know; if I can join you, I will reply and if I cannot come, then I can delegate. You do not just go and start addressing my people. They will call me saying, “There are some people here, do you know about them?” 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in this case they are talking about relief items for Teso from the Office of the Prime Minister taken by a minister and distributed by her without alerting the Members. 

GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, I am not defying your directive but I am also wondering because I need clarity. This is a minister for Teso affairs. If some people are misinterpreting that to be defiance, they should know that I am not part of the defiant policy; I belong to NRM. 

I agree with your directive, Madam Speaker. However, it should also cater for those of us who do not have a constituency and are at the same time assigned a total region as our constituency of responsibility like this minister. I really pity her because what should I tell her now? (Laughter) We shall ask her where the remaining iron sheets are so that she produces them before the Members of Parliament so that they know that they have not gone anywhere. I will make sure that she explains that.

However, Madam Speaker, at an appropriate time maybe you will guide us on these types of ministers who have no constituency. All constituencies in Teso belong to her because she is the minister in charge of Teso affairs. What happens to this type of minister? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, no one is questioning her constituency of Teso. The issue is: when you are going to do work in Teso, why don’t you inform the Members and you go together? (Applause) We have been told that when the minister in charge of northern Uganda was going to distribute items, she invited the Members saying I have got a, b, c, d, can we go? It is just courtesy. We shall not accept you to run around in our constituencies without our knowledge.

3.07
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Madam Speaker, I wish to supplement what my honourable colleague, hon. Abala, has raised. You remember very well that this matter was brought to this House and actually, a committee was given powers to go and investigate the shoddy work of Dott Services. 

Madam Speaker, the principle of separation of powers must be respected. A motion was presented in this House on the same issue and the person responsible for Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) ran to seek kill-quick action from the Executive.

Madam Speaker, Samson in the Bible had his powers which were run down by women. (Laughter) In this country, we have three women who are unbwogable. Allow me to say we have Kagina, Musisi and Doris Akol. They run to the President and sometimes they misinform our good President to ensure that the matters are not handled well.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that since the matter was under investigation, we now demand the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises to present its findings at least within 14 days.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will study the issues they are raising and give my ruling tomorrow.

Prime Minister, I do not know whether you were behind or in front of me last night when we were coming back from Masaka; there are new mabati in the wetland around Busega.

3.09
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): We shall ask the minister responsible to make a statement. We do not want a haphazard statement to mislead this House. We shall ask the minister in charge of the environment to come and make a full statement. 

However, the statement made here, that there are three women who went to the President, must be withdrawn because there is no justification. Nobody can prove –(Interjections)- The Speaker did not attend the meeting. For those people who said ladies went to the President, did you attend the meeting? Can you prove it? That is hearsay, misleading this House –(Interjection)- That is also my view. I am not contradicting the Speaker’s view. Now that I have a chance, such a vague statement should be withdrawn.

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to item No.3.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Kampala Capital Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: It has been seconded. Honourable members, this Bill is just a reprint. It was tabled and is with this House but when the motion to shelve it was moved, they did not reprint it immediately. 

Committee on Presidential Affairs, you have only 45 days to report on this Bill. It has been sitting somewhere for almost two years. We want it quickly, therefore take urgent action.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO JPY 13.659 BILLION ($125.1M) FROM JAPAN INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION AGENCY (JICA) TO FINANCE KAMPALA METROPOLITAN TRANSMISSION SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to $125.1 million from Japan International Cooperation Agency to finance Kampala Metropolitan Transmission System Improvement Project.

THE SPEAKER: It has been seconded. It is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMNT TO GUARANTEE A LOAN OF UP TO ISLAMIC DINAR (ID) 8.95 MILLION ($13.79 MILLION) FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB) TO THE ISLAMIC UNIVERSITY IN UGANDA (IUIU) FOR ENHANCING THE LEARNING ENVIRONMENT AT IUIU

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to guarantee a loan of up to $13.79 million from the Islamic Development Bank to the Islamic University in Uganda (IUIU) for enhancing the learning environment at that university.

THE SPEAKER: It is also seconded. Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal -

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification. I was in the Ninth Parliament and we passed many loan requests and even up to now we are still passing loan requests. We passed the Kanungu Road loan request in 2014 to construct our road, but the road has not started. As I am seated here, I am wondering why we are passing more loan requests. What guarantees do we have that these loans we are passing are going to be used to do the work we are passing them for? 

Madam Speaker, you know I have been talking about Kanungu Road. Can you imagine we passed this money in 2014 and I believe the money is accruing interest every month and yet we are adding more loans? We need some guarantee that the loans we are passing will do the work that they have been passed for so that we can pass them happily and comfortably. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that the Committee on National Economy has set new guidelines for approval of loans, including a report on the performance of other loans. Where are hon. Syda Bbumba and hon. Bategeka? There are some rules that were approved here from the Committee on National Economy, from their last recommendations, to support that process.   

For now, let me commit this to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back. However, the issue of Kanungu is very serious. For a long time, people could not even reach Kanungu and when that loan request was brought, we were very excited for hon. Karungi and Dr Baryomunsi. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the loan that was acquired to construct the Kanungu Road has greatly delayed because of the procurement process. However, the good news is that this process, for the very last time, is now being resolved with the African Development Bank. We hope that within two weeks, we will get the final verdict on this matter so that the construction starts. Thank you.

MR NIRINGIYIMANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the minister. First of all, you have spent 24.6 per cent of that loan on non-existing work in Kanungu. Secondly, you have said that it has been resolved; can you shade more light on how it has been resolved?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, where did you get that information that money has been spent?

MR NIRINGIYIMANA: Madam Speaker, it is in the budget performance paper. It is in his report. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I recall in Seventh Parliament, we guaranteed a loan for the Islamic University in Uganda and I hope it has performed very well. However, my interest is: when shall we guarantee one for the Christians - the Church of Uganda, the Catholic Church, the Pentecostals - and even the pagans? This is a serious matter because it is the Ugandans who are responsible for guaranteeing loans. What about other religions; when are you bringing guarantees for other universities of other faiths?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the other people have asked but the minister will answer.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought the minister needed to clarify to this House the hurdles they have met that have led to the loan not being disbursed or utilised since 2014, before he says it is being resolved. He is speaking in riddles. Can he tell this House what they have come up with or what actually happened to cause the delay of the loan to this extent, before we can believe what he is saying?

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On the issue of loans, I am also at pains to see us approving more loan requests. In 2014, we passed a loan request for the Competitiveness and Enterprise Development Project (CEDP). This was equivalent to US$ 100 million and part of this money - US$25 million - was to support the tourism sector. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform you that because of lack of preparedness to use this money, as of today, so far US$ 10 million has been lost through foreign exchange fluctuations. What was US$ 100 million is now US$ 90 million because we were not prepared to use this money. 

The other issue is that the money, which was supposed to construct a tourism training institute in Jinja, which was US$ 12 million, has been now reduced to just US$ 5 million. This is because of our lack of preparedness and efficiency in handling this money. Therefore, why are we really looking at these other monies when we have money that we have borrowed and it has not been utilised? 

We also passed another loan request of US$ 100 million from the African Development Bank for the Rural Electrification Agency, including for Kaliro–Bulamogi County in 2015. However, up to date, no work has been done on the ground. Honourable minister, what justification do you have to convince us that we are not only paying money on unutilised loans but also losing money in depreciation of foreign exchange? Should we continue with this trend? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MS BINTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In addition to what Members have said, I think this Parliament needs to have an audit of all the loans that we have passed to assess their performance and whether some have been really utilised or they have not been absorbed. In the case of the Kigumba-Masindi-Bulima Road, for instance, this Parliament authorised borrowing of money to tarmac that road but we do not know where the monies are and we are not informed. 

Madam Speaker, I believe there is a lot that is going on behind the loans. Through your office, Madam Speaker, we request you to commission an audit such that before we commit Ugandans into borrowing – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have been asking the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that question and this Parliament. I am happy as the chairperson of the Parliamentary Network on the World Bank because we are going to bring a report on this matter. 

We have seen that to date, the unutilised loans from the World Bank amount to US$ 2.8 billion and the problem is Government counter funding. They bring loan requests here but when it comes to implementation of the funds, Government counter funding is not there. 

I would like to invite Members to look at the all the policy statements. You will note that there is no money for Government counter funding. Therefore, why do you borrow money if you are not ready to commit yourself? However, I am happy that we are going to bring a report from the World Bank Parliamentary Network.

I want to comment on the issue raised by my colleague about inflation. This is what happened to the loan under the African Development Bank meant for the 29 landing sites. In the end, they only constructed nine landing sites out of 29 and they were substandard. They claimed it was because of the high exchange rates and inflation that they could not construct 29 landing sites. What type of interest rates and inflation did you experience that consumed money for 29 landing sites? One is at hon. Lubwama’s constituency and others are in Lake Victoria and Lake Kyoga. We do not have them because of the inefficiency in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, this shows that we are not absorbing   these loans. I, therefore, propose that you commission a committee to audit these loans that have been utilised so that when we are discussing the authorisation of more loans, we should be in the know of how we are performing. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am glad you are feeling the pinch and I hope that when we amend the rules, you will agree to a committee on implementation. We had wanted it to do this work but in the Ninth Parliament, people went to the caucus and said, “No, we do not want this”; now here we are. I hope we will be able to support the proposals in the Rules of Procedure.  Honourable minister, tell us about Kanungu and the others.

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The progress on Kanungu is that they did the procurement, shortlisted and evaluated about five companies. The first company was given a “no objection” to commence work but it had issues with the procurement entity, which lodged a complaint to the bank that it was not the right company to do the job. 

We agreed to go ahead with it because of the delays and instead appoint a strong supervisor to supervise this company and monitor it to see whether that can work for us. That is why I said that this is being discussed with the bank and we hope that in two weeks, we shall have resolved it and informed this House and the country.

The second issue on that road is the assertion that we have spent 24.6 per cent without a contractor on site. I contest that assertion. I do not think we can spend 24.6 per cent of a loan without a contractor on site. 

The second one is to do with the performance of the loans. Madam Speaker, moving forward, I would like to inform this House –(Interruption)

MR NIRINGIYIMANA: Madam Speaker, I am referring to the midterm budget performance report of 2016/2017. Honourable minister, you are the one who presented that report; if you contest it, what should we do? 

THE SPEAKER: What does it say? 

MR NIRINGIYIMANA: Madam Speaker, it shows many loans and the expenditure so far. On Kanungu, they have spent 24.6 per cent. That is what the document says. 

Madam Speaker, I am a member of the Budget Committee and I have assessed and interrogated the minister. He knows that is one of the issues we have asked him to bring to the table but he is now denying it here. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I do not think it would be right to spend 24.6 per cent of a loan when we have no contractor on site. I will probably check these facts with hon. Niringiyimana and inform the House. He has not read the report and we do not know the context in which the 24.6 per cent relates. Therefore, we can crosscheck and inform the House. However, to say that you can borrow US$ 100 million and spend US$ 24 million without a contractor on site-

Madam Speaker, lastly, I want to thank the Committee on National Economy. The committee has now put in place rules and regulations on how we present these loans to them; for example, they require us now, before they approve the loan, to show evidence of counterpart funding, which was a contributing factor to the non-performance of loans. They also want us to show preparedness of the project before they approve the loan. 

As we said, besides procurement issues, one of the other contributing factors was the performance of different sectors; we borrow and yet they are not ready to spend the money. There are also issues to do with procurement. We are also coming here with a Bill to cap the procurement period from 180 days, or two years, to strictly 90 days. I hope that when we bring it here, the House will support us. We think if we do that, we will solve these issues. 

Madam Speaker, I welcome the discussion on how best we can improve the performance of loans when you allow the Committee on National Economy to do that. 

MS AOL: I seek further clarification.

THE SPEAKER: On what?

MS AOL: On that loan.

THE SPEAKER: No, it is not a general debate.

MS AOL: But we still have some burning issues.

THE SPEAKER: We have already submitted the motion to the committee; what are you debating? (Laughter)

MS AOL: We want the idle loans -

THE SPEAKER: No, you cannot just ask casually for that information; maybe if you formalise the motion. Can we finish? We are waiting for them to check that information about whether the money went or not.

3.31
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to stand under rule 50, paragraph (k) of our Rules of Procedure. Madam Speaker, you are in agreement with the House and I would like to propose a motion. 

We know that in Cabinet, we have a minister in charge of economic monitoring. We would, therefore, like to propose that the minister in charge of economic monitoring brings to this House a comprehensive report on the performance of loans and the availability of counterpart funding - those that have failed, those that have been provided so far and what level we are at as a country. 

This is because whenever the Committee on National Economy brings in their reports, they bring a general report on the performance of loans. However, now we have had an issue with counterpart funding, which is actually a problem even with the Auditor-General. The non-performance of most loans is because of counterpart funding. Can we ask the minister in charge of economic monitoring to bring us all the loans that have been approved and which have not had counterpart funding and what level we are at?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know the schedule of that minister. Why don’t we just ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to find which of them can bring that report? I am not sure whether the economic monitoring minister is the one responsible for this. Therefore, let us task the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give us an update very urgently before we consider these new loans.

3.33
MAJ (RTD) GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Bahati is the minister in charge of planning. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is the co-ordinating centre for all Government borrowing. If hon. Vincent Ssempijja, for example, wants to borrow as the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the Ministry of Finance is the one with all the facts. They know how much money hon. Ssempijja has under the agriculture portfolio. How can you tell us, for heaven’s sake, that it is because of different spending agencies; those spending agencies are under your control! 

The Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is the one who deploys all the permanent secretaries. He is the one coordinating everything. Are you telling us that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has failed to coordinate all the planning functions in this country? Would you like us to pass this loan request without knowing whether a sector has the required counterpart funding and the capacity to absorb this loan? 

Hon. Bahati, are you telling us that things have gone to that extent and the only thing you know is to go and accuse the committee before the President of the country? As members of the Committee on National Economy, we made a decision that no loan request will stay with the committee for more than three weeks. You delay things and cause pandemonium within the system and then you want to shift the blame. If you have failed, come to the Floor of Parliament and say so.

THE SPEAKER: Now honourable members, the request is big. Hon. Osegge, how far back do you want us to go so that we simplify the work of the minister?

MR OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, we could consider from the Ninth Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us start from the Eighth Parliament up to the Tenth Parliament. Give us the list of the loan requests we have passed, how many loans have been implemented and which ones are still outstanding.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, it would be better for us to show the performance of our entire loan portfolio.

THE SPEAKER: From which Parliament?

MR BAHATI: The current loan portfolio that we have.

THE SPEAKER: Not the current. What does “current” mean?

MR BAHATI: “Current” means most of the loans that we acquired from the Seventh Parliament to date. These are still current because we borrow for so many years.

THE SPEAKER: That is what we said - seventh, eighth, ninth and tenth parliaments.

MR BAHATI: That is fine. However, I would like to make one clarification arising from what hon. Guma has said. It is true that the Ministry of Finance coordinates the borrowing resources of the country. However, we should be truthful to ourselves. For you to say that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is in charge of the performance of all sectors of this Government would be giving the ministry powers that we do not have. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is the one responsible for the money that you appropriate and not the Ministry of Finance.

MR ROLAND MUGUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to propose that we give the minister one month so that he can report back to Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: The minister is happy with two weeks. We want the information so that we go into the second session knowing where we are. Two weeks.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE INCREASING NUMBER OF FOREIGN RETAIL AND WHOLESALERS IN UGANDA

(Debated Continued_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall use only 40 minutes. We had started the debate and four Members had contributed: hon. Lilly Adong, hon. Nambeshe, hon. Anna Marie Nankabirwa and hon. Musana. Let us just have a few more contributions on this issue.

Honourable members, this is a report from the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. We had started with the debate but the minister was not there so we had to stop. Therefore, those who contributed cannot come in again; it is on the Hansard.

3.39
MR RICHARD OKOTH (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I listened to the report of the committee and I must say that I am very ashamed of the Uganda Investment Authority and the supervising entity. The reason we have an influx of foreign petty traders into this country is because of the failure by the Uganda Investment Authority and the supervising entities to ensure that we only attract into this country people whom we regard as investors.

Madam Speaker, what is happening is that we are attracting entrepreneurs instead of investors. That explains why even when these people come here, they come as entrepreneurs under the guise of investors and they do not bring any money but only come with ideas, which can help to improve our economy and add value to our products. Now, because we are desperate for investors, we bring them here and even guarantee them loans. When you have such a person whom you have brought into the country and you have the responsibility to make them active, that is how they end up masquerading as traders. 

They are large scale and retail store owners and they are the ones running supermarkets here. These are jobs that should have been preserved for our nationals and never opened up to the foreigners. However, because the Ministry of Trade and Industry, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Uganda Investment Authority have failed to make a clear distinction between who an entrepreneur and an investor is, we end up with everybody coming here because they have a “friend”.

The problem is much bigger. We have people in foreign missions and when they go out there, they meet their friends maybe in bars or wherever and they convince people to come here, promising them a number of opportunities in the country. When these people come, they are introduced to the President as investors with ideas that can help us improve a, b, c. The President then calls the Uganda Investment Authority to help these people with loans and trading licences because somebody has promised to bring here cheap goods. That is how they end up in this country –(Member timed out.)

3.42
MS HELLEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good work. The report is rich with a lot of information. 

Madam Speaker, I read the report and found out that there is lack of monitoring by the Uganda Investment Authority. As rightly observed by the committee, most of these companies come and register as investors; for example, I read about a company called Equator Catering Limited, which was registered to open up a training institute but in this report, it is clearly mentioned that they actually offer catering services to Tullow Oil in the western region. These catering services can be offered by ordinary Ugandans here but they are being offered by those foreigners, Madam Speaker.

If Uganda Investment Authority was monitoring and carrying out serious follow-ups on these companies to see whether they are doing what they were registered for, we would not have such issues happening in Uganda. We have heard that in the Office of the Prime Minister, there is a unit for monitoring and evaluation. Still, they also have a minister in charge of economic monitoring. I wonder what these people are monitoring; what are they doing for heaven’s sake? 

The other issue is the high interest rates for Ugandans. They cannot compete with these foreigners because the foreigners get credit and money from their countries at a lower rate and come and invest here whereas Ugandans suffer because of very high interest rates ranging from 20 to 30 per cent. On several occasions, this Parliament has recommended the recapitalisation of Uganda Development Bank but to date, nothing has happened. 

The Minister of Trade and Industry should look at this as an informative report and look at the recommendations and act immediately. Ugandans have lost their property and collateral and businesses have closed because of very high interest rates by our lending banks. I beg to submit.

3.45
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri West County, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Government is the problem. First of all, when issuing a work permit, the permit must specify what kind of work one is going to do. Who issues permits to petty traders? It is immigration, and it should be the principle responsibility of Government to handle this.

Madam Speaker, when we were drafting the law for Uganda Investment Authority many years ago, we clearly stated that if there is an investor coming in with money, the only person he could come in with was a finance manager to oversee his money. However, presently, everybody is coming in with even sweepers and that is why we are having a problem in this country.

It is now urgent for us to have a law because sometimes people may hide behind the absence of a law. I will give you one example. On the Entebbe Express Highway, we are going to spend $476 million to construct four lanes over 52 kilometres while in Kenya they have spent $260 million to construct eight lanes over the same distance. So, you will discover that the Chinese have come here to rob us but they are not robbing us on their own; they use our own people to rob us. If our people in top positions are allowing us to be robbed, it is high time Ugandans rose against such.

Madam Speaker, many of the workers on the road - I have just gone there - are Chinese. This means that where we would be the ones mixing the sand, it is the Chinese doing that. So, where are we heading to? It is high time Government came up with a policy or a law to deal with that matter. 

I have been to India and China but I have never seen a black person operating a kiosk there and yet here, you find Chinese operating kiosks in villages and Indians operating kiosks deep in the mountains of Elgon; who allowed them to go there and where will I –(Interruption)

MS MUTONYI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give to hon. Nandala-Mafabi is that this influx of big numbers of Chinese coming in does not stop with trade but also continues up to the industries. Pseudo industrialists come in and they become spanner holders and electricians in those industries. If Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and Uganda Investment Authority went to those industries, especially from Mukono up to Jinja, you would find many Chinese and Indians doing jobs meant for Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, that is the information I wanted to give to hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you can judge for yourself; the matters we are talking about are very –(Member timed out.)

3.49
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Madam Speaker, allow me to thank the committee for work well done. I think our problem as a country is that we have failed to agree on our definition of an investor. We do not know who an investor is and the limit that we have given for somebody to be qualified as an investor is not put into practice.

Two months ago, one of the committees of Parliament gave orders to the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to ensure that those who have no work permits in Uganda should leave the country. Did that happen? I was in Gulu and an Indian who had no work permit was arrested by the police. By evening, they had raised Shs 5.8 million and the man was released instead of being deported. The problem in this country is that such things are happening and nobody is taking any steps to deal with them. We say that this time round, we are doing things differently - (Interruption)

MR RICHARD OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for giving way. I would like to seek clarification; what was the Shs 5.8 million that they raised for? We need to get the real answer.

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, I do not know where the money goes. I have given the information because one of the people who helped to have the Indian released from jail gave me that information. However, if you would like to have more information, then you should be the one to take it up as Government to ensure that something is done about that.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Akol, has he not been deported up to now?

MR AKOL: The Indian is still working in the country. This is what is happening in our country. We are here talking and lamenting when in reality there are Chinese who come into the country in the name of implementing the loans we borrow from China but at the end of the day, they just open up small businesses. In Gulu, for instance, there is a place which they have just opened up called Smiling Panda Gulu and it is just a dancing place. The money we have borrowed is being used within the country to run their business. 

This is what is happening in Uganda. Therefore, I think action should be taken now. If we do not do it, then our people will be slaves in their own country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.51
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka County South, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a lawyer, in legal practice I worked with some investors as clients; once in a while, we are required to help them either renew or acquire their work permits. One thing that I noticed is that in the immigration offices, the requirements for work permits are not strict; all one needs is to take the investor’s passport, fill a small form and they will stamp the passport and he will be here for as long as he has been given. 

The committee concerned needs to sit with officials from immigration and amend the rules used to acquire work permits, so that a person acquiring a work permit should have a bank account here and bring proof of employment. More so, the committee or members of the immigration office should visit this investor’s place of business to prove that he is working. 

I grew up knowing that Kikuubo, Arua Park, William Street and Katwe were areas for our local business people. If Government would like to encourage these investors, whether small or big, let us find a place that we can allocate to them so that we know where to buy Chinese products, for example. They can be located in Namanve, for example.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kafuuzi, what you needed to add is that the skills of that person should be unique and not available in this country.

3.54
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am the only Member of Parliament who has worked with Uganda Investment Authority before, and I worked there for 14 years. During that time, this problem was not as rampant as it is now. 

The problem we are dealing with is corruption at the Immigration Control Board because it is very easy. The Investment Code Act, 1991 is very clear on who qualifies to be a local and a foreign investor and the thresholds are clearly indicated. In that Act, schedule 2 lays out the negative list of areas where investors will not be given an investment licence. Therefore, that investment code practically negates the idea of foreign investors being licensed in certain sectors. That being the case, why do we end up with this kind of situation? 

The investment licence is a primary licence that investors obtain before they can operate in Uganda. However, before they operate, they have to obtain secondary licences and permits and these permits come from the Immigration Control Board. The regulations would require that before a work permit is granted, the Immigration Control Board establishes evidence of investment. 

It is, therefore, not just a matter of presenting an investment licence and you get a work permit. It does not work like that. We never used to do it like that. However, these days, if you have money, you just go to the Immigration Control Board and get a work permit. This is where the loophole is. We can debate this today and tomorrow but that is where the problem is. An investor or any other person will not work here unless he or she has a work permit. 

The second problem is enforcement. Many of these people do not actually have work permits but they are operating here. I do not know what is happening to the enforcement agency. That is where the problem is and it is just corruption. If you address the –(Member timed out.) 

3.58
MS CATHERINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the wonderful and comprehensive report they have presented to us. I would also like to add my voice to the honourable members who have contributed to this.  

These people that have come into Uganda are making our local businessmen go down. They have started setting up their own prices hence disrupting the work of our own businessmen, who are already paying too much tax. This is a real concern and we have suffered because of that. I would like to give an example of Indians in Kabale. They have actually colonised Kabale. They even do all the small jobs that you think cannot be done by investors. 

In Uganda, the law clearly says that a person who is not an investor is not supposed to enter into this country. However, I do not know what the immigration offices or officers are doing letting these people colonise Uganda. To make matters worse, Madam Speaker, these people do not save in this country; their savings are always sent back to their homes. When a country is robbed of its money rights, you know its interests and economy will be compromised. 

Their products are also of very low quality; they are fake. Although I am not sure, I believe that they usually change their dates of expiry. I think it happens in their supermarkets because I do not see them throwing away expired products. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Jalia Bintu takes the Floor, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Apac Model Primary School from Apac District. Their Members of Parliament are hon. Tonny Ayoo and hon. Betty Engola. You are welcome. (Applause) 

4.01
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for its detailed report. 

This problem did not start today. I remember in 2005, we had a heated debate when some of the foreigners ventured into pancake or kabalagala and mandazi making. We even had some people lining up along the roads to beg. We then resolved in this House that they should not venture into those areas because our people are fully involved in them. 

What hon. Nandala-Mafabi said is true, that these people are everywhere up to the deepest corner in your constituency and they do not have capital. The information we get is that they get people who have big shops and they are given those goods on credit. I will give an example of cement. They will come here, go down to the yard, get a lorry full of Hima Cement or Tororo Cement, load it and then go and offload it in their shops. Afterwards, they start selling it and start paying back in instalments and yet a local person cannot be given that opportunity. That is how serious the situation is. 

Madam Speaker, there is a lot of animosity that is coming out of people. Two weeks ago, you saw people in Kampala moving around. This is being caused by some of those unforeseen issues that are a reality. 

Madam Speaker, there is no country that you can go to and start working anyhow. You cannot go to any country and start selling necklaces, sandals, bags and toys in the name of being an investor. You will do that for just one month and in the second month, you will be on the run while doing your things from home. However, in this country, you find these people everywhere. Now, we are being told that when they are arrested, they look for money to bribe some people so that they can go scot-free. This is really bad. 

I saw the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives here; we would like him to help us and the country. We have vocational schools that we have appropriated money to in almost all the regions. We also have children who have been educated and have been trained in plumbing, electrical engineering, building and so much more and are out there on streets looking for these jobs. When I see these people carrying sand or even trying to fix timber, I see we are really at a loss. These are some of the jobs we should protect for our people. 

There is a time when Kenya proposed that they were going to export their- (Member timed out.) 

4.04
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the wonderful report they have brought to this House. 

Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that we always come here and agree on some issues, which are never implemented. In the Ninth Parliament, we said that rent should not be charged in dollars but I am surprised to read in this report that rent is still being charged in dollars instead of shillings. It is unfortunate. I think Ugandans probably have a sickness, which I cannot explain because if we agree on something and the ministry is directed and they do not put it into practice, I do not understand why.

In the report, the committee is telling us that some foreigners come as tourists or they come for some serious investments like putting up industries and they end up going for small jobs, which our people should be doing. What is the ministry doing? Why can’t they help us? I believe much as the ministry has a lot of work to do, this should be part of their work. The interest of the Government is to see the people enjoying themselves in their country and not others coming here to enjoy while our people are suffering. It is unfortunate. 

For that matter, can the minister promise us that she is going to terminate those licences, and they stop working immediately? Let them go back and do what they came for and not do what they did not come for. The ministry should assure us. I am happy the minister is here and she is listening. The minister should stand here and tell us that she is going to terminate their licences immediately. If these people are not ready to go work on the investments that they were licensed to do, they should go away. That will make us happy. It is not good to carry these people in our hands; we breast feed them and they enjoy the praises. Why should we do that when our people are suffering? It is really unfortunate.

When you read through this report, most of the things are very touching. You realise that our people are now competing for all the small jobs that they would be enjoying. We are competing with these foreigners that have money, a lot of experience and the capacity to know much more about business than us. Madam Speaker, you said that you went to the United Arab Emirates and you really learnt a lot and saw that they are advanced and yet we are still backward. Therefore, I would like to propose that the ministry – (Member timed out.) 

4.07
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to inform you that we are not yet colonised in Kabale and with the help of Parliament, we will not be colonised at all. Hon. Ndamira and I will remain there; we are still in control.

On the issue of these so-called investors that come to Uganda – it is absurd. We need to actually create a team of five or seven people to move around Kikuubo and see what is happening there. All the Ugandans were sent away. The only Ugandans around Kikuubo are porters but every shop is owned by either an Indian or a Chinese.

Those of us that personally reach there can really see that there is a very big difference between the Kikuubo of 10 years ago and today. There is no single big shop owned by a Ugandan in Kikuubo; they are all owned by Chinese and Indians. One actually wonders if these people really have licences to come and trade here. There are instances where even the porters are fellow Chinese and Indians. One wonders if all these people and their families came here and got licences to operate here.
 
Look at the issue of sand mining; they are still the same people and they even beat up the authorities. Recently in Entebbe, the Chairman LC V and his team were beaten up by people who were doing sand mining. They were actually in the lake! He was beaten up by the Chinese that were sand mining directly in the lake.

After seeing the authorities being beaten up on TV, the Committee on Natural Resources went there and we told the Chinese to go away but last week, we were told that they had gone back. You can imagine that impunity! Even when Parliament tells them to go away and we even talked to the police around the area to get into action, they have still gone back. It is too much.

When we went on our search in Karuma, we found that the Chinese themselves had a supermarket selling only Chinese products. Where is the trickle-down and multiplier effect in Uganda? What are the Ugandans benefitting from these people?

Ugandans came crying in the Committee on National Resources for compensation of their land in Isimba. The reason they are crying is because they had a stone quarry in the area and they believed that they would be the ones to supply the stones while Isimba was being constructed. However, the stone quarry was taken and they were not compensated. They are still crying about compensation and yet stones were part of the bills of quantities for the construction of Isimba. These Chinese came and took the stones for free and they did not pay for them. The stone quarry is now running under the names of Chinese. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Conclude on the issue of stones very quickly.

MR BARYAYANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We, therefore, ask ourselves, where are we as Ugandans? When you tell them to compensate Ugandans that owned pieces of land, they refuse and say that they will not meet more costs. The question is: why didn’t you pay this company for the stone quarry that was in the bills of quantities?

A lot of capital flight is going on and our shilling is going lower every day. This is because there is no trickle down and multiplier effect. Look at the car industry, there is no Ugandan who imports cars into the country. They are the only ones who import cars into the country and we do not know if Ugandans cannot import cars themselves. This is too much. Ugandans are crying and one of these days, it is going to cause a big blast. (Member timed out)

4.12
MR LUTTAMAGUZI SSEMAKULA (DP, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the good report. 

The term “investor” in Uganda is changing today; even refugees are almost being called investors. You find them meandering in the villages and when you ask them who they are, in political terms we know that they are refugees but the local people term them as investors. Even tourists today are called investors. We find many of them and when we ask who these people are, some people call them investors and others call them tourists. However, as Members of Parliament, we are only looking at Asians or white people; we should also consider the black investors who are coming from Sudan and Nigeria. I thank you.

4.13
MR PETER OCEN (Independent, Kole County South, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for bringing out the issues in relation to investors. 

The major problem we are getting in this country is non-protection of our local businessmen. Tororo cement factory, for example, is being run by investors and you will not find Ugandans employed there. When they produce their cement, they place their agents in all the towns where they take their cement. As I talk now, they have started even moving up to villages selling this product. We also have local people who get it on credit and are selling this same product. How do you compete with such a person?

Recently, in Lango sub-region, businessmen almost rioted and the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives went and talked to them. These people have started going to villages looking for small produce right from the village and they move from market to market. I wonder what kind of investors make popcorns and move with them from market to market. I think as a country, we must protect our local businessmen. Thank you, Madam.

4.15
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Makindye): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It becomes a problem when you are drowning in water and then somebody comes to help you but just presses you deeper into the water. It is true that Uganda needs these investors because of the developments, which we would like to have, and the knowledge that they come with. However, the problem is that these people have allowed a massive influx of quasi investors. Now our people are asking us what kind of authority issues a work permit to someone from Iran and China to ride a boda boda. It becomes a problem when answering such questions. 

This issue has created many problems. The rent issues that you have been hearing about in Kampala are a result of this very problem. When these landlords have 20 per cent of their clients coming from other countries, they feel it wise to pay their rent in dollars and as time goes on, they start feeling that it is better to get rent in dollars than shillings and they make it a policy under their own rules. That is the problem in Kampala now - paying rent in dollars. Therefore, we must find a solution.

The other problem is that it has caused scarcity of dollars in Uganda. Local investors do not have access to dollars in Uganda because whatever money these people get is changed to dollars and sent to their countries in form of savings for their own countries. 

The ministry and all other Government agencies should look into these problems. I am very happy with the report because it has brought out so many issues and I hope that the ministry follows them up and tries to solve such problems. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.18
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a very comprehensive report. 

Madam Speaker, I am beginning to appreciate the Government policy of 1972. A very serious disease is attacking the tourism industry, if I can be very frank. I have been going to a number of our local hotels here and most of their receptionists are foreigners. You can imagine a foreigner ushering in tourists. My colleague, hon. Kiwanda, has been promoting kikomando and you wonder how a Chinese or Indian is going to be talking about kikomando in Uganda and he is the one ushering in tourists.

Madam Speaker, Chinese and Indians operating businesses here illegally are not only occupying space for our local traders but they are also selling fake products. You cannot come in illegally and sell genuine products. We know what is happening in China; there is a certain quality for almost every country. Somebody was telling me that most of these so-called traders are escapees who have just run away from court issues.

Madam Speaker, I want to say that we have a problem because we do not have what to sell and what to buy. That is why you can find a Masai selling weed in form of medicine, or a Kenyan farmer selling apples; in Kenya, he is a farmer and in Uganda, he is a trader. The problem is perception, which my colleagues have been talking about. When a foreigner is in Uganda trading in imported commodities, the perception is that he is an investor. Now, people look at foreigners selling apples and think they are investors and you wonder how they are investing in apples. They are just from gardens and now they are investors. Even these Masai selling herbals; we are talking of traders but they are even encroaching on the space of our local herbalists here.

Madam Speaker, this is how I would like to conclude: As we lament, Parliament is the only voter- (Member timed out.)

4.21
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. These days when you want to say that something is fake or is not, you refer to Chinese. Somebody will tell you, “my phone is not Chinese”, trying to say it is not fake. To me this is something bad.

Secondly, our friend, hon. Kiwanda, has done a lot to promote the tourism sector. However, when you go to rural areas like Rubirizi, you find these people selling t-shirts of Queen Elizabeth National Park. A Chinese is selling t-shirts in kiosks and bark cloth pieces. Investors from India and China are now doing what was usually the work of our local women or even youth. 

The other day, I was at the airport in duty-free shops and Chinese and Asians are selling t-shirts. I think we need to put an end to this by regulating what they can do here and what they cannot do. By doing so, we would be creating some jobs for the young people who have nothing to do in this country. (Member timed out)

4.24
MR SAM BITANGARO (NRM, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a job well done and for a very exhaustive report. I would like also to thank my colleagues who have contributed to this debate.

My observation is that this debate needs some guidance maybe from the Attorney-General who is in the House. To the Uganda Investment Authority, who is an investor? The Uganda Investment Authority issues investment licences to investors in specific fields but that does not mean that it limits trade. This is because licensing can be done under other laws - in tourism, mining etcetera. Under any other laws, you can get licensed. You can get a licence to trade in the country without necessarily having an investment licence. I think the ministers in charge of finance and trade will agree with me.

Therefore, if you find a Chinese or an Indian trading and he has a trading licence and a work permit, why do you blame this Chinese or Indian? Why don’t we point at our institutions or ourselves? Why do we license these people when we feel that they do not qualify or they are trading in areas that they should not trade in? (Interruption)

MR OJARA: Thank you, my friend, for giving way. Other than what my friend said, there is also the possibility that it is very easy to get dual citizenship or citizenship by registration in this country without much hassle. I know that the best practice in other countries is that there is a residency requirement; you must have stayed in a country for a number of years before you get citizenship.

The problem is that if it is easy to acquire citizenship by registration in this country, somebody could acquire it and when they are a citizen, work permits, licences and investments – all those things are their rights. Therefore, I think there might be a lacuna in the law that needs to be addressed. You might see them as a Chinese or an Indian – I lived in America and in that country if you come around saying, “Blacks have taken all jobs and are in every area”, they will not allow you to say that. We need to look at illegal immigrants; it is not just a question of seeing someone of a different colour and accusing them yet they are actually citizens. Thank you.

MR BITANGARO: Thank you for the information. I would like to suggest that we harmonise our laws so that by regulation, we indicate no-go areas for foreigners and the areas which Ugandans should exclusively dominate.

4.28
MR TONY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The purpose of foreign direct investment is to stimulate the economy. The law also clearly states the areas where we need investors; they are supposed to come and help in areas where we have gaps. Unfortunately, there is a problem of coordination between ministries and agencies of Government in dealing with this, which is our greatest challenge. 

We need the Ministry of Trade and Industry to speak the same language and act like the Ministry of Internal Affairs and its citizenship and immigration control, and then the labour sector and the police come in for enforcement. If we do not bring all these ministries and agencies together, the problem will continue. 

The worst thing is that where these investors were supposed to train our business people to build their capacity in business, they have ended up doing it themselves. We need to build capacity of our business people to compete within the region, which we are losing out on. 

We have talked enough; it is now time for us, as Parliament, not to look at the Chinese or Indians but the Minister of Trade and Industry, the Uganda Investment Authority and the citizenship and immigration control department. We need to ask them why they are not acting. There are instances where they have gone to Karuma to find that there are many illegal Chinese operating without work permits and expired visas and sometimes they are bribed and these Chinese get back.  

As Parliament we must now crack the whip on the ministry officials who are taking bribes and getting our people out of business while causing confusion and giving the foreigners opportunity to employ their own people. You find that the Indians and Chinese prefer working with fellow Indians or Chinese compared to working with Ugandans; therefore, they are kicking them out of business. (Interruption)

MS ALYEK: Thank you very much for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to add some information to what hon. Ayoo has said because I have visited factories and hotels owned by the Chinese and Indians. Even somebody who is not learned, who could have been a prisoner in their own country, comes to Uganda and becomes your supervisor and yet you are highly qualified. In Lira last year, for example, there was an incident that happened in a bakery owned by Chinese who had employees from Lira. The Chinese urinated on two employees in the morning. The issue was taken to the police and they were arrested.

Madam Speaker, you cannot go to China or India and supervise these people in their own country. This is very unfortunate. I am sorry to mention it on this Floor but that was what happened in Lira. Thank you. 

MR AYOO: Madam Speaker, this Parliament will –(Member timed out.)

4.33
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you may notice, issues of immigration are very contentious. Outside Uganda, they are the major topics during campaigns. I happened to have been working in the Ministry of Internal Affairs and I am glad that this issue has caught political attention. The implementers have been experiencing these issues that we are discussing now. My humble prayer is that the Government encourages this conversation at policy level. 

Issues of foreigners working in the country are a multi-facet of several ministries, departments and agencies. We have Ministry of Trade and Industry, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the security organs; all those have to correlate ideas and see how to move forward. If the blame is on immigration, for example, haven’t all of you been seeing foreigners manning the gates at the entry to Munyonyo; does that issue only have to do with immigration? It needs a broader conversation and my prayer now is that, Madam Speaker, you direct that the policy on immigration and employment be produced in this Parliament and be debated. Thank you. 

4.35
MS PROSSY MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee so much for the report they have produced. However, there are some things I feel we need to look at as a government. 

I hear all Members talking about paying rent. How do they manage to pay rent and buy off people’s shops and then set the rent high but still compete with us, the Ugandans, down in the market? When the Chinese come to Uganda, when they go downtown they employ our Ugandans and pay them little money. They give them little money, they use them under very poor conditions and they make big profits. They bring fake goods to our market; for example, look at their juices in Kikuubo and compare them with the ones made in Uganda; even when you fold the paper they sell into two, you will see the difference with their paper and the one that Ugandans sell.

Madam Speaker, I think you also need to set up a committee to maybe go and carry out research and help the minister in charge of trade so that they know exactly what is happening. Look at the hawkers that we talk about here; they are being given goods by these Chinese to go and compete with our Ugandans on the market, and what they are given looks exactly like what Ugandans have.

The minister in charge of trade needs to carry out research. How come they are managing to compete with our Ugandans? We are crying that the economy is not good but they are managing and moving on; how come? You really need to appoint a committee to maybe help and inform her about what is happening. Maybe she does not know exactly what is happening. Our people are suffering. Thank you.

4.37
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. 

What is happening is that we have failed the growth of our economy. Uganda has got a very broad opportunity to help itself to grow economically. However, we have allowed ourselves to always continue borrowing instead of economically boosting ourselves. 

It is self-defeating that we have structures that are supposed to do each and everything and yet we cannot achieve what we want. We have the Uganda Investment Authority that is supposed to supervise, but it is not doing its work. We have those who are supposed to licence and licensing has to go through a process. However, what do they do at the time of verification so that at the end a person who has been given a licence cannot withstand what he had opted to do?

Madam Speaker, I think our ministers and permanent secretaries should really account to us. I propose that the minister responsible for trade brings their monitoring report to this House so that we get to know whether these people are doing their work or not. Without that, it becomes difficult to know exactly what these people are doing. 

I would like to know from the minister what exactly has been done with the investors who have failed to comply. In addition, I would like to know from the minister what platforms we have provided for our local traders so that they also grow. Investors come because we have opportunities that we are not tapping. It is, therefore, we who are failing our economy because if we are not ready and do not have enough capacity to do what the investors are doing, it means that we are offering the opportunity to the outside people.

Lastly, on the issue of capitalisation of Uganda Development Bank, the alternatives that we have are not helping our people at home. We have microfinance support centres in the region. I was in Adjumani on Sunday officiating at a function of Adjumani Town Council SACCO. However, the interest rates are very high. This means that we are very hard on Ugandans and are very soft on the outside people. 

If we can allow these investors to illegally operate in the country yet we are charging high interest rates for our farmers and small-scale traders, it means that we are not providing opportunities for them to grow. Therefore, I would like to ask the minister whether it is true that the money for the Microfinance Support Centre operations is highly taxed. In Adjumani –(Member timed out.)

4.40
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for its good report. 

The report has brought out the fact of unequal bargaining power between our traders and foreign traders. If you use the analogy of buying land and someone inheriting land; if you are going to build and you have resources which you are going to use to buy land while someone else just inherits land, this person will begin to build straightaway with that funding that you are using to buy land in the first place. If our traders are going to go and start buying goods and paying taxes and these people are merely getting them from bigger traders who lend out to them and at the end of the day, they just go and check out to see how much has been spent and how much they can use as profit, that is unequal. We also lose taxes in the process. 

In addition, I note a lack of will to enforce. I would propose that we have a multi-sectoral approach. We have the Ministry of Internal Affairs for immigration; Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives; Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the labour part; the licensing authorities such as KCCA for trade licensing; and URA to capture our taxes. Let us have those sit together and come up with an approach that we can use.

Secondly, the laws are not bad in themselves. The good provisions should be saved and implemented. Where the law is lacking, let us have reforms and amendments. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether you are aware that the Ismaili community get money from His Highness the Aga Khan to do business; they do not have to borrow.

4.43
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the propounders of this report. It is quite detailed but lacks basically three areas. 

I want to look at the diplomatic and trade relations of 1962 that Uganda executed with China, India, Japan and South Korea. This was the beginning of trade liberalisation and globalisation, which is not a new phenomenon in the economic context. Therefore, what we are seeing today is perhaps a reflection and an effect of those agreements that this report does not examine.

Secondly, as you are likely aware, from 1987 up to the current period, Uganda has signed over six agreements with China. These relate to trade, economy, agriculture, education and technology. Because of these, if you went to some of these Asian Tigers today – personally I have visited these areas – if you go to China to a place like Guangzhou and Jinan, you will find Ugandans owning restaurants and operating retail and wholesale shops in areas of textiles, shoes etc. 

When you go to some of the Asian Tigers such as Hong Kong – I was there last week – and go to Nathan Road, there is a complete mall called the African Mall where you find Ugandans, Nigerians and Kenyans operating retail shops. Actually, if you want African food, they will tell you, “Go to this restaurant; it offers your traditional dishes or dishes that you want”. Also, go to Japan to a place like Nagoya, Ugandans, particularly the Baganda, are selling vehicles –(Interruption)

MS NABILAH NAGGAYI: We are debating a report on the influx and impact of foreign petty traders on our fragile economy. Is it in order for the honourable member to start listing individual traders and cannot even relate the impact of those individual traders in China on our economy? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not know whether your case is that we should allow them because our Ugandans are also working there. Is that what you are saying?

MR MUGOYA: Madam Speaker, I am an international economics lawyer and I wanted to give, first of all, the historical background, the facts prevailing and the key challenges. Perhaps, it would have been in the wisdom of the honourable member to listen to my submission. That would have aided her to understand where we are proceeding and how we are going to proceed and come up with a legislation that will not – 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, proceed with your proposals.

MR MUGOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What I am trying to say is that before we raise the hammer and it hovers over these “foreigners” – in the global village we no longer have foreigners – we must understand something very important. Let us revisit all the various agreements that we have executed with all these economies and then harmonise the same with our proposals before we proceed to condemn the actions of Government. That is my humble submission.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mugoya, are you suggesting that between 1962 and now, we agreed as a country that people can come here and make chapatti and mandazi as employment? 

MR MUGOYA: No, Madam Speaker. I think what I am proposing is in the right direction. That should be the focus but in harmony with what is already on record. Once we do that, I will have no problem.

THE SPEAKER: I would have been happy if you had quoted for us from these agreements where we allowed this to happen, and therefore, say we are tied.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It would have been very informative for the House if the honourable member quoted for us the different agreements he is talking about so that we can know whether they are still relevant. However, you are also aware that over the years, we have been making laws and these laws have been setting procedures on how someone can start business. 

We are also aware that some of these people are actually trading here illegally, according to the report. Therefore, when you are talking about an agreement and we are talking about the laws here, I do not understand you very well. Besides that, you also have to be aware, from the introduction of this report, that the report was prompted by public outcry about the high level of unemployment of our people and the high level of mortality of businesses in this country; our businesses are not surviving and our people are being driven out of business. 

Some of the countries you are quoting are actually countries which are labour-deficient. They are even looking for people to work for them in their small shops. Therefore, I do not think you are bringing something very important, which is good for this House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know this is very important but I had planned that we use 45 minutes. However, we have used one hour and 45 minutes because of the importance of the subject and 23 Members have contributed. I would like to now invite the minister to respond if she wants to. 

I would like to remind Members that we have a responsibility to our citizens first (Applause). We cannot just say that because they are our friends, therefore our people can fall into the ocean. 

4.55
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to extend apologies of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for not having been here last time. I did express that through writing but there was miscommunication amongst us. I, therefore, do apologise and it will not happen again.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson of the Committee on Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the committee members for the comprehensive report that we received last time when we were here. I would like to thank them for the research they carried out. We are all fully aware, as highlighted here in all the submissions, that there has not been total coordination amongst the stakeholders who are managing this delicate subject, and that is what we must work on.  

Madam Speaker, who registers? There is Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, Uganda Investment Authority and all those agencies that have been mentioned here. We realised that we must go back to the drawing board and find ways and means of harmonising the issues that have been raised in this report.

The committee report has highlighted fundamental gaps that have tickled us and that need to be urgently addressed. There is also poor implementation of the existing legislation and policies, which include the Investment Code Act, the Trade Licensing (Amendment) Act, Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Act, among others. However, there are also issues of the low threshold of $100,000 required by a foreigner to trade in the country. That is quite low and we must review it. The inadequate collaboration amongst the various agencies of Government, like I mentioned in my preamble –

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members! Let the minister respond. 

MS KYAMBADDE: There is the high cost of rent and charging in dollars. For this one, we must bring the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development on board because they are coming up with a regulation and they promised that they will come to Parliament with it. 

We support the recommendations made by the committee to address the challenges of the influx of foreign traders. I wish to inform honourable members that we are also concerned. I remember when these issues were raised by the committee, I presented the matter to Cabinet and a committee was constituted comprising of all the sectors that have been mentioned here - the Ministry of Internal Affairs; Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives; Ministry for Kampala Capital City Authority; and the Ministry of Local Government. We have already finished our report. 

Fortunately, all the issues that have been raised by Members and most of the issues that were raised in this report are also in that particular report that we are presenting to Cabinet. We shall present it and we will definitely get back to the House with the decisions that will be taken herewith. 

We have taken note of all the issues that have been highlighted here and we intend to ensure that we amend some of the laws. However, the question is: What do we do now in the short term? There is a proposal to ring-fence some categories of enterprises like retail and wholesale and ring-fence some areas. However, the question still remains: who is a foreigner? We cannot keep looking at only the Chinese; there is the Nigerian, the Sudanese and all these other people. Therefore, those are some of the issues we have also raised and consulted about.

In addressing this major lacuna, we intend to amend some of these policies but we also have come up with some other policies like the distribution policy, retail trade regulations and national trade in other areas. We are also moving towards the local content Bill which was moved in Parliament recently. We intend to ensure that we fast-track that because it protects the local employers.

Madam Speaker, as the sector committee noted, the challenge of the influx of foreign traders is multi-sectoral like I mentioned. However, in an emerging economy, a number of dynamics emerge as well and they normally call for reforms and regulations. I can see that the rate of growth we are moving in now is immense and Ugandans need to manage their own businesses. Our economy is growing at a very fast rate whereas our laws had not anticipated this when we drafted them. Therefore, we are all mindful of that and we need to take immediate action.

Madam Speaker, I will present to Cabinet all the issues that have been raised here and also the report. I also look forward to the support of the Members. You have definitely supported us through all your presentations. I just hope and pray that you continue supporting us to be able to make the necessary reforms so that Ugandans may enjoy the economic environment in this country.

Madam Speaker, allow me, if need be, to present a detailed paper to Parliament after Cabinet’s meeting and explain all these issues highlighted here. I wish to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. You will present to us a report in the second session, which starts in June. Let us go to item No.8 because item No.7 is not ready.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is not the first time this particular subject has come up before this House and discussions have been held, although not on a formal report like it has been done today. 

I feel hurt really that a report was presented to this House and twice or so, the debates have been deferred. Today we seem to conclude the debate and then the minister is saying she will bring a comprehensive report. What we want is action on the recommendations in the report.

For that reason, Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence. This report is a subject of great concern out there and our people would like to see that we feel for them also. Therefore, I propose we conclude the report and adopt it. The minister will come and apprise us on what is going on. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report was presented and we have discussed it. I now put the question that the report be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, just to remind you, in the Seventh Parliament, we had a full ad hoc committee chaired by hon. Dora Byamukama. The committee made a very comprehensive report and it is somewhere gathering dust. Time is of essence and the citizens want answers. This can become a very serious social problem for our country. Please, act on it very quickly. Let us wait for your updates from the actions of the Cabinet when you complete, and do it quickly.

I understand the minister is not yet ready for item No.7. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As Parliament, we have adopted our report and it has recommendations. It does not do us any harm to ensure that our recommendations are implemented. If we do not do that, the people of Uganda are going to implement them their way. Recently, you saw what happened in Nakasero. If all Ugandans got up- The second session is in June and probably, you will come in July. 

Madam Speaker, everybody has been waiting for this report to see what will happen. They asked me recently, and I told them we have a report in Parliament and we would debate it and take decisions. Now, are we going to say the minister is still waiting and yet there was a report on this issue in the Seventh, Eighth and even Ninth Parliament? In the Tenth Parliament where they expect results, are we going to wait for the minister? 

I know this minister is very fast in her work. Let us give her the report and she implements it. If you would like to wait for Cabinet, let them sit in hours but we have asked you to implement our report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, we have passed resolutions which are contained in the report. Tomorrow, the Clerk to Parliament is going to write a formal letter to the minister and the Prime Minister telling them about what we passed. (Applause) That is what we do. We cannot implement the recommendations ourselves. I believe the minister understands the gravity of the situation. Also, the second session is starting on the 6th of June, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, which is two weeks away.

Thank you, honourable chairperson and your committee. Let us go to item No. 8. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2017” be read for a second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is not seconded? (Laughter) Okay, it is seconded. What are your reasons for the second reading? You must tell us why you would like to amend the law.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the object of this Bill is to amend Section 89G (a) of the Income Tax Act, Cap 340 relating to limitations on deductions on petroleum operations to bring it in conformity with the production sharing agreements; and to make consequential amendments by introducing a definition of “cost oil” and amending the definitions of “contract area” and “petroleum development expenditure”. It is, in simple terms, to bring in conformity the production sharing agreements, which we already have, with the new issues like cost oil and the contract area that have come up, so that we move and implement these agreements. I beg to move.

The committee looked at this Bill and they are now ready to report to the House for debate.

5.05
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill 2017” that was referred to the committee on 9 February 2017 and is now ready to report back.

Madam Speaker, the object of the Bill has already been presented by the minister. Members can refer to their iPads for the methodology we used. I would beg the indulgence of the House and you, Madam Speaker, that I address the observations and recommendations by the committee.

Madam Speaker, the committee scrutinised the Bill and would like to make the following observations:
1. 	According to the existing Production Sharing Agreements (PSAs), it is clear that the understanding of both Government and the existing licensees has been that there is a cap on allowable deductions for income tax purposes. The cap is set as a cost recovery limit, which has been specified in the respective PSAs. 

	This is evidenced in the economic modelling of the existing petroleum projects by the licensees in their various field development plans that have been submitted to Government for approval. As such, restricting the cap on allowable deductions will be a change in this position, which has always been understood and accepted by the Government and the licensees.

2. 	The effect of removing the cap is that Government will lose tax revenue, especially during the initial years of petroleum production. This is because the implication of removing the cap is that the licensees would first recover all their profits before paying corporate income tax.

3. 	The allowable deductions by a contractor in relation to petroleum operations are against the cost oil derived by the contractors from operations in the contract area. This will effectively revert to the agreed position in the PSAs as was provided for in the Income Tax (Amendment) Act, 2010 which was repealed by the Income Tax (Amendment) Act, 2015.

The committee recommends that the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2017 be passed into law. I beg to report, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: In effect, are you reinstating the 2010 position? 

MR MUSASIZI: Yes. Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table a copy of the original report which the committee prepared together with the minutes that were prepared in consideration of the Bill. I beg to lay them on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chair. Honourable members, that is the report from the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It has been signed by the necessary minimum of members of the committee. You can now give your comments, if any. If there are none, I put the question that the Bill be read for a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

Clause 1
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, clause 2 is about interpretation. I would propose that we stay it for now so that the definitions can be given when we come back.

Clause 3

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have an amendment on clause 3. Clause 3 is saying the Minister of Finance, by statutory instrument, can do some amendments. The person in charge of assessments in this country is the commissioner general. Under the Income Tax Act -(Interruption)

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. We have got two Income Tax (Amendment) Bills. We have got Bill No.1, which we are currently considering, and there is Bill No.2. I would beg you to cross-reference your Bills. - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which one are we handling?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, it is the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2017 that we are considering and it is not numbered No.1. The second one is numbered No.2 and they are -(Interruption) 

MR OKUPA: How can we have number No.2 without No.1? Can the minister clarify to us?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, the one we are considering is dated 18 January 2017 and No.2 is dated March 2017. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, when was No.1 laid on the Table? It would only be when the first one has been laid on the Table that you would bring No.2. Therefore, I would like to know which day No.1 was laid.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The Bill that is at committee stage now was read for the first time in this House on 9 February 2017.

MS KOMUHANGI: Madam Chairperson, I have a suggestion. If there are two Bills and one of them is numbered No.2, then the other must be No.1. It cannot be No.3 or 4.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, we are considering the Bill that was laid here for first reading in February 2017 as No.1. Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 3 do stand part of the Bill?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

THE CHAIPERSON: There have been no changes in the interpretation. I, therefore, put the question that clause 2 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.   

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2017” and passed it without amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

5.18  
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2017” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2017”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) (NO. 2) BILL, 2017

5.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2017” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, it has been seconded. Can you give your justification?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the object of the Bill is to amend the Income Tax Act, Cap 340 –
1. 	To provide for the exemption from payment of income tax on income accrued by a body established by an Act of Parliament to regulate the conduct of professionals; 

2. 	To provide for the exemption from tax of the income of Bujagali Hydro Power Project up to 30 June 2033;

3. 	To provide for the deduction of initial allowance for certain capital investments outside the radius of 50 kilometres from Kampala; 

4. 	To provide for transactions between associates to reflect the chargeable income realized in an arm’s length transaction;

5. 	To empower the minister to issue estimates of rent, in consultation with the relevant government departments for purposes of assessing rental tax;

6. 	To provide for withholding tax on winnings of sports or pool betting;

7. 	To provide for advance tax in respect of specific transport services;

8. 	To provide for requirement to report financial transactions;

9. 	To provide for a limit on the interest payable on unpaid tax;

10. 	To provide for a rate of withholding tax on winnings from gaming and pool betting;

11. 	To amend the formula for assessing the value of the benefit of a vehicle provided to an employee wholly or partly for private purposes; and also consider other related matters.

Madam Speaker, again the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development considered this Bill and they are ready to report to the House for debate.

5.21
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment)(No.2) Bill, 2017”, which was referred to us on 4 April 2017.

Madam Speaker, like the minister has said, we are ready to report back to the House. I would like to straight away go to the observations which we made as a committee. 

1. 	Clause 5 of the Bill provides that a person who, for the first time, places an item of eligible property within a radius of 50 kilometres from Kampala during the year of income is allowed a deduction for that year for an amount equal to 50 per cent of the cost base of the property at the time it was placed in service. While a person who places a new industrial building in service for the first time during the year of income is allowed a deduction for that year of an amount equal to 20 per cent of the cost base of the building at the time it was placed in service.

This is in line with the Government policy of industrial free zones to foreign investors to bring in foreign exchange for the country. It will also create employment opportunities for the rural population and will decongest Kampala Capital City.

2. 	A person who makes payments for winnings of sports/pool betting shall withhold 15 per cent tax. The current status quo is that the owner bears the tax of 35 per cent. This has further posed administrative challenges. 

It is, therefore, proposed to have the owner of the machine or casino and the winner of the game and bets share the tax, with the owner paying 20 per cent and the winner paying 15 per cent. Uganda currently charges the highest tax on gaming in the whole world, standing at 35 per cent without any levy on winnings.

3. 	Madam Speaker, clause 9 of the Bill proposes to introduce a new requirement for financial institutions, microfinance institutions, forex bureaus and money transferring institutions to report any transaction exceeding Shs 20 million to Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) every month, not later than 15 days after the end of the month to which the transaction relates or as it may be required by URA. This will place an extra burden on financial institutions and duplicates the work done by Financial Intelligence Authority, which is mandated to collect this information.

The obligation being placed on financial institutions already exists under the Anti-Money Laundering Act. Uganda Revenue Authority can get this information from the Financial Intelligence Authority without requiring punitive and bureaucratic reporting. The figure of Shs 20 million is so low that URA will get a deluge of information, which it is unlikely to process meaningfully. This proposal should therefore be dropped. 

4. 	Savings and Credit Cooperative Societies (SACCOS) are one of the ways Government is promoting financial inclusion. Madam Speaker, SACCOs have the capacity to reach the rural areas where there are no financial services as opposed to other financial institutions. However, SACCOs are subjected to taxation, which hinders their efforts to raise internal funds, which would be used for capacity building and growth. 

Currently, SACCOs pay 15 per cent withholding tax on interest earned by members on savings; 15 per cent withholding tax on dividends earned by members on shares; stamp duty on agreements; 30 per cent corporation tax on their surplus as well as operational licences. The committee recommends that the interest income be derived by SACCOs with a capital base of Shs 200 million; and those that have been in existence for five years or less should be exempted to encourage savings and promote growth of the sector. 

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that the Income Tax (Amendment)(No.2) Bill, 2017 be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to report. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the original report by the committee together with the minutes by the committee and other relevant information, which the committee used in consideration of the Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson and the members of the committee. I just wanted to know whether your proposal captures these people with machines in the villages because they have a free ride and they do not pay any tax to the local authority. They just collect money and take it. Have they been captured under this? 

The machines are in all our villages, where people use coins. I would like to know whether they have been captured because they have been taking free money from our people and they do not pay tax, not even to the local authority. I do not know whether they pay the tax to URA. That is what we want to know. 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My interpretation of the clause is that when we say that we are proposing a 15 per cent tax on winnings accruing from lotteries and gaming, the gaming that takes place in the villages is equally captured. 

However, in the villages, URA is constrained to administer the taxes because they normally operate in towns. However, when we impose a tax on winnings accruing from lotteries and gaming, even these young men and women in the villages who are involved in the gaming business should be captured within the law. 

THE SPEAKER: What about when they just make the citizens lose and the money is in the machine and they take it away? I am not talking about small money. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, today we launched the Lotteries and Gaming Board. Last time you actually requested for the regulations that were put in place to protect the citizens of Uganda from engaging in these activities in areas where they are not supposed to be. We are saying today that in these regulations, gaming and lotteries can only take place in cities, municipalities and town councils. 

We have requested the board to ensure that all gambling in villages is banned; it is illegal and should not take place there. We have also requested the police to deal with anybody doing that beyond the gazetted areas because it is illegal. I beg to lay the regulations on the Table, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you also regulate the time because people gamble 24 hours a day, even in municipalities? Recently, I was in Buganda and they were asking me what they should do because people are gambling from morning until the next morning in the municipalities. Can you regulate the time? 

MR BAHATI: We did not look at the time when we passed the law here, Madam Speaker. However, we looked at who should not be engaged in this activity and we said a minor and we defined a minor in this law as one below 25 years. Therefore, anybody who is below 25 years is not supposed to do that. With time, we can look at that as well. In villages, we encourage all Government machinery to take action to make sure that this is not done. 

THE SPEAKER: Does it mean that I can go there tomorrow and grab the machines? 

5.33
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We made a law recently about gambling and it was very clear that first of all, the place must be enclosed. When someone is going to gamble, they must go with an identity card, which shows that they are a certain age. Someone should not go with harmful weapons like a knife because sometimes one can lose money and run amok and kill people. Therefore, we have the law. 

Madam Speaker, what the minister is talking about is the regulations because we passed the law under your leadership. What I was trying to put across is that the withholding tax we are talking about is incumbent on the one providing the service or incumbent on the one getting the service to withhold. 

A lottery does not mean that URA must be in my company so that I can withhold tax; it should be that I withhold and make a return to URA. When I make a return, I can say that I got Shs 1,000,000 from hon. Okupa from gambling and I charged him 15 per cent and here it is. Therefore, what I wanted to put across is that you do not need URA to be in every trading centre or in every municipality or town council to administer the betting tax. 

The only important thing is that all people carrying out betting must be registered by the lottery board and be in a gazetted area, which is known in the whole area as a place for gambling. If it is not gazetted and you are got under a tree, according to this law that we passed, that person is supposed to be arrested.

Madam Speaker, if you have delayed to impound those machines in your place in Kamuli, you have made a mistake. The day we passed the law is the day they should have been immediately arrested. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I am not going to debate but I rise on a procedural matter. I will debate later. 

The way the minister has casually laid the regulations on the Table - No wonder, Madam Speaker, you were asking whether all the documents are there. If he had formally laid the regulations on the Table and distributed them to Members in their pigeonholes, we would be able to understand and not repeatedly ask whether the documents are there. Therefore, can the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development formally lay the regulations on the Table or have them considered on the Order Paper tomorrow, but also ensure that Members have these regulations distributed in our pigeonholes so that we are able to read them later on? 

As hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying, we took a decision in Serere District to ban gambling from the district but now that registrations are here, possibly they can be able to come back if they adhere to the regulations. However, that is a procedural matter that I would like followed so that we understand the whole thing.

5.37
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas I agree with the committee’s observation No.7, paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, concerning SACCOs, I would like to note that SACCOs are still in their nascent industrial stage. Most of the SACCOs in Uganda are formed voluntarily and they are dissolved voluntarily. Most of them have been started but have collapsed. It is therefore up to Government to make sure that they protect our SACCOs so that they can grow. 

The chairperson has highlighted some of the challenges that have caused them to collapse. I am aware that in Kenya, Tanzania and Ghana, the governments there have tried to protect their SACCOs to ensure that they grow up to a certain level by waiving some of these taxes so that the SACCOs can be able to grow. At a later stage, they are left to be independent and self-sustaining.

We are all aware that even when a child is growing, it starts with crawling and when it is about to walk, you hold its hand and then let it be on its own. I, therefore, do not agree with the committee’s recommendation that we put a threshold because even if we put it, what if these SACCOs, after raising Shs 150 million, decide to dissolve and form another SACCO? Shall we have control over that? What if this SACCO reaches three years and it cannot continue operating; what shall we do? 

I propose that if Government is really interested in SACCOs growing, it should give SACCOs a grace period without providing this threshold, so that we nurture them. We can help them build a capital base during this period and build resources so that they can be self-sustaining at a later stage.

This has been experienced in other countries where we find SACCOs performing. At an appropriate time, I will move an alternative amendment to the chairperson’s amendment. Thank you.

5.40
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion. Regarding gaming, I think that we have already made a law but what is on the ground is that casinos are still going on. They are still collecting money from the villages. What is delaying the implementation of this Act? Is it the regulations that are not there? Why don’t we have them quickly? The people are still being exploited; they get money from children and poor people. 

We are talking of taxing the proprietor and the one who gets the money. For us, we are firm that 35 per cent was deterrent enough but now we have reduced it to 20 per cent. That means that they will continue exploiting us. Why don’t we remain with our 35 per cent?

What about the 15 per cent? How are you going to collect it from the person that has gained? As soon as you get your money, you run very fast. How are you going to get this money? I think it will be very difficult to get this money unless you have proper regulations to capture these people that are there. Somebody must sit there to see who has won and who has lost.

Regarding the SACCOs, they are very helpful. However, because of the cost, they have become very expensive. The interest rate of 36 per cent is more than that of the banks. I think we need to support them with money and also free them from taxation so that they can reduce the interest rates and more people can join and save money for investment. I support the motion. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.42
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for the good report. Regarding the SACCOs, I would like to support your proposal that tax on interest earned on these SACCOs be waived. I would also like to add that you should include the tax on dividends and the 15 per cent withholding tax.

Madam Speaker, I need the attention of the chairperson of this committee because he is the one that will have the proposed amendments included. My proposal under the SACCOs is that you also exempt the tax on the dividends because it tends to lower the motivation for saving. 

I would also like to propose that you do not look at those SACCOs that have been in operation for five years or those that have a capital base of a certain amount. In order to encourage the SACCOs as a sector, at least for this year, let us do it for all the SACCOs rather than saying that you have this money and that money.

Secondly, clause 5 talks about persons who for the first time play and properties of buildings within the radius of 50 kilometres from Kampala be allowed a deduction of 50 per cent. I hope we can understand each other here. The intention is to promote investment outside Kampala to decongest KCCA, but now you seem to be giving that allowance to investors within 50 kilometres of Kampala. I think it should have been beyond 50 kilometres. If we can understand each other on that – The way it is worded seems to be giving preference to those that invest in Kampala –(Interruption)

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, my honourable colleague, for giving way. The proposed initial allowance is aimed at encouraging people to invest in the countryside and the 50 kilometres are outside Kampala. The radius of 50 kilometres is outside Kampala not within.

THE SPEAKER: Your report says within.

MR MUSASIZI: We need to look at it and correct the error.

THE SPEAKER: The idea is to get out of Kampala.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that. I think that is the idea - 50 kilometres beyond that radius and not within. 

Finally, there is the question of tax on betting games. Who collects this tax and is it possible to devolve this to the local authorities rather than raising it with URA? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I have seen what is supposed to be laid here but I would like you to do it formally. First, it should be on the Order Paper tomorrow - the laying of the Regulations for Lotteries and Betting. You need to present 400 copies so that every Member has their copy. (Applause) 

It was actually laid here and then I read that it was laid on 9 May 2017 and I asked myself how it was laid when it was not on the Order Paper. It was smuggled. Please, endeavour to produce 400 copies for the Members and it will formally be on the Order Paper tomorrow for you to formally lay it on the Table so that the country can know.

5.46
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to concur with colleagues who say that reducing the tax of the owner of the machine from 35 per cent to 20 per cent would be promoting gambling. It should be maintained at 35 per cent and the winner at 15 per cent.

Secondly, you mention town councils, but the majority of the town councils we have in Uganda, for instance Bududa, are rural-urban; the setting is literally village. Therefore, for the minister to say that they have helped to abolish betting in villages when you have included town councils is like adding zero 100 times -  you will still arrive at zero.

Madam Speaker, the other issue of Bujagali being given a duration of 15 years tax exemption is a killer, in my view. I hold a view that we should make it renewable at least two or three years to avoid operational hazards or any distractions that may come in between. If we leave it at 15 years, we may regret, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

5.47 
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for the work. The reason the committee gave to reduce the tax on betting from 35 per cent to 20 per cent, according to the chairperson, was that it was impracticable for the operators to break even thus pushing them to operate illegally. The intention of putting the tax rate at 35 per cent was not to promote the business of betting. This report, therefore, is very positive because the intention of the law was to avoid or limit the growth of that sector.

Although the chairperson brought this in, I suggest that for the benefit of the country, if more betting houses are reduced in the economy, the better for us. Mr Chairperson, you may not be aware but most of our young people today wake up and go to betting houses without thinking of anything to do. Therefore, when you come and say that you now want to promote them - because by reducing from 35 per cent to 20 per cent, you are promoting the business of gaming and betting. I do not know whether you have youth or young people in mind when you are suggesting this reduction.

Many companies around are paying 30 per cent for corporate tax. Why is it being reduced to 20 per cent for the betting houses? I would suggest that if we are going to have any reduction, it should not go below 30 per cent and for the winners I do not think even 15 per cent is fine; it is very little. Many of our young people will bear with that and continue betting. I would therefore suggest that it also goes to 30 per cent. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.51
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a job well done. I would like to begin with betting. 

Madam Speaker, if you go just outside this Parliament, you will begin seeing the betting zones everywhere in this city. When you go to the villages, it is worse. Families are breaking down. I am sure that in 2013, Uganda got about Shs 11 billion from this. The problem that we have now is if we reduce the amount, it is going to be dangerous. Remember we are talking about the future of this country. My view is that we should increase the amount from 35 per cent to even 80 per cent. We should not be discussing simple issues because we are talking about the future of Uganda.

Concerning the SACCOs, this approach of exempting some and including others - I may not go for it. We should not be promoting discrimination as a Parliament because this country is for everybody. We should be fair to all SACCOs. My view is that we exempt all SACCOs from paying all these taxes and that will save this country and Uganda will develop. I thank you so much.

5.53
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report. 

I would like to comment on the exemption of Bujagali. I am of the opinion that every Parliament must be given an opportunity to pronounce itself on this issue. Therefore, instead of proposing a blanket 15 years, we could do five years so that we are sure that the Eleventh Parliament can also convene and review. In case this Parliament makes a mistake, we have a remedy that can cure it.

Secondly, I listened very carefully to the justification that the minister and the chairperson gave here. My colleague mentioned that there are many illegal gaming and betting houses going on. They do not tell us the number of these betting and gaming companies that are operating illegally. 

I even found it more surprising that a minister comes here and reports illegalities and wants Parliament to ignore them. Instead of arresting or prosecuting those operating illegally, you come to Parliament to ask to reduce on the tax. If you want to help businesses that are struggling, how many businesses in this country are suffering and struggling with taxes? I have never heard Government propose here that you want to reduce taxes for those ones. I know many companies.

Therefore, I would like to support the proposal that we uphold the 35 per cent and even impose another 35 per cent for those winning. Secondly, the responsibility of collecting taxes must remain with those gaming and betting companies. We should not really tamper with it.

Lastly, on SACCOs, you know SACCOs are becoming a new vehicle that is being proposed in this county to help bridge the gap of financing, which is a problem in agriculture and small businesses. Therefore, we should exempt every aspect if we are handling SACCOs so that we can try out and see how people will respond. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.55
MR JACOB OPOLOT (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the rest of my colleagues in thanking the committee for the report. I would like to agree with my colleague, hon. Odur, on the issue of Bujagali. I am actually wondering where the minister is hurrying to by putting a 15 year waiver. 

I would actually agree with hon. Nambeshe that every two years, the more we are engaged in debating this, the more the beneficiary is cautious of ensuring a good service to the people. However, when you put 15 years - We had a problem with Umeme and because we had entered a commitment for a very long period, we had to swallow the bitter pill.

Therefore, I do not agree with a 15 year period. In addition, I would think that other people should also have the opportunity to do work. If you do everything for the future, what will others do when they come to that office? I think it is selfish to deprive others of the opportunity to also make similar proposals and they are debated in this House. 

On the issue of investments outside Kampala, I concur with those who have questioned this. When you talk of a radius of 50 kilometres, where are you starting your measurements from? I would think that we make it a radius of at least 50 kilometres, meaning that even those who go to Pallisa are catered for. However, if the same wording is maintained, I think it will indicate only those within the radius. We have to specify this. Where is it starting from; is it starting from Kawempe? This must be specific.

Madam Speaker, on the betting business, I completely concur with all those who are saying that the tax of the owner of the betting business is maintained at 35 per cent. I do not see why you should be very considerate to someone who is extorting money from poor villagers. You are so lenient but you are opening your eyes into the coffers of the SACCOs that are supposed to help the poor people access financial services. 

Madam Speaker, in that vein, I would think that when we are talking of exemptions for SACCOs, let us not look at any threshold. These SACCOs are a vehicle to enabling the rural communities access financial services that they cannot access through Government aid. In other countries, governments instead help build these SACCOs because the multiplier effect of their services is obvious. However, here we are instead looking at grabbing the little that they are working for –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I remember Madam Speaker was here when the Finance Act, which waived arrears of SACCOs from 2013 up to 30 June 2016, was brought. However, this time round, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development never brought that law to be amended. I think it is incumbent upon this Parliament, since we know the importance of SACCOs, to ensure that the minister brings that law, we amend it and accommodate the aspirations of our people. 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, it is not true that the waiver on taxes for SACCOs was granted through the Finance Act. It was actually granted through the Income Tax (Amendment) Act, 2016. I thought the record should be put straight.

THE SPEAKER: I think his concern is that no mention has been made of it. Isn’t that what you are asking, hon. Kakooza? 

Honourable minister, you are talking about giving waivers to encourage industries to move outside Kampala. However, for a long time I have been asking Government to give incentives to banks to move out of Kampala so that Ugandans can access services. They are being cheated out there. Why don’t you also give incentives to banks to get out and serve our people? 

You know, I had to beg the Cardinal to open a second bank in Kamuli. I had one bank and for two years I was chasing him until he gave me Centenary Bank but there is no bank in Buyende, Luuka or Kaliro.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, that is a good proposal but the current situation is that when we passed the agency banking amendment to the Financial Institutions Act, I think the issue of banking was simplified because we are going to have banks everywhere. However, for us to suggest that we give incentives – 

Most of the 22 banking institutions we have in the country are making reasonable profits. The interest rates they are charging are high. Therefore, for us to suggest that we give them incentives would be extremely difficult on the side of Government. However, we have simplified the environment so that banking and financial inclusion in villages can be okay and I think this will be achieved in a few years from now. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, my interest is that you make sure that the banks move. Are you aware that recently in Lira, there was a group, which opened and after two weeks, they closed, taking people’s money? People need proper banking. 

6.03
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to thank the committee for their report. It is true that we are trying to look at sources of income or revenue but there are areas that we do not need to compromise for the sake of getting taxes. 

Madam Speaker, about betting, we have heard reports about many children losing their school fees. When they are given school fees, they go to the casinos and lose all the money. Even deep in the villages, when you send a child to buy something in the shop, they branch off to the machines and all the money is taken. 

Therefore, I would like to concur with the committee when they say that a new tax should be introduced for those going to the casinos because this will discourage the practice. When they are allowed to enter freely and take whatever they win in the machines, it encourages betting. 

Concerning the 35 per cent, it should continue. I see that they have just spilt the 35 per cent to distribute it between the owners and the winners. The 35 per cent should be maintained for the owners of the machines and those playing the games should also be taxed 15 per cent. 

Finally, there are some places like Amudat District where these SACCOs are just coming up. When we tax them, it will discourage them and yet we are trying to promote household incomes. We should remove the tax on SACCOS so that all our people can participate in income generation. Thank you. 

6.06
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. On the aspect of gambling and other gaming activities, I do not agree with the justification given in this report. This is because what is on the ground is that with the 30 per cent, we have failed to discourage gambling. Therefore, if we are to achieve our intentions, we should even raise it to above 35 per cent. (Applause) On a lighter note, what I can agree to is the retention of 35 per cent for the owners of the business and 15 per cent for the players. 

On the issue of SACCOs, we should all be grateful to those who are participating in SACCO activities. This is what is giving a fair say to the Government. Therefore, I agree that taxes on all these items be removed. 

On Sunday, while in Adjumani attending one of their functions, they said that due to the non-waiver, many of the members of the SACCOs are running away because the individuals who join these SACCOs also end up borrowing at high rates. We want household income to increase but these are areas where people are investing in our villages. 

Madam Speaker, I would like the chairperson to clarify on one issue. Now that we are removing taxes from the SACCOs, how are we going to ensure that individuals borrowing from the SACCOs are not charged high interest rates? Thank you.

6.19
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to my colleagues in relation to the reduction of taxes on gambling. Betting and gambling activities, by their very nature, distort the economy. They disrupt productive activities and that is why Members have been raising this concern in this House. 

We have had several Members speak under matters of national importance, raising concerns about these activities in their respective areas. The issue is that these activities disrupt productive activities. That is why world over they are heavily taxed with the intention of discouraging them. 

In our case here, the committee chairman is telling us that the only reason they want to lower this is because they are experiencing administrative challenges in collecting those high taxes. However, it would have made more sense if the taxes were low and collecting them imposed higher administrative costs. Otherwise, telling us that because the taxes are very high and because collecting such high taxes poses an administrative challenge we therefore must reduce it is in itself a defeatist argument and we should reject it as a House. Therefore, I join my other colleagues to propose that at worst, let us retain the 35 per cent so that these people continue to meet this tax. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, on the issue of Bujagali, I would like to concur with my colleague, hon. Nambeshe, that we lower this to two years on a renewable basis, but we should add that this should be with approval of Parliament. The reason I am saying this is because we are already at crossroads. This country is stuck with some agreements or understandings that were made some time back and which span over a long period of time. Look at the case of Umeme and that of the Rift Valley Railways. 

Even when the Government of Kenya cancelled the concession of the Rift Valley Railways, we are still stuck with them yet we know that now that they cannot operate in Kenya, they are of very little significance. However, they are saying, “Should you tamper, remember the agreement we made with you; you will pay us trillions of shillings.” They are talking of trillions! Even right now, Government made commitments to pay corporation tax for some companies some years back. Even when Parliament regulated this, they are still stuck with that law to the extent that we still give tax exemptions to these companies. 

Madam Speaker, to avoid this kind of situation for this country, I propose and concur with my colleagues that let this period be reduced to two years, renewable but with the approval of Parliament. In this way, Parliament can have the opportunity to keep a keen eye on what these people are proposing because this country lacks patriots –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I have not understood the rationale. It did not come out in the report.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, that is exactly what I wanted to ask; what is the rationale for exempting them? Does it translate into lower tariff rates or not? We need a clarification on that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the clarification is that corporation tax, which we are talking about, is calculated on profits. That means they have charged us everything, removed the expenses and the remaining is what we are saying we apply 30 per cent. This has no connection. I do not know why the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is talking about this. This is corruption of the highest order. 
Why do you say that I, Nandala-Mafabi, who sells tomatoes, should pay corporation tax after all my expenses but that he who charges me even higher on power should not pay? That is unacceptable. What I am trying to say is that there is no translation in the unit cost of power, so I want the minister to help me answer why you want to exempt them from paying corporation tax yet it is on profits.

THE SPEAKER: In addition, if you recall, they were the first beneficiaries of the energy fund.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, let us be fair to Government. Honestly speaking, when you look at exemptions from 2017 up to 2033, how many years are those? Almost 15 years. The problem with these exemptions is the giving of tax holidays, which we cannot revisit when things start to go to the wrong direction. 

The moment we commit Government up to 2033, how sure are you that the environment by then will be constant? There is no way that anybody involved in investment will be at the same level after 33 years down the road. It cannot happen. In other words, if we say you are exempting so and so from corporation tax –

THE SPEAKER: You are supposed to be giving information only.

MR KAKOOZA: That is why we objected to it.

MR BAHATI: Thank you very, Madam Speaker. Hon. Okupa asked whether the measure we are taking to extend the tax holiday by exempting Bujagali from paying corporation tax for 15 years, which is under debate here, will have an effect on the tariffs. 

As we speak, we are paying 11.5 US cents. The reason we are doing this is because of the structure of our tariffs; Bujagali contributes close to 32 per cent of the cost. One of the reasons that contributes to this is that when Bujagali was coming in, it was at a time when we were experiencing a lot of problems in the energy sector - the load shedding - so, we took a decision then and it came in. This has to do with the cost of money they used to finance our dam and taxation.

Madam Speaker, this is how Government is handling this issue: We are restructuring the debt that they have to a long term debt structure and reduce the interest rate. However, for us to reduce the tariff from the current 11.5 US cents to close to 8 US cents – that is by about 2.5 cents or 3 cents; we shall give the final reduction - we have got to reduce the cost of money and at the same time continue with tax exemption –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, how will you control the interest rates? Did they borrow from you or they borrowed from somewhere? How will you reduce that rate?

MR BAHATI: We are engaging with the African Development Bank to restructure their debt and get money for a long period. It is because they have borrowed money for a short term and that is the reason why - 

THE SPEAKER: I wish you could do that for Ugandans. 

MS KARUNGI: I would like to get some simple clarification from the minister because I know that this Hansard will be read in the next five or ten years to come. I would like to know how much 11 cents is in our Uganda shillings today, such that we can move at the same pace. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the minister is not clear to us at all. If this exemption is given, to what level are we going to reduce the tariff? It will be from 11 cents to what? You have not made it clear to us here yet that is where we should be starting from.

MR BAHATI: We are reducing it by a minimum of 3 cents. 

MR OSHABE: Madam Speaker, there is an agreement in this country that there was a bad negotiation with Bujagali and that is why the cost of Bujagali is that high. We are here trying to give the same negotiators, who got us a bad agreement, permission to give an extension of 15 years. Wouldn’t we proceed better if the minister, before we consider his proposal, comes to this House with a clear procedure on how they are handling the issues? That is important because the way it is being presented here is not on record. 

Can we proceed in a way where the minister presents a clear plan on reducing power tariffs in this country and specifically, on the matter of Bujagali? The House will look and evaluate whether the issue can be handled in a better way. Thank you very much.

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think that would be a proper way. We can circulate the proposal we have to reduce the tariffs from 11.5 cents to almost 8 cents or 7 cents to this House, so that you can study it very well and take an informed decision on this matter. Otherwise, tax exemption is one of those proposals that we are considering and it is before us.

Hon. Karungi asked how much 11 US cents is in Ugandan shillings. You multiply by the current exchange rate. (Laughter)

6.22
MR ABACACON GUTOMOI	 (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My concern on SACCOs is: one, I do not know if the minister and the committee bothered to find out the status of SACCOs in this country, from maybe central region to other parts of the country.

Madam Speaker, the SACCOs in Lira and particularly in my constituency are all dead. One time I visited Dokolo to attend a meeting between hon. Cecilia Ogwal and the then Minister of State for Microfinance. The report I found was very simple, that the executives became very corrupt in all the SACCOs in Dokolo and therefore, SACCOs in Dokolo had died. What has risen up instead of SACCOs in Lango is what is now commonly called “bolicap”. President Museveni visited them sometime back and supported them with between Shs 50,000 and Shs 100,000 per group.

Madam Speaker, I know and understand the initiation of these SACCOs. Some of those groups that started earlier were supported, sensitised and educated on their roles. However, for Lango sub region, the executives decided to misuse the funds of the members and nothing was done about it. Eventually, the SACCOs in Lango died a natural death. 

Unless we now apply affirmative action for the existing groups in Lango, we will have no SACCOs that are successful - maybe we have one or two of them which I do not know. Now you want to share their profits yet the members used to borrow and pay the SACCOs some small percentage. The percentage has actually been very high because there was no regulation system to address this. Therefore, this may completely bring down all the SACCOs in most of the parts of the country.

Madam Speaker, regarding betting and gambling, I think I will speak here with confidence that the impact is going to be very serious in many families because the level of stealing, dodging and tricking parents will increase. The owners of these gambling machines wait for the young boys to go and do the business with them. 

We have been advocating that this gambling, which is not allowed in our culture, should have been wiped out completely, to allow the parents and the communities space to engage in income generating activities that can improve the livelihood of most of the family members. However, with this betting and gambling, I think we have gone an extra mile to cause chaos in many families. Thank you very much. 

6.26
Mr PETER OKOT (DP, Tochi County, Gulu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We all know that Uganda is an agricultural based country and the most productive members of our community are the youth yet they are the ones mostly involved in gambling activities. I would like to add my voice to what the other Members have said, that we should maintain the 35 per cent for the owners of the gambling machines. If it were possible, we should increase the tax to 50 per cent for the winners so that it acts as a deterrent to people to move away from gambling activities.

On Bujagali, I do not know what has excited the committee to give a 15-year tax waiver. We are burning our fingers. If the Inspector General of Police, Kale Kayihura, hardworking as he is, has been added only three years -(Laughter)- then why give 15 years on something we have not yet even tasted. Honestly speaking, we are saying this in good faith. We are not saying Bujagali should not be given a tax waiver but let us have it renewable. 

What is the challenge here in accepting the two years or what hon. Gutomoi proposed? Let us carry our cross. Let the Tenth Parliament give it five years and leave it to be reviewed by the next Parliament. If they find that this Parliament did something wrong, then they will review and still give them some other years. So, I concur that giving a blanket 15 years is a disservice to the country. Thank you.

6.28
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja):  Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee. However, on a sad note, I know that our dear Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development cannot do this but technical people can mislead politicians. Hon. Bahati and the chairperson of the committee are good people but are just misled. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, on the issue of gambling, when we came to Parliament, we used our Bibles - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, hon. Waluswaka has said that the technical people are the ones who mislead the ministers. I know very well that the minister is a gentleman well equipped with financial knowledge. Now, if the minister with those qualifications cannot understand, how could you, the honourable member who is not a minister, have understood that this is a wrong thing? How come you are saying the minister has been misguided by the technical people? Are you in order to say the minister cannot understand anything and that he is vulnerable to being deceived? (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Can you substantiate how the minister has been misled? 

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my senior elder. From what I see, the chairperson and the minister are innocent people. (Laughter) I would like Members to look at the other bench where there are five technical people –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, those people are not in the House; do not talk about them. 

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, when we came here, we took oath using the Bible. The Bible I held in my hands does not allow gambling in any way. While we would like to get money, we should get it in an honest way. We should not get money in a way which demeans God. Gambling is bad and people are losing; out of 100 people, only one wins. 

Honourable minister, have you calculated the losses we have gone through? With this hunger, people are not working but they are busy gambling and Parliament is putting pressure on you to provide money to buy food relief. I would like to request this House, in good faith, to agree that gambling be scrapped. If it is to be there, taxes levied should be put at 95 per cent. (Laughter)

MR BURUNDO: Thank you very much, hon. Waluswaka, for giving way. Uganda is good at making very beautiful laws but at the end of the day, we do not put them into action. We are now saying gambling should be in town councils, municipalities and cities. Indirectly, we are saying gambling should continue but which is very dangerous. 

I was also boiling and I stood many times but I did not catch the eye of the Speaker. I have a strong opinion that gambling must stop completely because it is ruining our culture. Stealing has become rampant.

The second point I want to make –(Interjection)– I also want to inform my colleague here about the taxes on SACCOs. Our people are suffering. They go to banks like Centenary Bank to borrow money at a very high interest rate. If we are really serious, we should completely abolish taxes on SACCOs so that our people can borrow from them instead of going to banks because at the end of the day, the banks sell their houses and land. You are aware of the biting poverty going on. Please Members, when debating, let us get very serious. 

6.34
MR MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani County East, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am extremely happy but I pray Members get more serious about the issue we are discussing. There is a cold war going on against the citizens of Uganda. I think most of us must have forgotten that in early 1990s, Sudhir introduced the scratch-for-cash lottery in Uganda and you would get the city covered with papers. What was the result? Show me how many Ugandans have become as rich as Sudhir. That is why I am saying we are only dilly-dallying on what we know. 

In taxation, you tax the amount of money you can estimate. Do we have a tracking system to know how much people are earning before we can talk about 35 per cent tax? If not, then that is not good. First of all, I would like Government to deny what I am saying and to prove they have a tracking system that gives them how much people in gambling earn for Government to levy such and such a tax. We should charge an income that we exactly know. 

Madam Speaker, because of that, I would like to disassociate myself completely from that argument and say that we should say no to –(Interruption)

MR AYOO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give the honourable member and the House on gambling is that at local government level, most districts are trying to abolish gambling. At national level, we are clearing them by levying taxes and yet local governments do not want it. 

This brings very serious conflict of interest in eradication of gambling between the centre and the local governments. Once these people get the tax clearance, then they will move away. Therefore, let us just get rid of this gambling for now, honourable minister. We can get money from elsewhere. This money has never made any Ugandan rich, Madam Speaker. That is the information.

MR DULU: I said I completely disassociate myself with gambling in Uganda; it must be abolished from now. 

On SACCOs, Madam Speaker, you know very well that when a child is born, that child is first fed on milk; otherwise, you risk the child getting kwashiorkor. Definitely, the SACCOs we are talking about are still children that are supposed to be fed on milk. However, we are here pretending to be feeding these children on matooke, kalo and everything and you see the kind of hair they are having now; it is brown. That is why SACCOs are closing with members running away. Why not? 

Therefore, honourable members, let us be clear and say that these SACCOs should be fed on milk and we look for it. There is nothing like, “we are going to tax”. We should instead encourage them by giving them some incentives and not extorting them. I am sorry to use the word, “extortion” but we are extorting them instead of encouraging them and yet when outsiders come, we encourage them and give them all sorts of avenues to encourage them do their business. (Interruption)

MR MUYANJA SSENYONGA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to support what my colleague has said because recently, SACCO members brought petitions to some of us, including a letter written by His Excellency the President of Uganda, on 23 May 2015, requesting for the total abolition of SACCO taxes. A copy of that letter is here. There is also a similar letter from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development over the same. 

Madam Speaker, the SACCOs are locally established; people are just trying to organise themselves in small businesses, and this was clearly indicated by His Excellency the President. How come that we, the honourable Members of Parliament, can now go ahead and say we should tax them?

6.40
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We need to look at the scope as honourable members have said - I mean the negativity of the gambling machines in this country. First of all, all these machines are imported. That means loss of foreign exchange. Secondly, the people who own the machines are mostly non-Ugandans. That means we are not gaining much out of those machines. 

Another issue is about criminality. Fifty per cent of the people who go for gambling are criminals - (Interjection)- Yes! This is according to my understanding. That is true because when you go to western Uganda at the moment, we are harvesting coffee and the people who steal coffee are the very people who go for gambling –(Interjection)– Yes, most of them - actually, 50 per cent. You see, gambling is not usual business. The people who go for gambling are those who want to make cheap money. They want to make cheap profits. 

My proposal about gambling is that if it is to remain here in Uganda, a professional gambler should have an identity card for us to know he is a gambler. (Laughter) Secondly, gambling should be in urban places like municipalities and cities where we can identify places or casinos where people can go and gamble. We can then know that the people who are going there are known by the security.

Thirdly, I propose that the taxes go above 50 per cent so that the people who go for gambling know that what they are going to do will put them at risk of losing a lot of money. As far as the Uganda Revenue Authority is concerned, I hear they are supposed to get taxes from those people but how do you go to those villages and tax such people? That is why I suggest gambling should be in cities and municipalities where URA can easily access all those machines because I do not think those machines will be electronically connected to URA. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.43
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Members for the debate and the presentation. 

Gambling is a game meant for the rich who only want to pass time through spending their money. However, many times, I have witnessed people who are jobless gambling from morning to evening. Where do they get that money from and yet many times they are just idling, shunning productive work in the gardens and other service sectors?
 
I discourage gambling because first of all, it is ungodly. Also, I would request that if there is any kind of taxation, it should be so high to deter people from going to gamble. (Applause) Our country does not benefit much from such money; it goes back to their countries. If you do some research, you will discover that most of these centres are owned by foreigners, especially Indians, who keep on repatriating the monies back to their home country.

Madam Speaker, on SACCOs, instead of taxing them there should be a kind of motivation to help these people work more. They have played on the ignorance of the people in the villages there. True, they tell them they are charging two per cent per month but when that is added up, it goes to 24 per cent in a year. Others say it is three per cent and when added up, in a year it is 36 per cent. So, who is really being cheated more? It is that low person who wants to come up. If we do not encourage them by waiving the taxes, they will not develop into village banks and if they do not develop further, we will have a crisis. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.46
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been a little bit perturbed because I did not know where to start from on this debate. I am someone who believes in paying attention to detail and doing concrete analysis, scrutiny and interpretation. 

Madam Speaker, it still defeats my understanding up to now as to why, for example, the tax on lottery and gambling is being levied. Is it a deterrent measure or for revenue collection? I have been hearing Members advocating for this heavy payment so that it deters the activities of gambling. However, what is the Government saying? Do they want to collect more revenue or to deter the activities of gambling? Until the minister pronounces himself on this, I still find it very difficult to join this debate.

Secondly, there is the issue of the Shs 150 million threshold. I think, honourable minister, you should know that some of these SACCOs are agricultural sites and to the best of my knowledge, agriculture has a tax waiver. So, how do you now consider some of these SACCOs that are doing agriculture? Are you going to give waivers to all of them even when they have increased their savings up to over Shs 150 million? The narrative does not come out. 

I would, therefore, task the minister to justify his proposal in far as the amendment of the Bill is concerned. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have debated quite a bit, but it seems there are many different positions, which we need to reconcile either to give the tax entirely to the operators or to share it with the winners or to tax the winners higher.

There is also the issue concerning Bujagali where we have not understood the rationale for the proposed tax exemption. Therefore, I would like to defer debate on these matters to – When can we have the answers, honourable minister?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we could have the answers on Thursday earliest. However, we have a number of other Bills, which are clear and straightforward. We could deal with these as we give answers on Bujagali and also decide on which way we would like to take on the lotteries and gaming, which is regulated by law.

Madam Speaker, if you would like to ban lotteries and gaming, the fast way is to bring a Bill here and repeal the one that we passed. However, if we want to regulate and balance this Act with taxation, then we talk about taxation. Otherwise, we cannot mix banning and taxing. They cannot work together because we already have a law that regulates it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.50 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 10 May 2017 at 2.00 p.m.) 

