Tuesday, 4 May 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliamentary House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Vice Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE INTERIM ELECTORAL COMMISSION BILL 1994

MR ABU MAYANJA (Busujju County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Chairman. When the House adjourned last night I was explaining the matter about the alleged harassment of Itwonga family especially his mother and I am glad of my Colleague the minister of State for Internal Affairs is nowhere I did not - report that there was no violation of human rights when I was in Government but they are once there when I am not there what I felt was that, at that time in fact the Police of Government is to accord and promote human rights unlike past Government this Government does not instruct or tell or authorise members of security forces to violate the human beings or citizens.  But being the case if any soldier or a Policeman or a member of security forces does so on his own to commit an offence and if the Government knows about it that person is punished that has been the position of the NRM Government.  

But my complaint was that when the matter of the alleged harassment, arrest and so on at the house of Itwonga family with his aged parents was raised in this House the hon. Minister immediately stood up and defended the policemen although he had not had an opportunity in the major of the case of having carried out an inquiry to establish whether there was truth or otherwise in those allegations and I want to say that, very, very important that this very good policy of the Government should not be a compromise.  Government must continue to accord human rights and if any person on their own goes out of that the Government should continue to punish those people they should not be defended for their wrongful actions. 

I will not take too much time of the House but, I want to say that in order for the proposed elections to have meaning they must of course be held during an atmosphere of peace and security. (Applause) The Government has tried to do this until very recently when we show these things in Mukura and also here in Buganda.  Now, me I do not believe because, I am a federalist. We, federalists, we do not have army and we do not support acts of lawlessness in this country -(Applause) But it is very, very important.  

The other day, the House did not have an opportunity but this House expressed itself regarding the terrible activities that took place in Atyaka few days ago.  We want when we go for elections whether they are presidential or parliamentary or local councils we want those elections to be an expression of the will of the people of Uganda and they should be held everywhere and people know that for the C.A. Elections there were some problems in the North about registrar, about registration because of this Kony gentleman.  Kony is not supposed to be a gentleman because he is a very bad person everybody noted we have condemned his activities.

Some people have started saying, because if we want we are expecting these elections either late this year or early next year, we do not have much time to ensure that peace reigns throughout the whole country.  The other day I read an article in Ngabo Newspaper, yesterday I was reading about the Mayor of Kampala and other people have given views that the Government should as in the past approach this problem of bringing peace and defeating the rebels by the stick and the carrot has always been there and it is even on our Statute Book, the Amnesty Statute is there. So, I do not see why you should reject before hand an idea of holding talks with these people who are disturbing the liberty of the people of Uganda in the North -(Interruption) 

MR OBWANGOR: Thank you very much Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor of the House and the august House, we have sufficient power to strike the rebels but there is no willing to do it, I will tell you why, because throughout Uganda it was legislated each person of the age of 19 is a member of RC and in every village we have RC 1 secretary, RC 11 secretary, RC 111 secretary, RC IV secretary and RC V secretary, but there is no coordination on top of that we have a special branch we have the Police and then we have the Army Intelligence.  These people are not organised because I wrote a paper two or three years ago on national security it was not even answered by the National Secretariat of the NRM  -(Interjection)- therefore, there is no will to undo  why they want us in confusion. (Laughter)

MR MAYANJA ABU:  Mr Chairman, I do not know about that, I think there is a way even now as I speak we all know His Excellency the President is these and talking to military officers and they are planning.  But all that I am pleading is that, no methods should be ruled out in advance.  If has happened in the past, we can bring about peace by talking to Kony.  Let us talk to him, we have talked to other former rebels and some of them are Members of this House.  (Interruption)

COL. SERWANGA LWANGA.  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I want to give hon. Mayanja information, that the government of the national Resistance Movement has gone all the way even to talk this Kony.  Last year in the month of April or March we set talks in Gulu with Kony and as we were talking how, went and attached our unit, in fact, he was lucky because I was going to attack it; a Commander sent a message that, I see these people moving because they were in Chwero and they were moving leaving Chwero then I said, I want an order to attack them the Division Commander said no, do not attack them because we have a cease fire.  They went ahead attacked that unit killed soldiers and continued the war.  

Secondly, when hon. Abu Mayanja says that all methods should be used, we have talked to one of these rebels even Otai, we have made contact for him to come but he is there dodging, there is hon. Omaria we talked to him he came, Agrey Awori was also a rebel at sometime he came, the vice president under Lutwa’s Regime we talked to him he came, but I find it a bit difficult for somebody who has committed crime to the people of Uganda instead of taking him to court we should bring him back and give him a red carpet, because Kony has actually destroyed Uganda, he has destroyed the people of Uganda he has killed them and I thought we should also bring justice to people.  A man who has maimed people’s children, a man who has killed the people, I think also we politicians we should also when we are debating - okay, Itongwa, Itongwa went and killed the policeman attacked a policeman not knowing at all and now you say we should continue talking to them fine, you can talk to them but I also request that when you have talked to them allow us to take them to court, so that the courts of law should give judgement.  Do not give them amnesty when they have liked us and when they have killed the people of Uganda.  I thank you, Mr Chairman. (Applause)

MR MAYANJA ABU:  Mr Chairman, I think the |House is very grateful for that information from the hon. Member. The responsibility for the maintenance of order, peace and good Government in this country of course primarily first and far most on the Government and if the have made the assessment and they have come to the conclusion that speaking, talking will not be of any use for us back benchers our duty is to give advice and that is what I was giving and in the same vain I will say that I am a little perturbed about the relation with our neighbours. It is a cardinal principle of international relations that one should be friendly with the neighbour, because you cannot choose your neighbours they are always there.  We can afford to quarrel with people in China, in Japan, anywhere in Europe, in Latin America, the people who are our neighbours they are two they are to close for us and good sense, good policy, good politics dictate that we should always be on good terms as far as possible with them.  It is very unfortunate that - somebody has whispered that it is a two way traffic I am not blaming our Government I am just saying that I am a little concerned about the - because, our neighbour Kenya, Sudan, Zaire, now days when you are in Uganda you get a kind of atmosphere that we are surrounded by people who perhaps not to friendly disposed to us.  

Now, the President has just appointed perhaps ably, the following Minister who has sat there and really he has got a lot of diplomatic finest and I think hon. Members have notice, he has even changed his attire from the Kaunda suit to a large so he is very diplomatic, very able very effective.  We want under his guidance and leadership we wish that the relation between Uganda and its neighbours should be improved immediately so that -(Applause)- when these relationships are good you cannot talk of those countries harbouring for instance, enemies of Uganda rebels people like that, you know this thing happen when relationship go sour.  I have no prescription for this but I can only say that we should really realise if the present government and it is in our interest always to ensure that we get on well with then that is according to the book on international relation.

Now, finally, the people of Uganda where I am going to vote they are very, you know, Government has carried out one of the most successful policies has been that of privatization in my opinion because, I represent a coffee growing area people’s coffee is bought there is no longer a question coffee not being bought because there is no crop finance.  The solution of the problem of crop finance is very, very, important milestone of success to the credits of the NRM Government.  Because when people are poor they cannot exercise their political rights very well they can be diverted into some other things, people know in the CA Elections there was a tendency which was not here in the previous elections voters to be influenced by cash considerations, payments and so on, that is so because of - but part of it was called general poverty whatever, now it is very important, therefore, if our democracy is to be preserved that we continue and improve and enhance the policy that bring income into the pickets of our own people if we do that this bill when it is enacted in law will help us and with those observations, Mr Chairman, I would like to say as I said at the beginning that I do strongly support the Bill. (Applause) 

MR BUTIME (Historical Member): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I support the Bill and my contribution is on Clause 9, 1(e).  Clause 9 1(e) talks about civic education and I wanted to say that last year when we held Constituent Assembly Elections there were a lot of groups which were organised in the form of civic educators but, these groups had actually been sleeping opposition movement and even people who had been hiding from the law when the issue of civic educators came out they also came out and became civic educators and at the end of the day some of them were told to fall because the work they were carrying out was definitely anti - peace, anti-NRM government and was going to disrupt the smooth running of the elections of Constituent Assembly delegates.  

I hope that when a new interim electoral commission is appointed I hope the chairman this time will have the courtesy to use national security agency to advise him on what kind of civic groups which should be allowed to participate in the coming of elections, otherwise the Chairman may have a few embarrassments.  Mr Chairman, I said that the will have the courtesy that is the word I used I did not say he must, I said he will have the courtesy to consult and be advised.  (Interruption)

AN. HON MEMBER:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. From the area where I will be contesting in the C.A. Election our experience was likely different from that which the Minister is trying to convey.  We have the civic educators particularly the Joint Christian ones, that were the people who were making people realise what election was all about, they were teaching people the right thing, but to our surprise they were stopped and at a stage when the people were beginning to learn what the voting and the rights of the people who were going to vote.  

So, I think it is not correct to say that these civic educators were misleading people, maybe, if the Minister had some criminals who joined them I think they should have been isolated these criminals rather than ban the all group which in our view was doing a good job.

MR BUTIME: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  That is the experience of the hon. Member and I was giving my own experience. Now, if I may answer a few points which were raised yesterday during my absence because I had some other duties to perform.  These points were raised yesterday by the former Attorney General and Third Deputy Prime Minister.  

On the question of the Constituent Assembly consultation meeting in Lira, I wanted the hon. Abu Mayanja to know that every C.A. delegate in Uganda here is free to consult his electorate in his constituency any time that one is very, very simple and very clear. In case of hon. Cecilia Ogwal the consultative meeting she was going to hold in Lira had the following dimension; delegates were invited from other areas outside Lira Municipality accompanied by age group dancers.

Secondly, party uniforms, party colours were also displayed in the Municipality, and higher profile multi-party campaigners were also invited to address the consultative meeting. Now, Lira authority having seen what might happen and what kind of dimension consultative meeting was assuming were worried about the possible break of peace and they advised the Police under Section 33 of the Police Statute to dis-allow that particular consultative meeting.  

Hon. Wanendeya knows very well that hon. Cecilia Ogwal has the propensity, the tendency of organising political rallies under the guise of celebrations funerals cultural baptism or ceremonies, etc, and therefore, she knows what she is doing and she knew what she was doing in Lira at that material time. You are also aware that we have tried to restrain ourselves as much as possible to make sure that she goes about her business as she wants.  Mr Chairman, therefore, hon. Mayanja should not have misled or to disorganise -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. Is it in order for the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs to mislead us whereas hon. Mulondo also had other people from other constituencies to come and address those crowds, is the Minister a good thing to know what hon. Cecilia Ogwal was going to and therefore is it in order for him to tell us stories.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is quite in order for him to tell you the difference. (Laughter)

MR TUTIME: Thank you very much Mr Chairman. I think hon. Wanendeya now is satisfied with the Chairman’s explanation. The former Attorney General is the very person who advised government when he was the Attorney General in the following issues; political parties not banned, political parties activities not allowed, this was government position and it was hon. Mayanja’s position before the 18th of November 1994. (Applause) 

Today 4th and yesterday 3rd May there has been change of position and he is now condemning he is now taking back the advise which he gave them simply because I think he holds a in Kiswahili; that one is called ‘siyasa yaumalaya’ (Laughter) 

Mr Chairman, on the question of -(Interruption)

MR MAYANJA ABU: Mr Chairman, I am informed.  Is it in order for the hon. Minister of State to use unparliamentary language and refer to what I said as ‘Malaya?’  Two is it in order also for him to mislead this House by claiming that I am going behind on the advice I gave whereas:

(a)	The positions on political parties was taken in 1986 when I was not the Attorney General.

(b)	Yesterday the burden of my contribution was not about Cecilia Ogwal making political speeches but consulting her constituency as a C.A. Delegate like other delegates.

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is not in order to call you ‘malaya’ but the other -(Laughter)- Order, please.

MR BUTIME:  On the expression, Mr Chairman, this word ‘Umalaya’ I withdraw it but the former Attorney General knows very well that the question of political parties was revisited almost every meeting if NEC and we had take position almost every six months what should we do next, I am saying that the former Attorney General may have not have been the Attorney General in 1986 but, the period he was this matter was revisited several times and that is the advise he gave.

I am really shocks the hon. Mayanja said, that people are detained in police cells for six months I think what he wanted to say is that people remain on remand for six months and even more and he was so concerned about remaining on remand that he asked actually the Chief Justice, Minister of Internal Affairs, IGG, CID and everybody to hold a meeting and try to find out what can be done to reduce the number of people who are on remand and this one was done but not in the police cells as hon. Mayanja was saying yesterday.  I am surprised that he can forget the good job he did so quickly simply because their have changed his position. (Interruption)

MR MAYANJA ABU: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I am grateful to the hon. Minister for giving way, I think he did not quite understand what I said yesterday.  Yesterday I said, that the editor of the Citizen News Paper, Kiwanuka when he was interviewed in the Monitor News Paper he stated that when he was detained at Kampala Central Police Station he found there other people who had been detained there as long as 6 months I did not say that of my own knowledge I gave the House the basis of this information that according to this report and it has not been denied hon. Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs could have briefed him he was here, but this is the position.  

But according to Mr Kiwanuka I have no reason to believe him; I have no reason to disbelieve him the Minister can tell us that, Kiwanuka was detained in Central Police. He came out and said, when I was there, I found that there were people who are detained there some have been there for 6 months others for a 4 months and so on, this is in the Monitor News Paper.  Now people on remand are not sent back to Police cells when a person is arrested he is taken to police cells then he is taken before the court when he is remanded in custody he is taken to prison and this is the system has changed.  

MR BUTIME:  And that system changed when hon. Mayanja was the Attorney General but since he can believe -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MR BUTIME: If is prepared what Mr Kiwanuka told him, if people were there 6 months, since 6 months it is not 6 months since hon. Mayanja left the post of Attorney General. (Laughter) Therefore, he must have left them there, but I want to assure him that it is not true that people have been to Central Police for 6 months and since yesterday he was not sure himself whether what Kiwanuka told him was true I do not think really he should have dwelled on that one. 

The other very short point I have is on the old lady, the old mother of Itongwa.  When I stood up in this House here it was not a matter of just defending the police per say, I just wanted to put things right on record.  The word, Mr Chairman, was ‘torture’ not inconvenience because a person can be inconvenience, a person can be picked by the police, a person can be taken to a police station, but torture is a very, very, serious word.  Torture means the act causing some one to feel pain done out cruelty in other wards the police went to the home of this old mother and with intend to make punishment, with intend in a cruel manner handed her, beat her, or tortured her.  

I want to say that, really the police we have today in Uganda, the police we have trained since 1986 to 1995 going to a home even of a rebel or a home suspected to be harbouring somebody hostile, or somebody armed and after they have effected entrance and here is an old woman.  I do not believe, that they would mistreat her because that is the police we have today. So, I do not and I said that this matter was being investigated and we have found out that the Regional Police Commander of the area even went home to the home of this old woman to learn the circumstance to know what actually happened and he did explain to him what happened, he was taken to the Police Station yes, but torture is too hard word and untrue as far as what actually transpired and of course the hon. Mayanja says that he was surprised that the Minister of State for Internal Affairs had to come here when all the papers of Uganda has established that the old woman was tortured and I came to defend the Police.  When Mayanja was Attorney General he was not running his Chambers according to News Papers and he was always complaining of New Papers harassing him, he is not an allay on this papers, I think this is very, very unfortunate. (Laughter) 

Finally, I want to inform the hon. Mayanja that when he was the third Deputy and Minister of Justice he released Tabuliqs from Luzira who had killed police man and when the Magistrate protested he was sucked he violated the human rights of that Magistrate he should know that.  (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order. Can the Minister substantiate that allegation that the then Attorney General released murders, because that is a serious matter where he said the Tabuliqs were released when they had murdered policemen.  Can he substantiate that what then the Attorney General did was illegal, and he used his office to release these criminals can he substantiate because it is very serious matter.

MR BUTIME:  Mr Chairman, our investigations have indicated that the magistrate was carrying out his duties normally, he was supposed to sit down and hear appeal from these people who were in Luzira, but the Magistrate was made not to carry out his duties and in protest against the expressed instruction from the Attorney General the Magistrate was suspended and at the end of the day he was completely removed from his job as a Magistrate.  If you remember one of the dealers -(Interruption)

MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of order. Mr Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Minister to come and tell lies to this House. I am using these words because, in view his he is not aware that the Magistrate was suspended on the instructions of the Chief Justice.  Is he, therefore, now in order to come here and mislead this House and say that I suspended the Magistrate, is he not aware that the Magistrate was dismissed by the Judicial Service Commission? Does he say that - can he quote any law under which the Attorney General can go in the prisons which are under the charge of the Minister of Internal Affairs and release Tabuliqs from there, can he really just come here and give out lies?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Mayanja, how will I know whether he is aware or not? You can proceed, please.

AN HON. MEMBER: Rwabyomere and I was not happy when he received the kind of treatment that he received.  But, I am very surprised that the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs was in Government and instead of using his good offices in the Government to make sure that justice was done he is actually informing this House but actually this was done by the Attorney General and by so saying this is in - of the collective responsibility of Government.  Can the Minister tell this House what step he took when he knew Mr Rwabyomere the husband of an hon. Member of this House was treated so unjustly, can he tell us what step he actually took to ensure that justice was done?

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, is it in order for this hon. House to be turned into court, it stands to be a court when he is alleging that the positions are true, the truth of the whole story is that, when the Ministers of Uganda are on the Front Bench they collaborate to do wrong things. When one become a Back Bencher automatically there is a split in policy agreement, this to me is an embarrassment to Government I would therefore, calls for immediate investigation to this serious allegation. (Applause)

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, I wish to appeal to the hon. Member holding the Floor to try and reduce the nastiness in the whole debate and the bad taste it is leaving in the House.  I would like to say that, I think hon. Abu Mayanja said whatever he was saying in good faith and the case the Magistrate certainly could not be attributed to him knowing that the magistrate are dismissed by the Judicial Service Commission he could have been a complainant there is no question about, but that does not make it the business of his to have been the one directing the affairs of the Judicial Service Commission.

Secondly, I think also to say that when Ministers leave the Front Bench and they go to Back Bench they should be split because now they have now terms of employment and they are trying to fulfill their duties as back Benchers. (Laughter) 

So, I think they are no longer bound by collective responsibility and anything that happened when they were in office should not be really hanged around their necks like an - I think it is great to see hon. Mayanja in the Back Benches firing off right, left and centre at the Government and I think it is a very health sign of our country to enjoy such benefit, in fact we were missing him very much in the Back Bench -(Laughter)- and I hope we shall benefit from his past experience in the Back Bench and also in the Front Bench.  That you -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to summarise.

MR BUTIME:  Mr Chairman, I thank very much for allowing this very brief time to summarize.  But hon. Karuhanga knows very well how much work I did to try and assist us to resolve the problem of the traffic accident on the Kampala/Mityana road.  Finally, I hope we shall have explanation as to how people were saved after they had taken fuel and signed bouncing cheques and police arrested them and orders were given to release them by the Attorney General.  

Finally, let me end up by -(Interruption and Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, in our Rules of Procedure it is necessary that our Debate be reasonably relevant to the subject in the House.  It is in order, for the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs to go so far away from the going on of the Debate?

THE CHAIRMAN: He is not in order.  Please try to wind up.

MR BUTIME:  thank you very much, Mr Chairman, I do not intend to upset anybody but I was answering the wrong impression created in this House yesterday which has been printed partially not entirely all of it in the Press and people in Uganda are aware of that kind of speech - was mistakes which was delivered yesterday here.  

I want to request one thing, let leaders like Shakespeare how he puts it that mean must be made of, let leaders when they are in position of influence position of these ministerial positions keep the same principle even when they are out of those position -(Applause)- and not to change and shift position because they are no longer occupying this Front Bench, today you are here tomorrow you are there, the following day you are back the following year you are in the middle, another day you are a Minister of State, the following day you are a Prime Minister isn’t?  So, let us be men and women of principle.  I support the Bill, thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now call upon the Mover of the Bill to reply.

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma) Mr Chairman, I thank you for giving me the Floor, to wind up on this important Bill.  I want to start on a lighter note, by thanking all the Members, who have contributed to this Bill, whose contributions I have found very useful and helpful, and as we have indicated later on when we moved to amendment stage.  They have helped me and this assembly to improve on some aspects of the Bill.  

I want to particularly thank this House’s committee on Legal and Security matters for the assistance -(Applause)- and good working relationship we had during the process of presenting this Bill.  Having said that, Sir, allow me to respond to some anxiety that appears to be persisting in some Member’s mind about the constitutionality of the Bill, before the House.  I will repeat this for the sake of emphasis and removing any doubt where it may be; so that, when we move, we move well knowing that, we are moving on safe constitutional ground.  

It is true that, parts of the 1967 Constitution, were suspended by Legal Notice No.1 of 1986.  And among those provisions suspended, more provisions relating to the Electoral Commission, as it was then known in that constitution of 1967 Constitution.  Legal Notice No.1 further suspended Article 53, of the 1967 Constitution which again for the benefit of the House; I will with your permission, Sir, briefly refer to; and it says, I quote, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have so power to make laws for the peace, order, and good governance of Uganda, with respect to any matter.  There, Sir, under the 1967 Constitution lay the supremacy of Parliament to legislate on any matter in this country for peace, order, and good governance of Uganda, Sir, when that provision was suspended by Legal Notice No.1, the same notice in Article 7(1) provided and I quote with your permission Sir; that all legislative powers hitherto exercised by Parliament, definitely this a reference to the article now suspended; are hereby visited in the National Resistance Council and shall be exercised through the passing of Statutes accented to by the President.  

Sir, the Supremacy of this House, which should not be questionable to anybody, has its constitutional foundation in this provision article 7(1) of Legal Notice No.1 1986.  Which is not only part of our constitution now, but also is supreme over any other provisions that may be even in 1967 Constitution which are found to be inconsistent with any of these provisions.  Sir, attempts have been made to say that, if we had to amend Legal Notice No.1 in order to accommodate the appointment of a Vice President, it necessarily applies that, today before we establish a commission, we must amend this Legal Notice No.1.  I disagree, Sir.  The provision is very distinguishable.  The error then was that, there was an appointment made to a constitutionally non-existent office.  And when the error was realised, efforts were taken to cure that error. Government then, chose to amend Legal Notice No.1, as the easiest way of rectifying the error and resurrecting the article that had been suspended.  That was of rectifying the error and resurrecting the article that had been suspended.  That was one way of doing it, but it was not the only way Sir.  

Today, Sir, I am not asking Members of this august House to make appointments in non-existing office.  The Bill is seeking the authority of this Supreme Legislative Body, to establish offices in accordance with our constitution and the law, so that, when appointments are made, they are constitutionally provided for.  That is what we are doing.

Another area has been that of traditional leaders.  That if we had to come and amend Legal Notice No.1 of the 1967, in order to provide a constitutional base for the traditional leaders restoration; we must similarly, amend the constitution today.  Again, Sir, I disagree.  

In the case of traditional leaders, the Constitution was very clear and precise.  I think it was article 118, which provided and it was not suspended at that time; that the institution of a King or a ruler of a Kingdom, or constitutional head of a district, by whatever name called, existing immediately before the commencement of this constitution under the law, then in force is hereby abolished.  That was the constitutional provision.  And of course it went further to say, notwithstanding any provision of this Constitution by immediately proceeding clause, shall have effect from the 24th May 1966 in relation to the Kingdom of Buganda.  I will not go into details.  

The point I am making, Sir, is that, when this House decided to restore traditional leaders, there was a subsisting constitutional provision prohibiting the office of traditional leaders as the constitution then.  Today, Sir, the constitution has no provision about an electoral commission and therefore whatever policy we want to translate into law, and the law made thereafter, cannot be construed to be conflicting with a non-existing constitutional provision.  

I did say earlier that, the amendment of Legal Notice No.1; and the Constitution was one way of rectifying the error in the appointment of the Vice President, but it was not the only way.  I would give an example, Sir, and with the permission of Members - use hon. Tiberondwa Adonia.  If he is coming from Masaka, coming to Kampala, his destination is Parliamentary Building.  He could get to Natete, a suburb of Kampala, then he could decide either to go through Wakaliga and Rubaga up to Parliamentary Buildings or he could decide to go through Natete, Rubaga, Ndeeba, Katwe, Clock Tower up to Parliamentary Building.  I think the sense of the journey Sir, would be to get to Parliament. And the choice would be, whether he wants to take the longer route or the shorter one. 

The government is requesting the hon. Members to allow it to take a more straight forward and shorter route to deal with the provision of an Interim Electoral Commission, which is properly laid before it had has no constitutional problems at all whatsoever.  And I want to assure all the Members that thorough research has been done in this matter and I have no doubt in my mind that, we are on safe ground constitutionally and in harmony with all the other existing laws. Briefly I say, why now?  

Time Sir is of the sense if we are to have free and fair election.  We need to mobilise resources, we need to mobilise funds, we need to mobilise human resources.  We need to mobilise electoral materials.  We must facilitate and implement a civic education programme that may include training of trainers, judging from what concern the House has been expressing in this area.  The activity of updating the voter’s register.

MR OBWANGOR: Point of information. Yesterday, Mr Chairman, the hon. Member, the Mover, accepted my statement to the effect that, for us we need to make a substantive republic law, known as the Representation of the People’s Statute. He now says that, this is for a temporary experience.  So, therefore, he was playing by being disorderly yesterday. (Laughter) Because my thing is not this twisting - it is electing.  Therefore, I am not again in a position; I am moved by his statement; although I was very keen and followed him, the quotation of section 7, of Legal Notice No.186, and yesterday, I referred to him. This is a National Election Law, it is in a Statute, now it is idle, why can we not use it?  Chapter 113(1)? So that, because you are running for time, this is not time to make a National Election Law, that is the issue. (Laughter)  

MR KAVUMA:  Thank you, Sir.  Of course hon. Obwangor is free to offer advice, he did it yesterday, I assured to him that, my purpose this time is not to give this House a comprehensive electoral law, and I explained, I intend to do so; especially - I think, I will give him a bit of more information.  Especially, as we have not completed the constitution we are drafting, whose provisions are going to have far reaching, or may have far reaching effect, as to what electoral law we may have.  It would be premature to come and present a comprehensive electoral law in the absence of a concluded constitutional writing exercise.  Hon. Obwangor I am sure will continue to be patient until that time comes and the law will be here.  

So, Sir, I want now to move and say that to do all these things we have been talking about, among the many others I have not mentioned, we need to move now and move with speed, so that at the end of the, say, the elections we are anticipating are not only claimed to be, but seem to be free and fair.  

There were some concerns raised about apparent inconsistencies in the provisions of the Statute before you and this House, and the provisions in the draft constitution.  Here, Sir, I will say that, there is provision under article 299 of the draft constitution which I hope will be passed finally since it was passed by the relevant committee without much opposition, and that article caters for a situation where there could be discrepancies.  Why have an Interim Electoral Commission?  The nature of the Commission is going to be interim, again in agreement with the constitutional provisions that, are before the CA; just to make way for the permanent commission which will be appointed in accordance with the provisions of that constitution once it is promulgated.

As I said at the beginning, I found the contributions of Members very useful and I have circulated the amendment, I have had time to discuss some of these amendments with some of the Movers and, I am satisfied that, you will find room to accommodate each other, so that we come out with a law that defeats the handling of free and fair election this country. The questions as to the independence of the commission proposed, I think hon. Kabugo was saying, should be reflected in the title.  I would say that, I think we should be rather looking at the contents of the Statute rather than the title which could be equated to a name.  One could be Samuel, very well baptised; but he may be not very, very performing christian.  But if he has christian values and honours them, then the content of the substance in that family will justify his being a christian.  

I end this part of the submission by saying, that I have consulted extensively on the Bill and I want to appeal to the hon. Members of this House, to consider the amendment that I have circulated and we are going to debate positively, because all have been presented after a thorough research and in very good faith, in order to accommodate the thinking of all the Members who wanted to move amendments to this Bill.  I thank you, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1:

(Question put that Clause 1, do stand part of the Bill and agreed to.)

Clause 2:

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that, Clause 2 of the Bill be deleted.  The reason, Sir, is that, although at the preparation of this Bill, this Clause was relevant, because of the time fact that has intervened between then and now, it is no longer very relevant and its objectives will be adequately achieved by the already established machinery of how legislation becomes effective.  I beg to move Sir.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I rise to support the Minister.  Mr Chairman, the reason why I am supporting this amendment is because, by the time this Bill becomes law, at the time when the President puts a signatory on it, do you think the constitution will already be in place? Because we are going now to incorporate the amendments accruing to the Bill and take to the President for signature, and we have about less than two months, before the new Constitution is finished. So, really it does not make sense to put a date when that date and, therefore, Mr Chairman, I rise to support the Minister.

(Question proposed and agreed to.)

Clause 3: 

MR KANYOMOZI: Clause 3, Mr Chairman, I would like at the end of that Clause to add on an interpretation.  Say, urban area; or urban means city, municipality, town, council, trading centre and town board.  The reason for this is that, I am moving further amendments in the middle of the Bill to define a rural and urban area, in a case of demarcation of the constituencies, and I hope the hon. Minister accepts that this definition is suit coming and it will help us to process the Bill.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I oppose the amendment.  I think it is unnecessary and uncalled for.  Because the intents and the purposes of this statute which merely have a time limit principally aimed at a duration where the circumstances may not have changed so much; I find these provisions unnecessary and superfluous, Sir.  In any case, these could have been the subject of interpretation elsewhere. 

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 4

AN HON. MEMBER: Clause 4(1), I propose that, it be amended as follows: there shall be a commission to be known as an Interim Electoral Commission, which shall consist of a chairman and not more than 4 other members, all of whom shall be appointed by the President, with approval of Parliament. It is self-explanatory.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, I do not have your amendment with me; I do know whether the Members have got the amendment.

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, this amendment was circulated.

THE CHAIRMAN: I do not have it.  I do not know whether the Members have got it.

AN HON. MEMBER: The amendment is from the - hon. Butagira’s amendment.  I am the secretary to this committee, Mr Chairman, so we circulated. 

THE CHAIRMAN: So, is it Butagira’s Amendment?

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, I wish to seriously second this amendment.  I think when a matter which passes on election is an emotive matter, is a matter of national importance, and all the people who take decisions in setting these elections, need to do so in the public view and the accountability standards have to be extremely high.  And I think Parliament being the watchdog and the representative of the people should be involved in the selection of the Members of this Interim Commission.  Which Interim Commission is going to make us cross a step; a step from a state of non democracy to democracy.  And I think this is the right time for parliament to involve itself in approving and putting a stamp on the individuals that are going to carry out such an enormous responsibility. Therefore, Mr Chairman, I second this amendment.

MR KAWANGA: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I only wanted to seek clarification as to whether the Movers of this Motion have already read the amendment which is being moved by the Minister.  Because to me, that one is superior to the one which they are moving themselves.  And in the light of that, we will be wasting time, in debating this one, I would prefer that, we debate the other one which to me appears superior.

MR KAVUMA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I concur in total with the learned hon. Kawanga and I would like to appeal to the Movers of the amendments to accept the format in my amendment indicated on page 1, and 2; which goes, there shall be a commission to be known as the Interim Electoral Commission, which shall consist of a chairman, deputy chairman and not less than 3 and not more than 5 other members appointed by the President, on the advice of the cabinet and with the approval of the legislature.  Here we are putting a double check, cabinet will advice, the President will appoint and the legislature has an opportunity to approve.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, you have withdrawn your amendment? Now you can move your amendment, on 4.

MR KAVUMA: Sir, I move that Clause 4 be amended by substituting 4(1) and (2) as it appears in my amendment.  I do not think I have to bother the House by reading it again, Sir, I have just read it a few amendments ago.

MR KAWANGA:  I support this amendment.  First of all, it caters for the future. I know the constitution is making provisions for chairman and the Deputy Chairman, and this handles it.   And then the numbers are the same, so that, one does not have to fear about changes.  And then, it involves legislature in the appointment of this committee as besides the means.  This will make the whole exercise a lot more transparent than what it was before.  I support the amendment.

MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, while supporting the amendment, I had an insertion which I hope the Minister and the hon. House can accept.  I do support that, the list - I would like to insert that the President would submit a name from a list submitted to him by interested parties and the rest of the amendment. The reasons for this is that, there are pressure groups and organisations who should be consulted in this important occasion of forming the Interim Electoral Commission.  It would not take much for the other sequence would still be the same as the Minister proposes.  But I would like wider consultation besides the President using the cabinet; that interest groups also be consulted in this case.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us deal with one first.

MR KAVUMA: Sir, I would request hon. Kanyomozi to abandon this importation of his - he is trying to bring into this nicely done work.  Because Sir, what are these interested groups. And which are these, if they are there and worth consulting the President, the cabinet and this House, will not take into care their interests.  Sir, if it is political parties; and I am saying if it is.  A resolution of this House, Sir, has restricted the activities of political parties, it has not been rescinded and I can see this proposal being pregnant with a lot of dangerous connotations which we may have included in this otherwise innocent and very tidy piece law.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KANYOMOZI: Clause 4(2), I would like to add the following: the chairman of the Interim Electoral Commission shall be a justice of the Supreme Court or a judge of the high court, or a person qualified to be appointed to the justice of the Supreme Court or judge of the high court.  The reason for this is that, as stated it yesterday, the reason for this is that, I think that judges are better placed and lawyers, and they are people in the legal system.  Are better placed to handle this delicate work as chairman.  And also, I am not being original here.  I think already those colleagues of ours in the CA; this is the provision which is in the draft constitution.  And assuming that, it passes as it is, it would tie in very well, so that we do not have to change it at a later stage, when we have already passed this Bill.

I am sure the Minister being a lawyer, can see the sense in my proposition, and that, it helps to have experienced person at that, high level.  Furthermore, it also helps the President in selection to narrow the scope of where he is going to select from these learned people.  And I think this should be acceptable to the hon. Minister.  Thank you.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I thoroughly appreciate that, lawyers are usually the most competent at interpreting the law, there is no doubt about that; I am not in anyway persuaded by hon. Kanyomozi that, the lawyers are necessary the ones who always see justice better than everybody else. (Applause) And as far as I am concerned, an ordinary Ugandan can be as fair to everybody interested in an Electoral Process, as a high court judge can be.  

Therefore, I do not see why a retired archbishop cannot be appointed a chairman? So, I do not think that, we should restrict the hands - no, I was giving you that as an example.  Even a farmer in Bushenyi, can be the fairest man you can find to preside over this.  My experience has not been with failure to interpret the law, rather it has been abuse of the law.  And the one who knows the law, can abuse it better; than the one who does not know. (Laughter) Therefore, I would like to oppose hon. Kanyomozi’s proposed amendment.

MR MARWAS:  Mr Chairman, with the footsteps of my neighbour here, I would like to oppose this amendment. In the recent past, the last elections we had, the least complaint that came from Ugandans was from the commissioner of the CA Elections. There were so many other complaints.  But the Commissioner as a person so many questions were raised, but of course he is not a lawyer.  I think he was more competent and he did not raise a lot of doubt.  So, some of these things the way hon. Kanyomozi is raising, is already removing the substance of the people like Besweri Akabway.  So, I oppose the amendment. (Applause)

AN HON. MEMBER: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I stand to oppose the amendment. I see this amendment as an amendment that is tying the hands of the President, the Cabinet and the Legislature.  So, I believe it would be better if we leave it open for him or for the bodies that are supposed to appoint any Ugandan who has the potential, other than looking at only the lawyers and what have you.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, as you know, I have the highest regard for people of the legal profession.  It is also not true what hon. Prof. Kagonyera said that, the people who know the law, abuse it better; than the one who does not know.  It is not true.  However, having said that, I think that, what should govern the interests of this House; should be the level of integrity of the Members of that Commission including the Chairman.  And the hand which looks and scans the horizon for integrity should not be limited at all in scope. (Applause) There could be lawyers and judges of high moral integrity; but so could be other Ugandans.  I have a friend of mine actually, who is the Chairman of the Electoral Commission in Kenya; he is a judge of the High Court.  But if you could only know the amount of attack he had after the elections in Kenya, his integrity was seriously questioned, in spite of the fact that he is a lawyer; and he has not been sacked, he is still in charge.  

However, I think, what we need to establish are the words which are very important in Clause 5. ‘Members of the Commission shall be Ugandans - that is very important; of high moral character and proven integrity.’ The Judges obviously do qualify to come into this aspect.  And so do the others of the other professions including my friend hon. Prof. Kagonyera and politicians can come in.  In fact, hon. Kanyomozi should remember that, the last chairman we had, Mr Kisira; who comes from hon. Kagonyera’s constituency, I suppose; was not a judge of any court or a lawyer of any magnitude, or even a Magistrate.  But he has never complained that, those elections which were conducted by Kisira were hijacked. (Laughter)  So, let us go ahead and copy the examples that he has already used for.  

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 4:

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5:

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  The question of high moral character and proven integrity is one of those things which must be looked at.  I would, therefore, want Clause 5, to be crossed out, because most of - in Uganda are not -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: We do not have your amendment.  Hon. Wanendeya, I do not have your amendment, please.  Take your Seat, please; I do not have your amendment. 

(Question put that Clause 5 do stand part of the Bill and agreed to.)

Clause 6, agreed to

Clause 7:

MR SIBO: Thank you Mr Chairman. (Away from the microphone.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Speak up, please.

MR SIBO: We have had experience, Mr Chairman, hon. Karuhanga quoted Mr Kisira that, we had a nasty experience, because he was voting to ensure that, UPC must win.  We had a similar experience in 1962, when Ronnie Picklam was appointed, to make sure that, Benedict Kiwanuka would loose.  So, we do not want this kind of thing to happen again.  That is why I move that even, the removal of the Members of the Commission should be approved by Parliament.  I beg to move Mr Chairman.

MR OBWANGOR: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I distinctly decide with my hon. Friend Sib.  Because we were together and Mr Alan, that was in 1985,1961 and 1962.  It is imperative for peace in elections.  That we have really a person who is morally good, more of integrity and high capacity to administer the electoral system.  Because the whole system that we are making here, the final person who will it effective and efficient, is a person we elect as a commissioner and those who administer the electoral system.  If this House does not insist on morality and integrity and capacity and efficiency, the electoral system will fail and consequently political freedom, a mischief in setting up a polity - when I say polity, the state, that administers freedom and a civil government in a civil service.

MR MARWAS: Mr Chairman, I am having a problem with this amendment.  Here it says Parliament shall approve the appointment of these men and women of integrity.  But surely to go ahead and say, the President must come back and say, Parliament, by the way, I want to remove these fellows. I think it is more than enough for the President to do.  Because when I see it as it is, the Cabinet and the President are one.  Therefore, if the commissioners do not perform, who should give them a right to fire them and they should nominate the others to be approved by Parliament? What happens if Parliament refuses to remove these follows?  So, we are going to a problem.  We should give Parliament and the President to fire them, but we have the approval of getting the new ones. So, I oppose the Amendment, Mr Chairman.

AN. HON. MEMBER: Thank you Mr Chairman.  I rise to support the amendment.  The reason is that, when the Cabinet and the President forward names in this Parliament or to the legislature to approve, they may, in fact, reject certain names, and therefore, ask for some other names to be submitted.  Now, when that happens, it is possible that, the President and the cabinet may send names which will then be approved by Parliament knowing very well that, thereafter, they could proceed to dismiss them.  This is a protection which I think it should be included in the clause.  So, that, the president and the cabinet cannot dismiss any of the members of the commission which were approved by parliament and obviously they will give reasons and so forth for dismissing them, that there could be some hidden agenda.  I support this very much.

MR DRANI DRADRIGA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. While I appreciate the spirit behind hon. Sib amendment, which involves the house here - the Parliament; in the exercise of which democratic rights.  I find it a bit difficult to appreciate to the fact that, in the normal practice, it might be a bit difficult to appreciate to the fact that, in normal practice, it might be a bit difficult for this Parliament which does not have a specific committee on appointment - like a board, appointments to boards which other parliaments have, to be always involved in the matters of discipline.  I would like to be assisted here by either the Mover of the amendment or may be the minister; to see whether this can be workable today.

MR MANZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I think I have the same problem with hon. Marwas.  Because we must distinguish the powers of appointment and the powers of removal. Whereas it is important that, when the president appoints the commission, parliament should approve.  When it comes to a question of removing, the President can remove without coming to parliament.  However, in the replacement, he will come back.  And that is where the catchword is.  Because whereas in their first appointments to get the approval from Parliament, in the removing for some reasons which might be spelt out in their letter of appointment, he can remove.  But, of course, if he is going to replace, then he goes back to Parliament to approve the replacement of the people who were removed. 

Therefore, since parliament does not have as the hon. Member was saying, a particular body that sits around to interview and appoint people, and that is why we were not saying, that parliament shall appoint, we are saying, Parliament shall approve the appointment of the Members. So, I would wish to say, that we keep the removal of powers into the presidency or the executive.

MR KAVUMA:  Thank you Sir.  I oppose the Amendment for the very good reasons that have been given.  And secondly, Sir, I think we should also remember that, at times when this commission is going to be busiest, many Members of Parliament either this one, or another one will also be very busy in their constituencies campaigning.  Now, if a need arose and everybody is elsewhere in the countryside, I think we could create an impasse.  

Secondly, Sir, you can see that, the ground of removal are very very limited.  That already restricts any fear that, provision could be abused.  I, therefore, Sir, appeal to the hon. Members to accept that the removal be done with consultation with the cabinet by the President to avoid any impasse or lack of action when action is most needed.  There are enough safeguards already in the law, as it is provided.

(Question put that Clause 7 do stand part of the Bill and agreed to.)

Clause 8

MR KANYOMOZI: I am suggesting Mr Chairman, Members of the Commission and to the secretary shall be paid such emoluments as the legislature may determine.  the reason is that, I am looking at the commission in the same way as we take specified office like the Auditor General, the Inspector General of Police, the Chief Justice and the Judges of the High Court.  He is at that level.  And therefore, the approval of the Parliament is therefore necessary.  I would like to leave it - while the resolution will be brought of course in the similar manner as we have just done a few weeks ago; in a similar manner as we did for the judges adjustments of salaries. I would strongly feel that, the emoluments to these people should be subject to the approval of the parliament.  Reason to give them that sense of tenure and the dignity which they deserve.  I hope the hon. Minister will accept that.

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, I grateful to hon. Kanyomozi for making that amendment.  And I wish to support him.  I think this is as I said before and as other Members have said before, this is a peculiar office; it should draw its salary form the consolidated fund, whose emoluments and benefits should be approved by this House. Leaving this to the hands of the Minister is compromising the provision of the integrity to that of the Minister.  And I think it is not wise for this House to do that.  We want these people to be above board and to feel that, whatever they are earning cannot be challenged by the Minister of finance or used to influence their integrity. And I hope that, the Minister will accept this.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I do accept the amendment in good faith, government is interested in ensuring the independence of the commission; I would not say, the Minister would act on his own, but for the sake of transparency and organising a free and a fair election, I will accept the amendment. (Applause)

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Question put that Clause 8 as amended do stand part of the Bill, agreed to.)

Clause 9:

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that, Clause 9, sub-clause (1); paragraph (f) be deleted.  Mr Chairman, I move so, because it is superfluous and it would have to serve any useful purpose. (Applause)

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS KALEMA: Mr Chairman, I would like to move an amendment in (b), but I was not given a chance.  I would like to amend 9(1)(b)-(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Have you supplied your amendment?

MRS KALEMA: It is just to add one word.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, move it.

MRS KALEMA: Mr Chairman, I am glad you can give me an opportunity; it is 9(1)(b), it is to add and display to compile, maintain revise and update and display the voters’ register. I feel that issue is very important, in the process of elections.  The display of a voters register may be the beginning of rigging.  The beginning of free and fair elections, and the lack of it, can be the beginning of rigging.  So, I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SIBO: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that, 9(1)(d) be amended by insertion of the word election after nomination to read; ‘to receive and determine complaints relating to the registration of voters nominations and the election of candidates, in an election campaign.’  Complaints are at the levels of registrations, nomination, polling and during the campaign.  So, those are the four areas where nominations take place.  And here, there are only three areas that I mention. I am adding the election day itself.  The reason being that, one can make complaint against the polling staff, or even for failure to deliver polling materials, so that, one can appeal to the commission for this kind of failure.  I do hope, the Minister will accept this, he will not change his mind again. Thank you. 

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I have problem with the proposed amendment.  I think the law as it is framed now, takes care of all the worries we would have.  Secondly, Sir, when there is a dispute on elections, these matter have now advanced and normally the procedure of settling those conflicts is a court of law.  For that purpose, Sir, I would request the hon. Sibo to abandon this; and in any case if it is a fear from any administrative action, that may be taken by the staff, that already is catered for.  But I think this one is going to introduce unnecessary complications in the law, Sir.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, on Clause 9, sub-clause (3), I want to add immediately after the sub-clause the word: except that for the avoidance of doubt, the Interim Electoral Commission shall be responsible for conducting any referendum under the latter Statute.  This amendment is intended to harmonise this Statute and the C.A. Statute with regard to provisions relating to referenda.  It also intends to harmonise the provisions of this Bill and those of a referendum Statute that was passed by this hon. House.  So for purposes of harmonisation, Sir, I move that we amend that clause by the additions I have mentioned, Sir.

MR SALIM BACHOU: Mr Chairman, I support the hon. Minister’s amendment because it has helped to remove a few question marks that some of us had.  I support the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, there are no amendments on Sub-clause (5).  I am going to call sub-section (6).

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, Clause 9 sub-clause (5), paragraph (d) I beg to move that we delete the word may and insert may on application by a voter and upon reasonable grounds.  This amendment caters for consensus that emerged during consultations with various Members of this hon. House and Members of the committee responsible for law and legal matters so that any transfer shall have to be on application by a voter and upon reasonable grounds.  This will be safer in law.  It will provide against any temptations or any fears about abusing the process of voting while at the same time, it covers the interest of genuine and bona fide people who may for good cause want to transfer from one voting area or from one constituency to another.  I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, on sub-clause 9(5), I want to move that the paragraph be amended by removing (e) and inserting the following new paragraph: May delete from the register, the name of any voter on ground that the voter died or for any other good cause.  Mr Chairman, the clause -(Interruptions) it is 9(5)(b), Sir. Mr Chairman, I move that with regard to 9(5)(b) - I seek your guidance, Sir. Are we on (b)?

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, (b).

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, it is 9(5)(b) which reads: “may including the register of the name of any person who is not 18 years of age but will be of voting age before the date appointed by the Minister under paragraph (a).” That, Sir, I will reluctantly accept the atmosphere in the House which was very much against this provision in spite of the very good reason I circulated in the short paper.  But in the spirit of going together and management of society in modern democratic principles, I accept and we delete.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, on Clause 9(5)(e), I beg to move that that paragraph be deleted and in its place, another clause be inserted to read: “may delete from the register, the name of any voter on the ground that the voter died or for any other good cause.” The reason, Sir, is that the question of death being specified as the law stands now is very restrictive.  Circumstances may happen where a person was on the register under the mistaken impression that he was a Ugandan or where he was a Ugandan when he got on the register but then, subsequent to that, he changes his citizenship.  That kind of situation, Sir, is not covered here. Similarly, somebody could become of unsound mind and the law would be too restrictive to accommodate.  I want to seek for a wider area of operation by the Commission to be able to cure any deficiencies that may come into light while updating the register. I beg to move, Sir.

MR MWADHA: Mr Chairman, I would have supported the Minister if he gave all those possible causes that could cause somebody to be removed from the register. I think if it is found out that this person was actually not a Uganda, that is a good cause and I do not see why it is not mentioned in the law.  But if you leave it open like that, people can remove bona fide voters for other reasons and they say because the law says if there is a good reason for a person to be removed.  

I would like to oppose, I think this provision is open-ended. I would have preferred the Minister if he foresees any possible causes for a person to be removed such as discovering that a person is not a Ugandan or has become of unsound mind or has since ceased to be a Ugandan, all these possible causes rather than actually leaving it open.  Therefore, I oppose the amendment.

DR LUYOMBYA: Mr Chairman, I would also like to oppose this amendment for the reasons the Minister has tried to outline and they have not convinced me.  For example, he mentions somebody finding later on he is a non-citizen. It is only a citizen who is allowed to register.  Therefore, if you are found later on, it is already an offence.  He talked of finding somebody mad.  This is subjective and it will entail medical board, medical examinations and so these reasons are not convincing and in any case, if somebody has died, definitely he will not appear for voting. (Laughter) I would rather urge the Minister to propose that we delete the whole clause completely.  Thank you.

MR KAWANGA: Mr Chairman, I support this amendment.  This amendment is necessary.  First of all, the hon. Member has talked about a member who has died not turning up and the member who has died may not turn up but somebody else may turn up to vote in his place.  (Applause) We have to prevent that.  

Two; on the question of people who are not citizens, it is a fact that some people who are not citizens registered in the last election and since people have run back to Rwanda now, we know they have gone back to Rwanda, Kenya and other places and if we keep them on the register fully knowing that they are from there, surely you are not being fair.  The fear that people have is catered for elsewhere.  But if somebody is aggrieved by the action of the Commission, they are allowed to appeal against that decision.  But you cannot hand pile the Commission to keep registers irrelevant or inappropriate names simply because they cannot remove them.  I think this is a good amendment.

MR MARWAS: Mr Chairman, look at the amendment of the Minister number 5 which says, on application by a voter and upon reasonable grounds transfer. We are saying, if you have transferred, it is indeed for the Commission good to deregister you from the other register.  I am saying, if I have to apply and go and vote in Karamoja, then my name must be deleted if I voted in Kampala.  I am saying, the question of good, I think the Minister should say reasonable because good can be facial but we should say on reasonable ground.  Otherwise the amendment is very important.

MR KAVUMA: Sir, first of all, it is not true that when you are transferred from one area to another that necessarily you have been removed from the register. The register is a national document and it is treated as such as one document.  You may be on that register in an electoral area A but that electoral area data does not constitute a register in itself.  Sir, it is not correct that transfer will constitute a removal.  

Secondly, Sir, I think if Members want to go by “reasonable”  I will accept it but normally, it is good drafting to go by  good cause which is legally interpreted and I would appeal to Members to maintain good cause because it has specific legal interpretation affixed to it.  “Reasonable” can cause a bit of a problem.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, Clause 9 sub-clause (7), in paragraph (a), I beg to move that we delete -(Interruption)

MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, Sub-section (6), I think the Minister has already deleted - on sub-section (6), I would like to propose an amendment to read as follows: “In the performance of its functions in sub-section (5) of this section, the committee shall be assisted by local authorities of the area.” The reason is that the word local authorities covers everything and I am removing some words which could bring complications at a later stage. Local authorities cover anything which is legal and which everybody in the countryside knows and these are known; the chiefs, the RCs.  Everybody is solely inclusive rather than restricting it to RCs only. If the Local Authorities are included, then the chiefs can also assist the commission, so with the RCs.  I hope the Minister will support.

MR KAVUMA: Sir, I have difficulty in accommodating hon. Kanyomozi because the law as it is has defined Resistance Councils and Resistance Committee, it is now an established fact that in our administration, they have established themselves as very respectable and capable people to handle matters of the local nature.  Our population has a lot of confidence in them.  

I also have a problem with the local authority.  It may not be comprehensively defined.  Sir, I appeal to hon. Members -(Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I am grateful to the Member for giving way.  The hon. Minister, if he looks at this amendment carefully, he will realise that the limitation on the performance and function of the Commission and the assistance is limited in the bill to RC.1 and RC.2 of the area only.  Now, the import of hon. Kanyomozi’s amendment is extended to RC.3 as well and RC.4 and RC.5 and RC.6 of the area and therefore, the assistance is much broader to the Commission.  And I think what the Commission here wants to achieve is that they get the assistance from the willing people who are also responsible people in the area and I think you should not fear the word local authorities because that also is covered within the Statute and when you look at the definition provided in this bill on page 2, there is no mention in fact in the definition of Resistance Committees as a definition as he was talking about.  The definition of the Resistance Council and Local Authorities is all in the interpretation and I think he should really support hon. Kanyomozi’s motion.

MR KAVUMA: Sir, the definition of Resistance Councils and Committees may not be in this Statute but it has been defined in the RC Statute which is now establishing our Local Government and it is clear there is no uncertainty about it.  Local Authority, Sir, the interpretation Decree, I had opportunity to look at it, there was nothing satisfactory and I am therefore, foreseeing a problem arising when this proposal is being implemented in law.  We are going to throw a problem of uncertainty in the law in a very important exercise.

MR MWANDHA: I have listened to the proposed amendments by hon. Kanyomozi and the justification by hon. Karuhanga.  Does the Minister intend to exclude the chiefs from getting involved in assisting the Electoral Commission and restrict it to only RC.1 and RC.2, not even RC.3, not even Women Councils?  All the other authorities.  Is the intention of the law to restrict it to RC.1 and RC.2 and ignore all these other people who may in fact be very useful to the Commission?

MR KAVUMA:  Sir, I think there is also a misconception.  The assistance here is in regard with updating the register.  The updating is done at RC I and RC II level.  I am saying the RCs at RC I and RC II are best qualified and they have the confidence of the population to handle matter of a local nature applying to them.  And this is why during the last election when registration started and everything was going, there was an appeal from the population which was eventually accommodated to involve not the chiefs but the RCs. Our population has confidence in the Resistance Councils as their leaders.  They did a commendable job last time.  I think we should not appeal to move a vote of no confidence from them.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, on Clause 9 sub-clause (7), paragraph (a) I move to amend the paragraph by deleting the word (and facilitate).  The reasons I want to remove the words, and facilitate is that it would be putting too much of a burden to the State to require it to facilitate the role of polling agents of candidates and also representatives of different sides in these elections. What does facilitate mean? The most difficult part of it will come to monetary facilitation.  One voter could have as many as 200 or even above agents and representatives.  If we are going to allow or to ask the State to facilitate these agents, I think we are being unrealistic in our law.  It is sufficient to provide that they will be recognised so that the complaints that have been raised in this House that last time they were not allowed to do their duty as they did, would have been taken care of without overburdening the State to an extent that you will never be able to accommodate.  I beg move Sir.

MR KANYOMOZI: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, 7(a), I would like the Minister to enlighten me a bit. I find this word sides a bit very difficult. Does sides mean opinions?  Does it mean different parties? What does sides mean in a referendum?

MR KAVUMA: Hon. Kanyomozi did raise this matter yesterday I think when we debated and his worry was that we are used in our sides and that the law uses sides. I only want to inform him, Sir, and the House that in modern trends in drafting in Uganda have tended to adopt this terminology of sides. (Laughter)  

Even the Constitution draft we are working on in the C.A. were provisions which have been approved by one of the committees and is awaiting to be approved by the plenary. This terminology has been adopted.  So it is not true Sir, that as it was in the beginning, it is now and it will ever be, Amen.  It does not make any difference.  We want to give our people the law they are used to, which they understand easily and sides will not make any confusions in anybody’s mind, it will not cause people to think about other things they may not want to think about even if they are not part of the exercise.  Sir, I beg hon. Kanyomozi to accommodate the drafting and we go as modern trends have dictated.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Question put that Clause 9 as amended do stand part of the Bill and agreed to.)

Clause 10:

MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, Clause 10, in my submission yesterday, I brought the issues of the code and I would like to oppose an amendment that for the purpose of performing its functions the Commission may bring an action before a court not below the level of a magistrate’s court in Uganda and may seek from that court and the rest, the remedy that may be available.  The reason why I am saying any court, I find the idea of any court a bit very difficult in this exercise.  Any court could be anything up to the level of courts at the village level and I do not think, those courts, although, they are courts, are competent to handle cases of this nature.  So, I am proposing that amendment to cater for the gravity and the dignity of the cases to be handled by the court and elevating the court to be of a certain level, Mr Chairman.

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, I stand to oppose this amendment from hon. Kanyomozi.  I think he is misreading the meaning of clause 10. Actually what Clause 10 is trying to do, it is trying to make the Commission live within the boundaries of the law.  For example, if there is a dispute on the death of a person as prescribed in Clause 5 and the Commission is not very sure about the status of this situation, it can go to a most available court in the area.  It could be the lowest court, that there it will determine the issue and you do not have to go to the High Court, that there it will determine the issue and you do not have to go to the High Court to know whether somebody has died in Atiak or in Bundibugyo and come to High Court.  I think it is trying to make the work of the Commission easy and at the same time live within the law, and of course with that, you can always appeal to the higher courts.  So, I think the meaning and intention of Clause 10 should be maintained.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 11:

(Question put that Clause 11 do stand part of the Bill and agreed to.)

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13:

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, Clause 13 -(Interruption)

MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, I would like to move an amendment on Clause 2*a) to read as follows: Ensure that each district has at least one member of the legislature except that no sub-county shall fall within more than one constituency.  Yesterday, I did give the reasons for this and I have looked at the population figures in detail. First of all, we will ensure that no district - because the districts are controlled by this House.  We are the ones who determine which district comes into force.  This House does not determine which county comes into force.  Therefore, we need the districts to be represented and all the small districts and the bigger ones will definitely have representation in the next Parliament.  

I am avoiding the issue of a county because if you look at the statistics which I have looked at in detail, you find that they are so uneven and people as I said yesterday, represent people and it is easier, as long as you are keeping the planning unit which is a gombolola intact to have the commission doing a very good job and making sure that the population is fully represented and all of us are fully represented.  

There is the issue of maintenance of a bigger House.  Since we are not in control of counties, I can see a situation where this House will be so big and unmanageable. Already, we are having problems of maintaining ourselves leave alone maintaining this building in a adequate form and shape.  Once the districts have been represented and sub-counties not divided, I am sure we will get what we need.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I oppose the amendment by hon. Kanyomozi.  In the Parliamentary democracy, our people to today, the concept of representation from a county as the unit for representation has been well embodied in our society.  Hon. Kanyomozi has a fear that this will result into an extremely large House and he says we have no control over counties.  I do not know what he is talking about but counties are controlled by some government authorities at all levels so that the creation cannot be done in isolation of the overall economic picture of the country.  Rather than disturbing our people now, changing the concept they have accepted which apparently is also passed in the Constituent Assembly at least at Committee Stage, I would rather for the time being during which this law is going to govern elections and maybe we should adopt it as it is if need arises in future when circumstances have changed, that they require to accommodate hon. Kanyomozi’s worries, then appropriate action will be take by the appropriate legislative authority.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR MARWAS:  Mr Chairman, the Committee moved an amendment on Clause 13(3)(b). Because if you look at 13(2)(b), it states: In dividing Uganda into constituencies the Commission shall take into account means of communication, geographical fact, density population and boundaries and areas of districts.  So the committee says that to qualify 13(2)(b), we amend 13(3)(b) and add at the end say, where a county has a population of 140,000 or more inhabitants, there is made out of that county two or more constituencies so that each constituency has approximately 70,000 inhabitants. So, we agree the 12(b) to say further that provided that because of the vastness of the county, two or more constituencies arise.  So we are combining all.  We are qualifying 13(2)(b) in 13(3)(b).

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, this worry was brought to my attention by hon. Marwas and his concern was really to accommodate a county which is so large in area although it may have very few inhabitants.  I had a problem with the amendment, Sir, because much as we may want to say that democracy is not cheap, but we must also take a leaf from Moska Volpone who said he would want to mix profit with pleasure and the analogy would be we should try to mix our politics with economics.  If there is a large county with fewer inhabitants than the others, since representation is largely weighed against the people rather than the area, I would move to oppose this amendment so that we retain the format as it is now otherwise, we could turn out to have an extremely large and expensive House which would be a burden to the economy of this country.  I beg to oppose it.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, I seek clarification from the hon. Minister because when he was rejecting Kanyomozi’s amendment he was using the argument population.  Now that he is refusing hon. Marwas’ amendment, he was using the argument for population.  Now I get the problem in that if we have to mix politics with economics.  We must have the weights for population and land area.  So I cannot see how he can mix the who in these two following amendments unless he clarifies to us which basis he is actually using; land area as weight or population or both and in which mix?

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I think the worry really expressed by hon. Manzi is a worry about extent.  When we were considering the district to make it a district we are now enlarging the area so much that it was going to prejuciary affect the representation rights of many people.  Now when we say we should now take a county as a unit but we able to subdivide it into constituencies solely on grounds of area.  We are talking about the vastness of the county.  I think here it is the question of extent and I think the law would serve us better by allowing people to be represented basically from a county.  But if population matters come in and the law is not shy about it, it has provided it elsewhere, then that can be take into account. But otherwise, Sir, I fear we may unjustifiably enlarge the House on vastness - I am emphasizing vastness because that is the area although the people may be fewer than deserve a whole representative in the House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAJUBI: Mr Chairman, I propose that Article 13 sub-section 3(b) be amended to read as follows: “where a county has a population of 200,000 or more inhabitants designate out of the county two or more constituencies so that each constituency has approximately 100,000 inhabitants.”  Reason: a very small constituency will be unviable for an MP and it will also be very, very unviable for the taxpayer because this will lead to creating too many political offices.  

I would like this House to consider the fact that we have just retrenched the civil service to about 50 per cent but now we are considering increasing the number of MPs.  This House will be ridiculous.  I think a constituency of 100,000 is really big enough for a man or woman who is going to be in office for five years because a very small constituency of 70,000 inhabitants was good for the Constituent Assembly; because these people had very little time.  But for an MP, I think we should consider 100,000.  If a woman representative takes care of a whole district, why should an MP not take care of a constituency of 100,000 inhabitants.  I beg to move Mr Chairman.  

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, for our Parliamentary democracy is still in its infancy.  Good policy on effective representation of the people dictates that any thing from 70,000 people, if they can be accommodated in a constituency or other things being equal, should be the effective level of representation.  That notwithstanding, you will note that this format could take any constituency up to 139 voters, close to 140.  Now, with the problems of communication we have, I think it is unwise at this moment to tamper with this provision.  When things improve again, Sir, then the law may be amended to accommodate that.  I am mindful of the fact that, women representatives come form a district but Sir, these are elected from electoral colleges.  They can always go to these units of RC.3 and the rest of it.  But even then Sir, I think that should not be a good argument to deny our people effective representation on the basis enshrined in this policy.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, on Clause 13(3) paragraph (c), I beg to move that that paragraph be deleted and a new paragraph be inserted therein to read: “in the case of the City of Kampala, regard each division as a county. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS KIRYAPAWO:  Thank you Mr Chairman. (Interruption)

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 13 sub-clause (3) paragraph (d) be amended by deleting the paragraph and inserting the following paragraph to read: “Designate each Municipality as a constituency except in the case of Jinja Municipality out of which the Commission shall designate two constituencies.” 

It is a historical fact that Municipalities have always been treated or had preferential treatment in our electoral laws and the creation of their constituencies.  Under the current NRC, we have two Members from Jinja Municipality.  I would be the last to try and remove a democratic achievement the people of Jinja have attained through these legislations and through practical terms and through which they have had very practical representation from the Members in this House and the CA.  And for that reason, Sir, I beg to move that this House accommodates this arrangement.  Secondly, Sir, I am not forgetting the other Municipalities and they get recognised.  I beg to move, Sir.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, I am amending the amendment.  Except for Kampala which one can recognise having population and looking at the reasons given in 2(a) and (b) and looking at the population figures I do not think we are doing ourselves justice by keeping Municipalities to have single representation.  The reason is that besides Kampala which has a population nearly getting to about a million, the rest of our Municipal areas have a population of less than 60,000. In fact Jinja is the highest, others have 4,000. Is it in fairness to the taxpayers of this country that we have really just a blanket cover of representation compared to an area like Rukiga for example, or Ndorwa or Kotido or Koboko where you have got to cover 1,000 square kilometres or Nyabushozi or Kazo? These have one representative.  A place which is having a population of 4,000 is also going to have one representative. It can be walked on foot and covered in one day or one hour.  I would suggest an amendment.  I move an amendment that Clause 13(3)(d) as amended by the Ministry be deleted. 

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, I stand to just make a comment on what my hon. Friend Kanyomozi has said.  Apart from Kampala and Jinja, I really think it is very fair for the small municipalities to enjoy the same privileges of representation at the legislature level as the other counties which are vast in area and which are heavily populated.  I think we must find another way - fortunately, the Constituent Assembly will be meeting next week to come up with a new provision on this.  But I think this House will have done itself a favour to take a dynamic step in this direction.  For me I really wonder! are we going to have the same amount of people as MPs as we have in the CA? Apart from sitting, what type of money are we going to provide to look after these politicians? Can we really not find a way of representation without overburdening the taxpayer? (Interjection) Yes, there is indeed reason for Kampala, there is indeed reason for our industrial city Jinja to enjoy two representatives.  Surely the other people I think should accept to be part of the wider population and I think this House has some responsibility towards that and I think if hon. Kanyomozi can accept that we remove Jinja and Kampala from his amendment, then we would go a long way towards supporting his position.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Chairman, in light of the fact that this House has been sitting since 2.30 p.m. and now it is getting to 5.30 p.m. and everybody has been working extremely hard and doing a very good job, but obviously we are reaching a stage of diminishing returns.  I want, therefore, to move that this House is adjourned by the Chairman to an appropriate future date.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Kavuma): Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the committee is continuing to consider the Bill.  It has not completed its work and I beg to move that we adjourn to some convenient date next week, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma):  Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee has considered part of the Bill during its Session in the Committee Stage this afternoon.  Some provisions remain to be considered and the Bill has not yet been completed and that proceedings of the House be adjourned to facilitate completion of business at a convenient date, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)


THE CHAIRMAN:  Now I adjourned until Tuesday next week at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 4.30 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 10 May 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)
