Thursday, 7 May 2009

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you and I want to thank you for keeping time. As we agreed, we are supposed to start at 2.00 p.m., but practically we should start business at exactly 2.30 p.m. So I appeal to you to maintain that time so that we clear as much business as possible. 

At the beginning of this week, hon. Wadri rose to talk about famine in Arua District and it was agreed that the problem is not only in Arua but also in other places in Uganda. Ever since I have been approached by a number of Members of Parliament from the East and North East, complaining about the same problem and wanting to make similar statements as hon. Wadri made. I think it is not necessary to make those statements; we just need to accept that there is a problem in a big part of Uganda on the issue of food. 

Since we had agreed that the minister in charge - I think that is hon. Kabwegyere’s department - in the Prime Minister’s Office should convene a meeting with all leaders from the affected areas to discuss this matter, I think this meeting should be held as soon as possible. If not this week, it should be convened early next week so that the affected Members of Parliament meet the minister to discuss how to handle this problem. Otherwise, I see this as a big problem. I hope the Leader of Government Business will take it up so that this meeting is convened very soon. 

2.35
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Mr Speaker, I thank you for the communication you have given us. Yesterday when the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness got up to speak, we realised that we were limited by time but we wanted to ask him questions. 

He said that they had done a survey and they had information on the extent of the hunger situation in the country. I appreciate your position that we should go ahead and hold meets, but Parliament is like the voice of the people and people look to it to see how it responds to some of these things. I am sure that the people of West Nile, having heard what hon. Wadri said, are very happy that their case has been brought before this House. 

Sometimes this may be important because right now you do not know whether you should go for the meeting, whether you should be categorised as hunger stricken. We would have wished that the minister gives us a list of the districts that government now recognises as suffering serious vagrancies of the weather and therefore have a degree of food shortage. 

It would also help for the country to know that government is concerned about their areas. My appeal is that if it is possible, following that meeting let some formal statement be brought before the House so that people can speak about it. 

Otherwise, as I speak now in my constituency people had planted but the dry season has come back. The wind is now blowing like it is January and we are not sure if the plants that we cultivated are going to germinate. In fact, as a farmer I am going to replant about 40 acres of my rice because the seeds were caught up by this very dry spell and we do not know how long it will take. 

My appeal to you is that you should allow Parliament to address the matter so that the country may know that we are concerned, and also provide opportunity for Government to demonstrate that they have been following up this matter rather than the thing that hon. Ecweru has said. Hon. Ecweru is normally very expansive. Sometimes he would say something and when you say, “Give me the evidence”, you realise he has not have it. That is my opinion, Mr Speaker.

2.38
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As an institution, we can speak for our people in the countryside. A problem is creeping into institutions. In schools, food is a scarce commodity and the problem is being off-loaded on parents. School fees are now skyrocketing to levels where parents are hard pressed. At the beginning of the year, my child was going to senior one and I paid over a million shillings. This term, it is even a little higher than that. So the ministry in charge of these institutions also has to look at that. 

I have read in the media that Makerere University has given up the policy of providing food, so this also moves back to the parents and guardians. So the problem seems to be looming further than the countryside. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.40
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of clarification from the Leader of Government Business with respect to the issue of our UN Mission. We realise that Dr Ruhakana Rugunda was appointed the ambassador to the UN Mission and as we are in the budget process, we are supposed to appropriate monies to that mission. 

At the time, the explanation was that it was raised to the level of Cabinet. However, there was a reshuffle and he ceased to be a Cabinet minister. So I want clarification on the rationalisation of his position as an ambassador. According to the law, ambassadors are supposed to be vetted by Parliament. Therefore, I seek clarification on how the Leader of Government Business intends to handle this matter and what the position of government on the matter is. 

2.42
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members of Parliament, Dr Rugunda is to be vetted by Parliament and he has been advised to come for vetting. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Now, there is an urgent meeting that we need convened about famine in the North and North East.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: This morning I discussed this matter with hon. Ecweru. I request him to quantify the required amounts of money so that I may write to His Excellency the President and direct the Minister of Finance to provide that money.

I do not object to a meeting taking place between those affected and the minister in charge of disaster because it may enrich his capacity to quantify the problem. I would suggest that they meet tomorrow –

THE SPEAKER: Why not Monday, so that sufficient notice is given that there is a meeting?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Okay. Hon. Migereko will coordinate it. Thank you. 

2.44
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had communicated yesterday that there is a matter I wanted to bring to the attention of the Office of the Prime Minister. 

The last month has been a month of havoc in my constituency. This relates to the storm that resulted from the rains. Two primary schools: Opunoi Primary School and Odapakol Primary School; were affected. Kamodo Secondary School was also affected. A four-roomed classroom block, which was housing students from S.1 up to S.4, was affected. We are now worried that we are likely not to open because up to now, nothing has been done. We have brought it to the attention of the ministry and the district but the constraint is the funds. 

We have tried locally to raise some materials for re-roofing this building, but we are not able to put it up. We have communicated to hon. Musa Ecweru, but up to now there are just promises. We are getting worried because time is running out. So I want to call upon Government to help us if we are to open on time –(Interruptions)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I thank my honourable colleague. I just want to remind hon. Okupa who has been at the centre of this that part of the communication from the Ministry of Education to Kamodo Senior Secondary School says that the school should not re-open until the building is fixed, yet schools are re-opening in two weeks’ time at most and there is no roof. So, we do not know where to take the 506 students that are supposed to be housed by the secondary school. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR OKUPA: I want to call upon government, non-governmental organisations and well-wishers of Kasilo to come to our aid so that our students can be able to go back to school. Thank you. 

2.47
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Okupa for raising this matter again. The view of the Office of the Prime Minister is that this is an emergency. We are proposing that we take advantage of the meeting to address the food crisis in the North and North Eastern Uganda so that the issues regarding the effects of the storms in the region can be handled with a view to finding a solution to problems such as the one you have raised. So my appeal to you is that you come to this meeting. We shall make sure that the Minister of Education also attends this meeting and we find a solution. Thank you. 

PRESENTATION OF PETITIONS

2.49
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would wish to present a petition under rule 27 of our Rules of Procedure, seeking for the intervention of Parliament to review the Trade Licence Amendment of Schedule Instrument No.2 of 2009 and probe into the propriety and legality of the trade licence fees levied by KCC prior to the enactment of the said instrument. 

The humble petition is brought under the auspices of Kampala City Trader’s Association (KACITA), which is an umbrella organisation for all the traders in Kampala. The petitioners are owners and/or traders who carry out their business within and outside Kampala. 

Mr Speaker, your petitioners do pay the bulk of taxes provided for under the various legal and statutory instruments, which include import duties, Value Added Tax (VAT), income tax, withholding tax, property rates, trade licence, local service tax, to mention but a few. 

The subject matter of this petition is the general structure of the trade licence, which the business community in Kampala and outside find quite repressive and retrogressive in nature. The petitioners believe that this august House takes cognisance of the Trade Licensing Act, Cap. 101 Laws of Uganda, 2000, which was enacted way back in 1969 and updated in the various volumes published by the Uganda Law Reform Commission in 2000.

Part (c) of the schedule of the said Act provides for licensing fees for different types and grades of business or trade in Kampala City. The line minister was enjoined under section 30 of the Act to issue a statutory instrument or instruments amending the schedule as and when necessary.

The foregoing not withstanding, Kampala City Council has been assessing and indeed imposing on the traders quite exorbitant trade licence fees not sanctioned by the said legislation or any statutory instrument. As an example, the licence fee for wholesale trade provided for in part (c) of the schedule was supposed to be Shs 100,000 and Shs 60,000 for grade one and grade two respectively. Retail trade was supposed to be Shs 35,000 and Shs 20,000 for grade one and grade two respectively. I have attached a copy of the Trade Licensing Act referred to above.

By the end of 2008, KCC had been charging varying amounts of trading licence fees ranging between Shs 360,000 and Shs 950,000 for various categories of wholesale trade and Shs 200,000 for retail trade. We have annexed different licensing structures together with KCC local revenue enhancement plan for the year 2007/08 as well as 2009/10. They are attached to this petition.

The point here is that the tax structure as provided for in part (c) of the schedule has not been complied with. Kampala City Council has been arbitrarily assessing the various business units on a basis which is not provided for in the law, which we invite this august House to probe into to establish its legality. 

The petitioners are not opposed to paying trade licence fees. However, they are aggrieved by the conduct of Kampala City Council in imposing on them arbitrary taxes which are not provided for under the law. They have been compelled to pay a higher amount of tax over and above the statutory limits which constitutes, in our opinion, a glaring violation of their economic rights. 

In an apparent frantic attempt to address the aforesaid legal flaw, the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry amended part (c) of the schedule by issuing Statutory Instrument No.2 of 2009, which was gazetted on 23 January 2009. We have annexed a copy of it, Mr Speaker. 

The said instrument has instead aggravated the situation as the figures provided therein are quite inordinate, unrealistic and inimical to growth and development. Besides, the instrument was made in abstract without any form of consultation with the affected business community.

Finally, the petitioners raised their concerns to the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry in a petition dated 19 February 2009, but they have got no remedy to date and yet the tax assessors and collectors are moving on with the enforcement of the new instrument. 

The point here is that after the instrument was made, the petitioners did not sit back; they moved the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry to review the structure of the taxes as provided for. However, up to now they have not received any positive response. All they got were statements from a few leaders from KCC saying, “We are halting the taxes”, but the tax assessors are going ahead to carry out their duties, as well as those enforcing the payment. As we talk right now, the shops are about to be closed by those who enforce the new statutory instrument. That is why we are calling upon this august House to intervene as early as possible to stave off some chaos. As we talk now, if Parliament does not intervene, the traders are about to riot; they are about to invoke their rights as provided for in the Constitution to push the policy makers to review that decision. 

In the premises, we humbly request that this august House intervenes in the matter by:
1. 	Reviewing or causing the review of the said instrument - the Trade Licensing (Amendment) Schedule Instrument No.2 of 2009.

2. 	Probing into the propriety of the fees which they have been paying outside the parameters of the law. 

This petition is supported by signatures of 1,000 shop owners in Kampala. More would have signed but we thought 1,000 would be representative enough. 

Some of the leaders of KACITA have attended this session to witness these proceedings. We pray that if possible, we could get a select committee. I know it is at your discretion, but if we could be assisted to urgently handle this matter before it runs out of hand; I do pray and I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, you have heard the contents of the petition by the traders. Obviously from what has been read, this matter falls under a known law, the Trade Licensing Act, which I think is under a specific committee of Parliament dealing with trade. If you are to go for a select committee, then there is a long process of setting up a select committee and yet as you said, the matter is urgent. 

I think that the committee in charge of trade and in administration of this law can adequately deal with this matter. I do not know what the views of other members are, but my view would be to send it to the appropriate committee to expeditiously handle the matter and maybe report back to the House before the House is prorogued. The House is likely to be prorogued sometime this month. So let the petition be handled by the committee on trade and they expeditiously report back.

MR WOPUWA: I think that the petition would be for local government because there is a lot of policy and powers of local government to levy taxes and so on. How will the two committees relate? People would handle it more from a business view other than policy to allow local government generate local revenue.

THE SPEAKER: These kinds of tax instruments started in 1969 under a specific Act - the Trade Licensing Act. So it is not the Ministry of Local Government in charge of this instrument. It is the Minister of Trade who is in charge and, therefore, the appropriate committee would be that of trade rather than that of local government.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE ON THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE 1 FOR THE FY 2008/09

3.00 
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to present a report of the Budget Committee of Parliament on Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.1 for the financial year 2008/09. 

Before I present this report, I would like to comment that this report was presented to Parliament by the Minister of Finance on 19th March and subsequently referred to the Budget Committee. The delay in presenting our report was occasioned by the fact that the final response to the issues that were raised by the Budget Committee to Ministry of Finance was only received on 28 April 2009 and hence the delay. 

On 19 March 2009 the Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development presented to Parliament the supplementary expenditure for the financial year 2008/09. The schedule was subsequently referred to the Budget Committee for detailed scrutiny and consequently to report its findings and recommendations to this House. The committee hereby reports on its findings.

Methodology

The Budget Committee, which is enjoined under the Budget Act to consider the national Budget, had to jointly scrutinise the supplementary schedule No.1 for the financial year 2008/09 with sessional committees whose votes were affected by the supplementary requests. 

Rule 161(d) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament also requires sessional committees to critically examine government recurrent and capital budget estimates and make recommendations on them for general debate in the House. 

In order to have a comprehensive and structured assessment of the supplementary expenditure schedule, the Budget Committee therefore requested each sessional committee to scrutinise their affected votes, study the impact of the supplementary expenditure on the original financing outlay and work plans, and establish the consistency of the supplementary expenditure with the sector policy frameworks. 

On the basis of the Budget Committee’s concerns and the sessional committees’ findings and recommendations, the committee held a number of meetings with Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu, the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development in charge of Planning; hon. Aston Kajara, the Minister of State for Finance in charge of Investment; Mr Chris Kassami, the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury; and other technical staff from the Ministry of Finance. 

Framework for the Scrutiny of the Supplementary Expenditure

A total of Shs 125.288 billion is being applied for as supplementary expenditure. From the analysis of supplementary schedule No. 1, recurrent expenditure attracts Shs 118.408 billion while development expenditure is Shs 6.879 billion.

In order to facilitate the scrutiny of supplementary expenditure, the committee adopted the following terms of reference:
1. 	Whether the supplementary expenditure was in conformity with the law, that is -
•	Whether the supplementary expenditure was below the statutory limit of three percent; 
•	Whether the affected departments, especially those whose budgets were cut, were consulted as demanded by Section 12(3) of the Budget Act;
•	Whether the Minister of Finance indicated the impact of the supplementary expenditure on the original financing arrangement and sector work-plans as required by Section 16 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act.

2. 	Establish the sources of funding for the supplementary expenditure.

3. 	Whether the supplementary expenditure was occasioned by unforeseeable emergencies that the relevant sectors could not capture in the normal budgeting process.

4. 	Whether all the deserving emergencies were covered under the supplementary expenditure. 

Findings and Recommendations

Statutory Limit of Three Percent:
The Constitution (Article 156), the Budget Act (Section 12) and the Public Finance and Accountability Act (Section 16) permit the government, when need arises, to incur supplementary expenditure in any financial year. However, the Budget Act, Section 12(1), authorises government to incur supplementary expenditure not exceeding three percent of the total approved budget for the financial year without prior approval of Parliament. The total approved budget for the Financial Year 2008/09, including the statutory budget, was Shs 6,663.82 billion. 

In the course of the Financial Year 2008/09, government has incurred supplementary expenditure amounting to Shs 125.29 billion, which includes Shs 5.350 billion expenditure authorised by Parliament on 07 August 2008 to address the crop failure and food crisis in Northern Uganda. The above total supplementary expenditure is 1.88 percent of the total approved budget for the Financial Year 2008/09.

By the time of presenting the schedule to Parliament on 19 March 2009, most of the funds had already been issued to the spending agencies. Only Shs 4.542 billion in favour of classified expenditure under the Internal Security Organisation and Shs 1.209 billion for salary shortfalls under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was not yet issued.

The committee, therefore, reports that the supplementary expenditure was below the three percent threshold and thus, government was not duty bound to seek prior approval of Parliament before utilising the supplementary resources. 

Sources of Funding for the Supplementary Expenditure

The committee was informed that the total supplementary expenditure amounting to Shs 119.94 billion was funded through the following means:

1. 	Draw down from Bank of Uganda amounting to Shs 63.438 billion.
2. 	Suppression of the budget, yielding Shs 48.614 billion.
3. 	Utilisation of the non-tax revenue, yielding Shs 4.008 billion.
4. 	Non-resource supplementary; this is a book entry, yielding Shs 2.667 billion. 
5. 	Reallocation within the wage bill of Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which yielded Shs 1.209 billion.

The committee was further informed that the Shs 48.614 billion yielded through the suppression of the budget came from the following sources:

•	Suppression of Poverty Action Fund’s budget of Shs 695.664 billion by five percent, which generated Shs 34.783 billion. The committee was informed that the 95 percent minimum performance of the PAF budget was agreed upon with development partners.
•	Suppression of non-essential items of the non-wage recurrent budget of 21 votes, which generated Shs 13.831 billion. The committee was informed that the non-essential items suppressed included the following: workshops and seminars, allowances, travel inland and abroad, and general supply of goods and services. 

Evidence of Consultation of Affected Departments

As seen above, some of the supplementary funding was resourced from budget cuts or suppression of votes of a number of departments. Section 12(3) of the Budget Act provides that any reallocation of funds shall be made in consultation with all the affected ministries, departments, institutions or organisations. 

The committee was informed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that consultation of the affected departments can sometimes be problematic. He explained that requests for supplementary expenditure made to the Ministry of Finance usually come at different times and tend to be of an emergency nature thereby making it difficult to carry out consultations at the technical level all the time. However, the minister informed the committee that lack of consultation at the technical level was usually cured by the collective consultation done at the Cabinet level, given that supplementary expenditure is approved by Cabinet.

The committee observes that the consultations carried out at the Cabinet level only, without similar consultations at the technical level, were not sufficient. 

The committee recommends that full consultation at technical level, where work plans are designed, should always take place before reallocation of funds through suppression is made. 

Effects of the Supplementary Expenditure on the Original Statements of Output and Outcome
  
Mr Speaker, Section 16 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act requires that supplementary expenditure should indicate changes to the original statements of outputs and outcomes. When the committee inquired from the Minister about the impact of the supplementary expenditure on the original statements of outputs and outcomes, the minister’s response was as follows:

•	That affected votes were expected to perform at the level of the releases; 
•	That the five percent cut in the PAF areas was minimal hence would not greatly affect the government programmes and the delivery of services;
•	That most of the affected areas were non-core activities that would not affect the performance of the sectors;
•	That in a bid to improve budget efficiency and effectiveness, the affected areas were identified for suppression in order to free resources for use in the priority areas.

The committee observed that the response of the Minister was not convincing enough. He did not give the exact effect of the supplementary expenditure on the original statement of various sectors’ programmed outputs and outcomes as prescribed by the law.

The committee observed that suppression of the PAF budget, which caters for the needs of the poor, to fund activities that are not of an emergency nature should be discouraged. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that in future, the supplementary schedule should be accompanied by a clear indication of the changes in the original undertakings. 

Supplementary Expenditure Vis-à-vis Emergencies 

The committee observed that except for the supplementary expenditure to handle crop failure and the burial of the late Wako Muloki, the Kyabazinga of Busoga, all the activities funded under the supplementary expenditure appeared to be of a routine and ordinary nature. They should have been budgeted for during the normal budgeting process. It appeared to the committee that there was a problem with planning and forecasting in some ministries and departments. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that supplementary expenditure should be for activities of an emergency nature that could not be captured during the normal budgeting process. For emergencies that arise during the course of the financial year, the committee further recommends that the enactment of the law to operationalise the contingencies fund should be expedited. This would enable financing of emergencies from the contingencies fund.

Foot and Mouth Disease Outbreak

Although supplementary expenditure would ordinarily be incurred for activities of an emergency nature, the supplementary expenditure under review did not make any provision for addressing the outbreak of foot and mouth disease, which was reported in the country in 2008 and has now spread to more than 20 districts. 

The minister explained to the committee that the failure to provide for the containment of the outbreak of foot and mouth disease was due to the delay by the Ministry of Agriculture to submit the supplementary request to the Ministry of Finance. He explained that the supplementary request came in when the schedule had already been submitted to Parliament but that since then, a supplementary expenditure of Shs 3 billion, which will be reflected under another schedule, had already been provided to the Ministry of Agriculture for the purpose of addressing foot and mouth disease. 

Sectoral Analysis

State House:
The committee was concerned that the supplementary expenditure of Shs 21.3 billion extended to State House did not seem to have arisen due to unforeseen emergencies. Rather, the activities that were funded under supplementary expenditure appeared to be routine activities that ought to have been budgeted for during the normal budgeting process. 

The Ministry of Finance and the Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs explained to the Budget Committee that the expenditure arose due to non-programmed activities and expenditure like intensified travel both inland and abroad, fuel and maintenance costs.

It was also explained that maintenance of State House, medical treatment for traditional leaders and donations to senior citizens, religious leaders and progressive farmers also warranted supplementary funding to State House.

The committee, therefore, observes that while the activities under State House are good, such activities should be planned for during the normal budgeting process. The committee further observes that due to the proper facilitation of the presidency, the image of Uganda has improved tremendously. 

Cotton Development Organisation

Support to Phenix Logistics:
The committee was informed that Shs 1.349 billion was availed to Phenix Logistics through Cotton Development Organisation to facilitate value addition to cotton lint. When the committee asked the Minister of Finance to elaborate on the policy that was used to avail public funds to private companies like Phenix Logistics, the Minister gave the following response:

•	That the Shs 1.349 billion availed to Phenix Logistics was a revolving fund and that the money would be refunded by the company;
•	That it was government strategy to invest in value addition to cotton lint;
•	That government owned 47 percent shares in Phenix Logistics;
•	That it was in the interest of government to support Phenix Logistics as the company had already accessed the US market, exporting under the AGOA arrangement. He explained that it was in the strategic interest of the Government of Uganda that the company be supported to add value to cotton and maintain its access of the American market.

In spite of the justification given by the minister, the committee remained concerned about the way Phenix Logistics was accessing public funds when other actors in the same industry were not being provided the same support. 

The committee recommends that government provides a clear explanation to the House on the basis upon which it supports Phenix Logistics. 

Support to Cotton Farmers 

The committee was informed that Shs 13.52 billion was incurred as supplementary expenditure to provide price support to the cotton farmers following the slump of cotton prices from the indicative price of Shs 800 per kilo as announced by CDO to Shs 450.  

The committee was informed that supplementary expenditure of Shs 13.52 billion was used to enhance the price from Shs 450 per kilo to Shs 600 and that the intervention realised 125,200 bales of cotton. 

The committee recalled that the price support supplementary expenditure was in line with the resolution of Parliament adopted on 18 December 2008 to the effect that cotton prices be enhanced by Shs 150 per kilo.

The committee also observed that for a long time the indicative prices announced by CDO have always been off the mark. Moreover, CDO was in the habit of unilaterally announcing indicative prices without consulting other players like the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry.

The committee, therefore, recommends that CDO should always consult the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry as provided for by law, before announcing the indicative cotton prices. 

Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs

The committee noted with concern that Shs 5.2 billion was spent to settle rent for the Administrator-General and Uganda Registration Services Bureau. The committee observed as follows:

•	The rent obligation should have ordinarily been captured during the normal budgeting process. 
•	The money involved could have put up some offices for the said agencies. 

The committee recommends that government should come up with a strategy of building its own offices instead of spending colossal sums of money on rent. 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that Parliament approves the supplementary expenditure for the Financial Year 2008/09 amounting to Shs 125.287 billion whose breakdown is as follows:

•	Recurrent supplementary expenditure of Shs 118.408 billion, which is inclusive of statutory recurrent expenditure of Shs 8.191 billion.
•	Development supplementary expenditure of Shs6.879 billion.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I want to thank you and the committee for this report which has been easy to follow. Thank you very much. 

MR WOPUWA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the chair of the committee for the report but I wanted to seek further clarification: where is the home of traditional leaders? Is it State House or the Ministry of Gender? I have heard about culture and the ministry responsible for the elderly; where is the home of traditional leaders?

Secondly, I also want to seek clarification on the issue of Phenix funding where government owns 47 percent shares in the company. Is government represented in management? Is there a board responsible for Phenix where government is represented so that our interests, as government, are catered for or this money is merely a donation?

During CHOGM, we heard about money being given to Munyonyo. Government was trying to support these private investors in order to deliver services properly. However, if we have shares, to what extent is government involved in ensuring our representation in Phenix? If we have shares, then we must have representation in management and even on the board.

Lastly, the committee has made a comment that CDO increases indicative figures without consulting other ministries like Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. What is the mandate of CDO? If CDO as set up by an Act of Parliament is independent, is it necessary for them to consult? If they do not consult, is this the general trend of lack of consultation in management or it is only CDO that is doing it? I thank you. 

3.18
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the committee for a job very well done. 

While she was reading page by page, I expected the summary of the report to be slightly different from what it was. We have spent I think a couple of sessions on the issue of Foot and Mouth Disease in Northern and Eastern Uganda. I remember very well that we were on recess mid last year when we were called back to pass a supplementary budget for foot and mouth disease that had broken out on our western borders and it was expeditiously fought. 

Today it is coming close to one year and the traders of cattle in Tororo cannot sell their cattle. The predicament is so bad that people have failed to go to school. I can line up 100 people who I personally know who have failed; they have the cattle but they cannot sell it and send their children to school yet some of the children are in their last semesters. That is how bad it is. So, when such an issue is raised in a manner that it has been raised, I think it leaves a lot to be desired.

Mr Speaker, there is the issue of CDO, AGOA and Phenix Logistics. We have had several sessions in this House handling these issues. Uganda being a liberalised economy, we have sold out our shares for all the factories. This is the only factory that we are re-entering as a country to gain our shares. I know that government has taken effort to explain how and why - with some of us being willing to accept that explanation - it is not up to 51 percent, which would allow the Auditor-General to carry out an audit. I am saying this because if we only own 47 percent, we do not have to receive audit reports. The government auditor cannot carry out an audit of the accounts of Phenix Logistics. So, we cannot tell whether after six months or one year this money will be there or not.

On the issue of CDO, I would like to say that we have really spent a lot of time on this. I would urge the Members in this House to take the recommendations as they appear in this report paragraph by paragraph, rather than taking the final recommendations that have been presented. 

I am saying this because in the report it is very clear that they have asked the ministry to explain how we pay rent. We have spent a lot of man hours budgeting for the next financial year, but after that someone goes and pays Shs 5.2 billion! Didn’t we anticipate that we were supposed to pay rent for the Attorney-General’s Chambers? If so, why wasn’t it included in the previous budget? Why should it come as a supplementary? I think this report leaves a lot to be desired –(Laughter)– yes, the summary of the recommendations at the last page leave a lot to be desired, but at paragraph level –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tanna, I think this report is very clear. The report has told us the circumstances under which expenditure may be incurred without coming here - that is, if it is below or up to three percent of the total budget. They also told you that this is the case where money was spent because the law allowed it. What do you want us to do?

MR TANNA: Mr Speaker, as I wind up, I would like to comment on the Shs 5.2 billion paid in rent for the Attorney-General’s Chambers. I would like to support the committee’s position because this money, if converted into dollars, is about US $2.6 million, which would be enough for us to acquire our own property rather than paying rent for a building for one year. We can be able to own a building with that amount. I would like to commend the report on the recommendations that government should come up with a strategy of owning its offices. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.23
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee members for the very good report. I am saying this because it is the first time we are getting a budget report on a supplementary that has set terms of reference. When you read through the terms, you realise that they clearly elaborate that there was good use of our money.

I would like to comment on the issue of PAF funds. I would like to say it has been the practice of this country that whenever there is any crisis, PAF funds have been encroached upon. The practice that this report has talked about is not good. I would like to urge government to look at the other votes, not PAF funds. 

If you just say that only five percent was removed so that the effect would not be felt, the first question to come to my mind is: why did you budget for only five percent in the first place? There is no need for the ministry to always encroach on that fund because it helps a lot in the struggle to alleviate poverty.

On the issue of CDO, I would like to ask the chairperson to assist me. In the report it is stated that there was some money that was advanced to Phenix Logistics, but when it comes to justification, the report is not clear. In the first case, the report says it was a loan or a revolving fund and that the money would be paid back. However, as you went on in the report, you told us that Government is also a shareholder in Phenix Logistics. My question is: was it capitalisation to Phenix Logistics? If so, have our shares increased from the 47 percent? 

I am asking this because if one shareholder increases the capitalisation with the other one not doing much, it implies that that shareholder has to forfeit some of the shares. Surely as Government, we should not be holding 47 percent; we should have much more because we are injecting a lot of money in this factory. Otherwise, we shall be losing out. Those are my concerns. I thank you.

3.27
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I also would like to add my voice to the voices of the others in thanking the committee for this clear and very concise report. 

I remember earlier this year when this report was presented on supplementary expenditure, our concern at that time was whether government had broken any law by spending over three percent, which is the amount allowed by the Finance Act. I am happy to note that this time we are only talking about 1.8 percent.

The second issue is that at that time there was a big concern, especially following the outbreak of the Foot and Mouth Disease in Karamoja. I am very happy to report that the Ministry of Agriculture, using part of this supplementary budget, bought for us 90,000 vials of vaccines. Most of the cattle in Karamoja were vaccinated, which is very important to mention here.

Thirdly, while there are positive developments in this, there are two issues of concern that I would like to raise. One is the issue of the public-private sector partnerships as required I think under Article 159 of the Constitution. Government cannot enter into a loan –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. For the last two days the Chairperson of the Budget Committee has not been presiding over the committee meeting affairs because of unavoidable commitments. I also would like to say that the report of finance was considered about 30 minutes ago but I am surprised that some of the issues in respect of which the committee expressed its opinion have already appeared in this report. I do not know whether we were just wasting our time in the Budget Committee meetings or not.

Mr Speaker, you know that I have been in the country –(Interjections)– yes, we considered the report of finance 30 minutes ago; I have not had my lunch. From that meeting I came straight here because I realised that the chairperson of my committee was going to present something on the Floor and so she needed my support. I am surprised that she is presenting a report on matters that were considered a couple of minutes ago.

The chairperson knows that I am very supportive member and I have been around. She normally contacts me whenever she needs anything the committee has to do. However, I am surprised that as a senior member of this Parliament, I have not appended my signature to this report and nobody ever told me that there was a report that required my signature. (Laughter) Procedurally, is it right that we debate a report and express the views of the committee when members of that committee have not looked at the final copy of that report? I am just seeking a clarification.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not know what to say but when I look at this document, it is dated 27th April and that is a week or so ago when it was written. My sense is that maybe what you were discussing some minutes or an hour ago just coincided with what had been discussed by the committee.

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, I think my honourable colleague, hon. Cecilia, is handling independent issues. When we were looking at the supplementary budget, I think she appeared once or twice. Those issues were presented to us during that time and that is why they are appearing in that report. What we were discussing this morning was part of the Budget Framework Paper, which is different from the supplementary budgets. That is why I am saying these are very different issues. I, therefore, would like to appeal to her to reflect seriously on her participation during the course of discussing the supplementary budget. Thank you.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. For hon. Odit to say I am handling two separate issues, I think he needs to audit himself. (Laughter) Let me cite one incident. When the report of agriculture was presented before the committee, the same hon. Odit queried why Parliament had approved about Shs 13 billion for subsidy when actually the production for this year was only 65,000 bales and yet Parliament had based its estimates on 125,000 bales. Am I still dealing with two separate issues? 

I know that the issue of subsidy was raised, but it has been presented here as if we approved it yet we did not. The reason we did not approve it was that we wanted the Ministry of Agriculture to first tell us why they had requested for payments for 125,000 bales when only 65,000 bales were produced this year. We wanted to know what had happened to the rest of the money. All these issues were raised. If there were reports that were given, they were not presented to us. So, I would like to raise a point of order. Is he still in order to confuse this House that I am dealing with separate issues when I am very consistent and I make sure I read all these documents? Is he really in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal and honourable members, my understanding of what hon. Odit was saying is that this report concerns a document that was submitted here on 29th March for supplementary expenditure that had occurred before that date. Currently, we all know that we are in the budgeting process for the budget that will be read some time in June. It could be that you are discussing two issues that coincided. When they handled this one, they might have looked at the policy and for purposes of the next budget they were also dealing with the same policy matter. I think we can leave it at that.

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, I just want to make some clarifications regarding what my senior colleague said – 

THE SPEAKER: Again? No, please leave it.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. The second issue that I would like to discuss is that whereas we are within the law and specific expenditures have been made, my general concern regards the issue of public-private sector partnerships. I think it is high time that the Ministry of Finance provided us with an enabling law, which provides a clear criteria and methods of accessing government support. It should focus on how government can participate and relate with the different institutions in this country, which will be willing to access government support in the process of development.

Along the same line, I would like to seek clarification from the Ministry of Finance on the extension of support to Phenix Logistics. Two years ago, around August 1997, a loan of about US $5 million was brought before this House and we approved the loan for Phenix Logistics. Now, here I see that Phenix Logistics has been extended more support of Shs 1.349 billion to do the same work. That time we even went to visit the factory and the explanation was that they needed to expand and buy more machines as well as provide seeds to the farmers. That was US $5 million. I think it was a Japan/Uganda agreement.

During that time we recommended very clearly, and the report was approved by this House, that anymore support that is extended to any such company like Phoenix Logistics would be conditional on the number of jobs created. We provided some level of scalability that for Phenix Logistics to access some more money, it must show cause and report to this Parliament that it has created “x” number of jobs and if they access more funds it is going to provide maybe another 10,000 jobs to this country. I am really concerned about the criteria and the law that will enable us to support the sector.

Thirdly -(Interruption)

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, I was Ambassador of Uganda to Japan when Phoenix Logistics accessed the US $5 million, which the Japanese Government provided for the company. That firm was a facility created by the Japanese Prime Minister to assist any Japanese doing business in Africa. We were required to guarantee that loan and for sure this Parliament approved and guaranteed that loan. This was to enable Phenix Logistics to create new capacity with modern equipment for textile production in this country. Therefore, it was very big support from the Japanese Government to our country. What was required of us as a country and as a government was to come and supplement this contribution.

If you have been to that factory, you have seen the ultra modern equipment that is there. I do not think it is comparable to any textile industry in East Africa and, therefore, a request for supplementary support to enable it produce the kind of textile materials for the export market should really be supported by us. I would like to urge this House to understand the circumstances under which Phenix has been operating. Let us remember that Phenix is the successor to United Garment Industry (UGIL) -(Mr Okupa rose_) Can I finish? Let me finish. UGIL was here in the 60s and produced Yamato shirts when all of us were students. We remember wearing those school uniforms with Yamato shirts. These people stood with us through thick and thin and they have remained with us to this day. They have stuck here. I do not think it is asking too much to seek a little support from our government to continue while their government is also supporting them.

That is the clarification and information I wanted to give. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Thank you, hon. minister, for -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, what are debating? Are we debating this report or future policies? 

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Speaker, let me conclude by thanking hon. Baba for that detailed information. I support the motion.

I want to highlight that as the committee recommends, it is very important that the Ministry of Finance brings an enabling law that will help any private business in Uganda to have a clear criteria on how it can still access funding. Thank you very much.

3.42
MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (DP, Kyandondo County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I look at the report, hon. Tanna puts it right about the 5.2 billion being paid in rent. This morning I was looking at one of the papers and I discovered that one of the landlords in this city was enjoying a tax waiver from Uganda Revenue Authority. Isn’t it a contradiction that we would go ahead to approve money to pay for rent to such a landlord? I am not talking about this particular landlord, but he represents other landlords - a landlord who is busy getting tax waivers from Uganda Revenue Authority?

Secondly, government holds a 47-percent share in Phenix. I am really disturbed by the contribution of the hon. minister when he says we approve the loan of US $5 million dollars. Isn’t it proper and appropriate for you to come here before you say anything else and tell us, “As far as the loan of US $5 million that you approved is concerned, this is what we have achieved so far and these are the challenges we are facing. So we need A, B, C, D to push the thing ahead”? But this is really taking Parliament for granted. If government is contributing 1.3 and our shares are not going up, it means our partner is supposed to contribute 1.5 billion. What is the position? Is he contributing 1.5 billion to keep the shareholding at par or are our shares going up as government?

Finally, I want to talk about the issue of traditional leaders. I find it very disturbing that the President, when he is in his good moods, which is rare -(Laughter)- would say, “I am giving so and so this”. I think while that is good, it is proper that we come up with a formal policy on how some of these things have got to be handled so that we don’t depend on an individual. Thank you.

3.45
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On page 9 of the report the committee stated that they had an explanation from State House justifying how the money was spent. One explanation concerned medical treatment for traditional leaders and donations to senior citizens, religious leaders and progressive farmers. 

This selective treatment without a standardised or unified position of how to deal with traditional leaders across the board - recently we had some handouts, which were not uniform. The Buganda Kingdom got Shs 2 billion and Busoga Shs 1 billion. I don’t know whether the Banyoro, Acholi and Ateso will get anything. Such unequal handouts to traditional leaders by our President worry us as a country. If they cannot be treated, as my colleague has said and if we don’t have a position or policy on how they can be assisted at the same level, then this will create loopholes. It is like when you have children and treat some preferentially. Some may think they are more loved than others. We want this to be unified so that it does not raise inequality among our traditional leaders.

When we talk about senior citizens, it seems it is at the discretion of the giver. Who are the senior citizens of this country? What is the criterion of getting our senior citizens on board? I would have loved to hear one coming from Kitgum but I have never heard. Such a move raises inequality in the use of natural resources of this country.

We hear –(Interruption)

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague for giving way. Recently I was reading in the press that the MPs of Karamoja were complaining to government about a senior citizen; former minister hon. Yafesi Otim who is looking for money to go for treatment yet there was money here. Nothing has been given yet, so it looks like even among the senior citizens, there are those who are more senior than the others in the hearts of those who give this money.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, colleague for that information, which drives my point home because as Uganda, we are looking towards having our senior citizens agreeable to all and not on the basis of “if my face pleases the President then I become a senior citizen”. We must have a criterion of selecting our senior citizens rather than having the individual few recycled every now and again to benefit from the resources of this country. This should be addressed immediately by the government as we all watch the steps taken in the allocation of national resources to select senior citizens who may be invisible for that matter.

Mr Speaker, I also want to draw the attention of the House to the same page where the committee observed that due to proper facilitation of the Presidency, the image of Uganda has improved tremendously. I am wondering, is it because of the glittering and expensive jet plane? What about the stinking poverty of our people in the countryside? What about people who are dying of hunger? What about the rotting cancer of corruption in this country? It is a shame if we imagine that one face and one vision can portray a positive image of this country. 

It is we the citizens who should portray the good image of this country. If we are proud of our country, if we can sustain our livelihood within the country instead of dying of hunger and living like beggars, then the country’s image will be seen in glaring light. But if it is going to be because of the Presidency then the dark corners of this country, the continuous war in the North, the corruption and the stinking poverty will taint the image of this country, take it or leave it. 

I also want to comment on the selective handouts to so-called investors; selective in the sense that we glorify those investors at the expense of our indigenous, Ugandan, private investors. We don’t promote our own at all. Professor, I don’t know if you have invested here and are being glorified as such but these selective handouts by the President, while leaving out indigenous Ugandans, is killing the spirit of investment and business in this country. We need to see our own people being helped so that as a country, people are motivated to invest in our country and not to go outside this country. If you are going to have selective handouts to investors to bail them out; just the few who are normally rotated, you will continue to hear the Basajjabalaba’s, Phenix and the like. We want to see our indigenous investors being bailed out by the state and that will have meaning.

Lastly, I was also surprised that the committee, having seen the irregularities as outlined in the report, it went ahead and said: “We can still approve the supplementary.” You know as my colleague said, while other things are still pending, we need to hear even the reports where they had asked the government to come and explain further. If we keep on just passing budgets or supplementaries, while things are not well done, the committee should stand up. Let them be given all the details before we can pass it. Every now and then we are borrowing, we are giving supplementaries, other things are pending and we are continuing. How shall we go on as a country? We need things right in this country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

3.54
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have given me an opportunity to say a few things about the report. I want to take off from where my sister, hon. Betty Anywar has stopped. 

When I look at page 10 of this report, there is a statement by the committee in which I find a contradiction. This reads: “In spite of the justification given by the minister, the committee remained concerned about the way Phenix Logistics was accessing public funds when other actors in the same industry were not being provided the same support. The committee recommends that government provides a clear explanation to the House the basis upon which Phoenix Logistics accesses these funds.” The question which I want to pose to the chairperson of the committee: is the amount you are asking the House to approve excluding this concern or not?

THE SPEAKER: I think what is from that is for future purposes. For future purposes, let a clear policy be done.  

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, you are clarifying; I wish they had added as a rider that for future purposes but from here, I do not see it. Because this is a contradiction and I think we must take it seriously. 

The former Excellency, the Ambassador raised the issue of government supporting this private development. Yes, because when these loans are brought here, they are going to create jobs and to create avenues for widening the tax base. But what do we see today? Because it was on that basis that we approved that loan for Phoenix Logistics but what do we see today? The very people we approve loans for, the ones we guarantee are the people who get tax waivers. What a contradiction! You sometimes make our lives very difficult to defend when you give those reasons and in the end you find such contradictions. 

On the issue of CDO, we approved Shs 5.6 billion as its budget this financial year. But what do we see now? The supplementary is more than twice what the budget was at that time. Because it was based on that budget that even the indicative figures were raised. 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, thank you and I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Okupa for giving way.  Actually as you comment on the Cotton Development Organization’s supplementary expenditure, I would like to inform you that what the committee should actually be recommending is 3.7 billion and not 13.52 billion. If we are talking about 125,000 bales and you multiplied this by 189, that is, the weight of a bale; you come to something like 125,200 kilograms multiplied by 150 brings you to about 3.7 billion and not 13.52 billion. So the information I want to give to hon. Okupa is that this amount is over inflated and I think the discrepancy or the difference between 13.52 billion and 3.75 billion should be deducted from the total request by the committee. I thank you.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Amuriat. You know I was coming to that because if you approved 5.6, how do you get this? What was the increment? The increment was Shs 150 only and yet originally we were budgeting for 800 or even if you budget at 450. So, the request of 13.52 is exaggerated. We do not need the supplementary just because of a difference of Shs 150. 

I even remember very well that this House rejected a report, which was read here on the issue of the indicative price because CDO had brought a report, which was read by the Chairperson of Agriculture that they are now going to put in 650 but the House pronounced itself that we should proceed with Shs 800 per kilogram and go and look for money. Unless you are telling us now that this is to pay the farmers Shs 800 per kilogram but if it is 600, this is broad day light robbery. This money is not going to the farmers. What we need for that difference is less than the 13.25 billion. 

They have raised the issue of –(Ms Akol rose_)– please!

MS AKOL: Thank you colleague for giving way. And Mr Speaker, I want to give information on how the 13.52 billion was utilized because the detailed breakdown was given to the committee:

Payment of farm gate prices support of 150 per kilogram; 9.450 billion was spent to purchase 125,200 bales. Then purchase of organic cotton, this is still to the farmers, in Aromo, Lira District plus transportation and ginning, Shs 1.38 billion was spent. Then payment to ginners for 3,500 metric tones of cotton seed supplied for planting in this season, 2009-2010, was Shs 1.225 billion and of course final payment for pesticides and pumps procured in July and August, which is Shs 1.266 billion. This is that clarification I wanted to give regarding the Shs 13.52 billion. I thank you honourable colleague for giving way.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I want to be taught some mathematics by the chairperson of the committee. When you talk about 125,200 bales, even if a bale weighed 200 kilograms, which is actually beyond - for your information a bale is 189 kilograms - the total weight that you realise is Shs 2,504,000. When this is computed by the difference between 450 and 600, you come to a total of Shs 3.7 billion, not 9 -(Interjections)- no, put organic cotton aside. It is not Shs 9 billion. 

And I would like the chairperson to prove here now - 

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Members, should we go back on page 4? Don’t you think the law presents us a problem? The problem is about statutory remittance of Shs 3.7 billion; this is what I find that we are going through an exercise but there is a legal problem. I think we should look into it and see whether it is not causing us problems as Parliament.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, we are appropriating money in this House and as we do that, we have to be mindful of the figures.

THE SPEAKER: Appropriating money yes, but I am saying the report on page 4, if you really internalise it, it causes a problem for this debate. I do not know whether you have internalised it.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I do not see the problem it causes. It is why -

THE SPEAKER: First of all, they state, “The Constitution, the Budget Act and … permit the government when need arises to incur supplementary expenditure in any financial year. However, the Budget Act, Section 12(2) authorises government to incur supplementary expenditure, not exceeding three …” This is what I am trying to show you. I do not know, but for me it is causing me a problem.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, it is not on the basis of what the law allows or disallows. My argument is that we have got to ask for money that is actually going to be put to use. Not anything more, not anything less. They build up to Shs 13.53 billion that the Cotton Development Organisation requires as supplementary expenditure, contains this extra amount that was paid to farmers. The Shs 125,200 – simple arithmetic will tell you that for this particular purpose, about Shs 3.7 billion will be required not Shs 9 billion as the chairperson specified.

In other words, it is my firm conviction that the Cotton Development Organization is asking for more than it is incurred. 

MS AKOL: He requested me to answer.

MR OKUPA: The chairperson will have time to respond; the good thing is that when we used to have our cows, our parents educated us and we all did mathematics and I think we can be able to appreciate these issues. I think that list should be looked at, but also the chairperson and the committee raised the issues of lack of consultative approach by the CDO. We have raised the issue in and out of this House about CDO. Time has now come and the Prime Minister should take this matter seriously. CDO needs some restructuring.

Chairperson, I would also be comfortable if you helped me on the issues of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs because this is another area I do not know. You have given us a summary but when I looked at that supplementary, which was brought at that time, the issue of Foreign Affairs, how has Foreign Affairs benefited from this supplementary, I wish you had mentioned - this is one area that needs funding, we were together in West Africa, we were together in Brussels, including the Minister of State for Finance. They need help from this government.

Finally, on the traditional leaders, can I be made to understand why money has not been released to Iteso cultural union? We provided a budget of Shs 500 million to be shared between the ICU - the Iteso cultural group and the Adhola but it is surprising that the Adhola accessed Shs 250 million but the Emorimor, King Papa Iteso Augustine Osuban Adugala has not accessed this money despite providing all necessary documentation and yet the Adholo, with nothing regarding the requirements which were necessary for the release of money, accessed the Shs 250 million. May I know from the minister responsible why this has continued despite us raising this matter? I need an explanation that I can go and give my people.

4.09
MR ISHAA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me the opportunity. I want to thank the committee for the report especially for the information that they have availed to us in this House but at the same time, let me express my concern for the recommendations that later followed.

Besides the good information that they were able to enrich us with, I am concerned that within the same law, the budget framework, the budget law it is provided that reallocation can be made specifically on emergencies. Even as quoted in this report, the reallocation or supplementary budget would have been meant to cater for emergencies that would arise. But I am deeply concerned that what has been provided for here is basically what could have been planned in the normal budget, which would not call for any emergency or supplementary support from government.

As I am to move further on page 9 of the report, I am still concerned by why State House was able to spend Shs 21.3 billion on unforeseen emergencies in the name of traditional leaders, donations to senior citizens, religious leaders and progressive farmers. It is very important for this Parliament and the people of Uganda to know what criterion is used to determine and define a progressive farmer by State House and government. Even in this House, I know you, Mr Speaker, hon. Okello-Okello, and others including hon. Byanyima who is pointing at me, qualify to be senior citizens. Are they part of the beneficiaries of these funds? This raises a lot of concern. But even if money were being given to some people for whatever they have done for this country, don’t you think it would have been right for us to follow the rightful laws? Under what law are we operating? Under what policy are we operating? How does State House just imagine that, “These particular farmers should benefit”? This is what makes us very unserious as a country and even as Parliament if this is the criterion that we use to carry out government business.

We have traditional leaders in this country from all regions. We have the Wononyaki in Lango but I have never had of the Wononyanki being mentioned anywhere for any benefit from State House. But recently we had Shs 2 billion going to Buganda and another billion going to Bunyoro. How do we define this –(Interruption)

MR MENHYA: Mr Speaker, I thank my colleague for giving way. As the Chairperson of the Presidential Affairs Committee, I wish to say that the President as the fountain of honour of this country and the head of state has the prerogative to give and donate something to anybody who pleases him and I am of the view –(Interjections)- that the Shs 21.3 billion that was spent by State House, among other things, went to classified expenditure. It is not true that all this money was just donated. I thought I should provide that kind of information. Thank you. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is my colleague who comes from Busoga, which is a beneficiary of the Shs 2 billion and having a conflict of interest, in order to come here and say that the rest of us should not be complaining because we have not pleased the President? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Is it out of order for one to be grateful? If one appreciates, does that mean he is out of order? You see, good manners are that when you get something, you appreciate it. But, hon. Members, don’t you think in view of the laws, which I pointed out before for this particular report, we really do not need to extend the debate? But what we should do is to prepare ourselves to debate these issues in the coming budget. This money was properly incurred under the law. The law allowed them to spend it so long as it is not more than 3 percent and this is what the committee told us: that they were within the law and it has already been incurred. They are not asking you to authorise them. They have already incurred and are only saying, “This is what we did”. Why don’t we prepare ourselves for the coming budget?

MR ISHAA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I was still on the Floor.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, you are still on the Floor but I am saying, isn’t it high time we concluded this debate?

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You are right they are within the law but what is important when we come here as legislators is to ask: was it incurred properly according to the accounting procedures? This is what is important. We do not mind -

THE SPEAKER: It was incurred lawfully.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Let me give an example, Mr Speaker. On page 5, on the sources of funding for the supplementary expenditure, No. 1 among the sources of funding for this supplementary expenditure was drawn from Bank of Uganda amounting to Shs 63.438 billion. Can the minister explain to us how he withdrew money from Bank of Uganda? We all know that the Consolidated Fund Account is held by Bank of Uganda and we do not mind if this expense came from the Consolidated Account. Can the minister now explain to us this drawing from Bank of Uganda and how it happened? Did it have parliamentary approval? 

Two, the allocation within the wage bill on No. 5, we do not mind having spent this money but when you say the allocation within the wage bill of Foreign Affairs, are there some employees who were not paid? What happened? This is a wage bill – if it was development capital, you can say yes, they halted this expense. But the wage bill, you reallocate it and you come here and tell us it was okay? I find it very difficult to accept.

Going to the cotton, we have been told that this money was used to buy 125,200 bales.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Nsubuga, I thought he was on the Floor and you had just come in for clarification.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: But I want to know. Can the minister explain to us? According to my calculation, this expenditure would have been Shs 3.3 billion and they have spent Shs 13 billion. Can he explain the deficit?

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Two colleagues have raised the issue of the kilos in a bale and the quantities purchased. But I want to make this clarification that a total of 66,000,000 kilogrammes of seed cotton was purchased, equivalent to 125,200 bales. So I do not know what you are using to calculate the quantities of kilos in your bales but this is the data we got from CDO. I thank you.  

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, the difference is Shs 150 from Shs 450 to Shs 600. When you multiply these bales by Shs 150, the sum in difference you get is Shs 3.3 billion. So how did you get Shs 13 billion?

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, I think honourable members have to do the mathematics properly. What I know is that 66 million kilogrammes of cotton at Shs 150 give 125,200 bales. We are talking about the Shs 150 over and above the Shs 450 that was approved by Parliament as the price increment for cotton farmers.

MR ISHAA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I think in future we should be able to follow procedures in this House. I was made to sit and wait for information that turned out to be a submission. This was very unfair because it distorted my contribution. 

Anyway, the point I was trying to build was based on the issue of national balance and equitability in development, which I think even my good colleague, the Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs should be concerned with.

National Objective XII talks about balanced and equitable development in the country. The point I was trying to raise was not necessarily to the effect that the President should not give any money to any cultural institutions or progressive farmers, pioneer or senior citizens, but to have a balance in the whole country as provided for in our Constitution. This is because we all have a responsibility, as leaders and more so as legislators, to implement what is in our Constitution.

Secondly, on the money that was given to Phenix Logistics, I would like to say that I found it very disturbing because I could not imagine Shs 1.349 billion being given to Phenix Logistics in the name of a revolving fund. That also makes me pose a question: with whom would Phenix Logistics share this money? If it is a revolving fund, is it revolving within Phenix Logistics or also among other ginners in the country? I am saying this because I know that Nytil in Jinja, which is doing quite well and now operating as Picfare has not been given any support. So, if this money was given as a revolving fund, will such investors also benefit in future. 

Secondly, I would like to say that it was very unfortunate to find that government came here and said that they were supporting cotton revival in the country yet it was the same government that said they have only 47 percent in the AGOA firm. Why couldn’t government get to other ginners and give them support to enable them also sell to external markets?

I am still very concerned that even the money that was given to CDO as a away of caring for the emergence of the increased prices of cotton did not benefit the farmers. It was the same CDO that gave government the indicative figures of Shs 800, but later on did not provide for it in their budget. What happened is that they came and asked for a supplementary budget or an emergence fund from government. I think this is not how we should be operating as a country.

We always have a normal budgeting process where all government departments prepare budgets before presenting them in this House. If we are to give out a supplementary budget that is required in the law, why don’t we provide these requirements within our budget framework other than waiting for – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the subject of the current debate is a report of the committee on the supplementary schedule that was tabled here on 19 March. This schedule, as we have been told by the committee, was lawfully incurred; it was within the provisions of the law. I am not saying that you do not have merits in the contribution, but what you are saying should come when we are handling another subject. I think you should prepare those ideas for the time we will be dealing with the coming budget; they will fit there. Otherwise, for this one as I see, with the legal provisions quoted, I do not really think we should go that far. Anyway, it is up to you.

MR ISHAA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. However, I would like to say that I am still concerned with the Shs 5.2 billion that was spent on rent. 

I would like to say that I have a right and the mandate to debate this report. It is also the prerogative of this Parliament to know what has been submitted here by the committee. I am wondering and I need to know, how come we accumulated Shs 5.2 billion on rent for the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs? It is important we get to know that. And why didn’t the ministry budget or plan for it? 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable for giving way. On this Shs 5.2 billion to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, I would like to say that we tried to ask the minister about the operations of the Uganda Registration Services Bureau – it is good the Chairman of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee is here. But a couple of weeks ago the minister was before our committee and said that that bureau is not operational as of now because no money was allocated to it. I am wondering how the same issue came here. That supplementary budget was made for that particular purpose. The information I want to give is that this bureau is not operational and, therefore, no money was given to the bureau according to the Attorney-General. So, how does it come to the supplementary budget?

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Lukwago, you are a lawyer and you are very conversant with the arrangements at the Ministry of Justice and the Attorney-General’s Chambers. Where are the homes of the various departments of the Ministry of Justice and the Attorney-General’s Chambers? Are they in government buildings? You know them. Where are they? I will allow you time to tell us the locations where these departments are operating. Where is the Administrator-General? (Laughter)

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, the Administrator-General is housed on Amamu House.

THE SPEAKER: Is that a government house?

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I am aware that it is not a government house but there are two aspects here. We are talking -

THE SPEAKER: You have answered. 

MR LUKWAGO: It is not a government building.

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Directorate of Public Prosecutions?

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, it has been shifting from one place to another.

THE SPEAKER: Currently. (Laughter)

MR LUKWAGO: It is currently found at Crane Chambers.

THE SPEAKER: Is it a public building?

MR LUKWAGO: No. Crane Chambers does not belong to government.

THE SPEAKER: Where are the ministry’s headquarters? (Laughter)

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I was talking about Uganda Registration Services Bureau, which they are saying was funded from the supplementary vote but which is non-functional.

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Registrar of Companies?

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, the Registrar of Companies is found on Amamu House. However, Uganda Registration Services Bureau, which is provided for under the Uganda Registration Services Bureau Act is a body on its own. It is a statutory body which is non-functional and therefore we cannot pay rent for it.

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Constitutional Court or Court of Appeal? (Laughter)

MR ISHAA OTTO: Mr Speaker, as I wind up -(Laughter)– alternatively, even the Shs 5.2 billion could have been used by government to buy that building for the offices of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. This report has given us good information but if you follow the recommendations based on the information given, it is not supporting it. It is contradictory and in my view, we have to make amendments to this report before we go ahead to pass it. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.33
PROF. MORRIS OGENGA-LATIGO (FDC, Agago County, Pader): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the committee for the report but I would like to differ with hon. Tanna who praised the committee exceedingly for the report. I will point out why I differ.

On the last paragraph on page 2, the committee says that in order to have a comprehensive and structured assessment of the supplementary expenditure schedule, they did a number of things. On page 3 they even define for themselves the terms of reference for their work. 

As we shared with you, Mr Speaker, the issue in the debate of this supplementary expenditure is not whether it exceeds the mandatory three percent. Rather it is provided that supplementary expenditures be brought to Parliament so that government explains whether the expenses they incur are worthy of a supplementary.

One fundamental error or shortfall that I find in the report was that the report does not reflect a critical examination of the various supplementary expenditures as tabled in Schedule I and the associated explanations that may have been given. I am going to deal with that in a short while.

More importantly, I would like to seek clarification from the committee because in the top paragraph of page 6, they say: “As seen above, some of the supplementary funding was resourced from budget cuts or suppression of votes of a number of departments.” They go ahead and say that Section 3 of the Budget Act provides that any reallocation of the funds shall be made in consultation. What I do not understand from this statement of the committee is whether reallocations are part of this supplementary expenditure and how a reallocation can be a supplementary expenditure when the money has been appropriated. 

If there is anything in this figure, which is a reallocation, the approval of the total figure would mean that we approve monies for those in government to use that they should not have used. And this needs to be sorted out.

When you go back to the issue of what we as Parliament must do in respect of supplementary expenditure, our role is an oversight role. We ask government to account. If we give you ordinary money and you spend it and then you come and ask for more money you must have a good reason for that.

The role of the committee is to examine whether the reasons given by government satisfy the supplementary expenditure. When they do not, then we should tell them, “If you repeat this, there will be consequences.” 

I would also like to deal with this issue that the chair of the committee has been explaining, that is, the Cotton Development Authority. First of all, while we worry about figures I have a very serious problem because in the last paragraph of page 9, the committee report says that the committee was informed that Shs 1.349 billion was availed to Phenix Logistics through the Cotton Development Authority to facilitate value addition to cotton lint. 

The first question I would ask myself is: Phenix is an industrial establishment; yes, it uses cotton. What business has Cotton Development Authority got with it and not the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry that should supervise this? Once you start seeing money taking roads that it should not take, you must have a very keen eye on whether the money really walked that path and where that money went.  

If you look at the committee report, that critical examination has not been done. The committee chair and this report says, “We were told.” When you were told, what did you do about it? Did you ask them to produce evidence? Did you follow up to where the money reached? It is not here in the report! It makes us a laughing stock in the country because we are supposed to be the guardians of the interests of this country. CDO claiming that they bought 66 million kilogrammes of cotton; from where? Can they give you a breakdown of cotton bought from each of the districts of the cotton growing areas for verification?

I had a very serious problem with CDO when they were battling DONOVANT. They unfortunately incorporated scientists to produce a report suggesting that organic cotton was a menace to cotton production. The only problem was that they forgot that I was a very senior scientist. I supervise students who did their Masters and PhD in cotton research and some of us understood this thing. I went to a meeting and analysed what they presented. Just like the report from Tanzania, if the Parliament can remember, again sponsored by the Cotton Development Authority and brought before this House, not to provide learning experience for the cotton sector but to justify certain things, we even said that that report should be rejected. 

In my view, I have to say this: the claim that CDO spent Shs 13 billion or whatever figure minus Phenix in buying cotton, I can say openly that this is not true. The claim that we produced 125,000 bales of cotton, I can stick my neck on it that this is not true! All that the committee should have done was to go and ask everybody who picked the money from CDO. I have information that CDO and some of their staff were involved in physically buying cotton, which is not their job. Now if they are physically involved and they are the ones producing the statistics and our committee merely accepts what CDO said –(Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wouldn’t want to intervene at this particular time but hon. Ogenga-Latigo, I am a Member of this committee. This matter came to the committee a long time ago and it took us a bit of time. We raised the questions that you are raising and we got the answers. For proper calculations, we had elaborate discussions only that when the report was brought by hon. Madada, we had a serious discussion here and when you look at this, there are some issues that are very administrative. 

This money had already been spent so they used powers within because some of them were emergencies to the Ministry of Finance and they had to spend the money. It took us a bit of time, like you are talking now; to ask certain questions and most of them were answered. Some of these things will continue creeping in, even in the budget.

I wouldn’t want anybody to think that committee members sat and rushed over this, no. There were a number of letters that were written to us so I want you to bear with us especially on a supplementary when money has already been spent. We only advised relevant chairpersons of the committees to go far and find out so that they can report to the committee, otherwise I would want you to have some comfort and some trust in us, as a committee, that we did a good job in coming to this conclusion. I thank you.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you very much, my senior brother Nathan. If you followed my argument right from the beginning, I said that as a component of your report and in your terms of reference, if you had included evidence of accountability, this would have helped. That is all that I am saying. For what you will do in the future, I have not declared anywhere that I have any shadow of a doubt regarding the ability of the committee. I am just referring to this particular instance and the deficiency related to some of the issues such as the Cotton Development Authority.

My very strong proposal is that as hon. Nathan Byanyima said, this committee should have recommended that the Committee of Agriculture follows up on actual expenditure relating to this money. I am going to ask the relevant accountability committee to actually take up this matter because let us be honest with ourselves. Last year, there was so much rain that most of the cotton growing areas lost cotton. The previous year when the weather was good, the total cotton yield was about 100,000 bales. When you have lost production you cannot get 125,000 bales. I am looking at the whole thing holistically and I would beg that this matter be followed up.

As regards this issue of Phenix Logistics, His Excellency made a passionate appeal in Japan for us to support Phenix. It is not our policy that governments should not touch business. It is the policy of your very own government where you serve as a minister that government should not be involved. But once a decision is made to support a sector, it doesn’t make sense to support the tail of the sector and you leave out the body and the head. 

If you want to support textile exports, you must support entire levels from production of cotton, cotton processing, production of textiles and clothing, which you export. If you focus on one end, it will just be like pulling a mule where only the front leg is outside and three quarters of the body is in the pit. Until you bring the mule out and it walks on four legs, your struggle is in vain. 

Therefore, hon. Members, this committee and report should have categorically said that this will be the last supplementary expenditure on Phenix until a clear justification for what it wants is provided and money appropriated in a normal process. Otherwise, the inefficiency of Phenix means that the price of the product from Phenix will be so high that for it to be competitive in America, we must subsidise the price. Hon. Members, you can see the absurdity that comes when we poor Ugandans now subsidise Japanese and Americans who are well off. It is very absurd!

Lastly, hon. Lukwago talked about the housing of the Uganda Registration Services Bureau. When he made some clarifications, I then understood that this was under the Administrator-General. Mr Speaker, you mentioned the Bureau of Statistics. I think in the last Parliament we passed a loan on a big project; the registration of companies. If I can recall, I was on the Committee of National Economy. That loan was supposed to provide for the construction of Statistics House to ensure that all these bodies that deal with data in Uganda are housed in a common place. 

I would want to know from government whether it is technically so difficult to separate Uganda Registration Services Bureau from the Administrator-General so that since it provides statistics on births and deaths, it becomes part of the consolidated institution housed in Statistics House where occasionally, I hear the NRM caucus used to meet.

Mr Speaker, I would like to suggest to the House that while we accept these supplementaries because we cannot do much on account of the law, we should really tighten our examination of supplementaries when government tables them before the House. Where the process does not permit, our next course of action should include recommendations to appropriate committees to follow up these matters so that the country is accounted to for the monies that they give government to administer the country. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, you have heard what the Leader of the Opposition has said and the various committees have also heard. In case there is anything affecting your committee, you can follow it up and give us a more detailed report. We are now supposed to deal with the motion to receive and adopt the report. I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Now what will happen is that we will have another session for the Committee of Supply to consider the two items. Meanwhile, we can tackle another subject. Do you have the energy? I believe the energy is there so let us go to the next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW 45 MILLION UNITS OF ACCOUNT TO FINANCE COMMUNITY AGRICULTURAL INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (CAIIP)

4.53
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Erinah Wangwa): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Committee of National Economy, I am happy to present a report on the motion for the resolution of Parliament to authorise government to borrow Units of Account 45 million from African Development Bank for financing the Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Project II (CAIIP II). On our Order Paper, the amount was 30 million UA but I think that was a typing error. The amount is 45 million UA.

This is a report of the Committee of National Economy on the request by government to borrow Units of Account 45 million from the African Development Bank for the Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Program II (CAIIP II) in the Ministry of Local Government.

The request was presented to this House by the hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and referred to our committee in accordance with Article 159 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and rule 152(2)(b) of our Rules of Procedure.

The committee has accordingly considered and scrutinised the request and now begs to report as follows. 

Methodology

The committee held meetings with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the technical officers. It also held meetings with the project management team. 

The committee analysed the following documents:
•	The minister’s project brief that was laid on the Table
•	The loan financing agreement
•	The project appraisal document
•	Project implementation plan and 
•	The report on the sub counties benefiting under CAIIP I. 

The committee also made on-spot field checks on the activities under CAIIP I in the districts of Mubende, Mityana, Kamuli and Kaliro and I am laying on the Table the documents as read before: the project appraisal report, the loan agreement, the committee minutes, written responses to the questions raised by the committee, the map of Uganda showing coverage of CAIIP district by district and the project implementation plan.

Background 

Mr Speaker, you recall that in July 2007, this House did authorize government to borrow UA 30 million from the African Development Bank and another Special Drawing Rights of 9,950,000 from the International Fund of Agricultural Development (IFAD) to finance the first phase of the Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme (CAIIP I). 

CAIIP was a successor to the Area Based Agricultural Modernization Programme (AAMP), which was implemented in 16 districts in South-western Uganda. CAIIP I was intended to replicate the achievements of AAMP in the districts of central and eastern Uganda, covering Rakai, Lyantonde, Masaka, Sembabule, Mpigi, Mubende, Mityana, Kiboga, Nakasongola, Kibaale, Mukono, Kayunga, Iganga, Namutumba, Butaleja, Tororo, Kamuli, Kaliro, Pallisa, Budaka, Mbale, Sironko, Manafwa, Bududa, Kapchorwa and Bukwo. 

Justification of CAIIP

In a review of Uganda’s agriculture and rural sector carried out in 2005, a number of investment gaps were identified under the pillars of PMA namely; infrastructure for access to markets; infrastructure for agro processing; and environment and natural resources management. 

The Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme (CAIIP) was, therefore, designated to contribute to the seventh pillar of PMA, that is, physical infrastructure with particular focus on improvement of rural roads, markets and agro processing facilities. 

The project seeks to improve rural agricultural infrastructure through improvement of district feeder and community access roads which will link farmers to markets and in addition, the project will invest in empowerment of markets which will be equipped with adequate facilities including stalls, slabs, stores, agro processing facilities, water and sanitation and rural energy. These market places will become rural centres of commercial interchange and growth points around which other private enterprises will emerge. With reduced transport costs and post harvest losses, the farmers will achieve higher margins of incomes at the farm gate. 

It will also be recalled that when this Parliament was approving the funding for CAIIP I, government undertook to secure further funding to cover the North and North eastern regions under phase II which had been programmed to start in 2008. It should be noted that some districts in central Uganda and West Nile region have similar programmes namely: the District Livelihood Project (DSLP) funded by IFAD and Northwest Agriculture Small Holder Projects financed by the African Development Bank.  

The Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme herein referred to as CAIIP I was launched on 30 October 2007 and implementation is already underway in the 26 districts covering three sub-counties in each district. 

The Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme II is intended to be rolled out to a number of districts in the North and Northeast of the country in namely: Gulu, Amuru, Kitgum, Pader, Lira, Dokolo, Amolatar, Soroti, Katakwi, Kumi, Kaberamaido, Amuria and Bukedea as well as Jinja and Wakiso which were omitted in CAIIP I. There will be a further expansion of the programme coverage from three sub-counties to   35 percent of the sub-counties in each of the 26 districts under CAIIP I.

Project Components

The project (CAIIP II) will be implemented over a five year period and has one core field component and two service components. These are:
1.	Rural infrastructure improvement;
2.	Community mobilisation; and
3.	Programme facilitation.  

Rural Infrastructure Improvement  

The programme is to finance a wide range of investments which will be selected from the following options: 
•	Improvement of feeder roads;
•	Construction of market places;
•	Construction of produce stores;
•	Construction of cold rooms;
•	Installation of rice hullers;
•	Installation of grain mills;
•	Installation of milk coolers;
•	Installation of peanut paste machines;
•	Installation of honey extractors;
•	Installation of tomato pulpers; and
•	Installation of cassava chipping equipment. 

Community Mobilisation

The programme will finance community mobilisation activities to make small rural farmer holders, interest groups and communities aware of the programme and training of the rural communities to enable them effectively participate in selection, approval, management and maintenance of the infrastructure. It is planned that this component works closely with the community development department as well as NAADS to carry out community mobilisation activities. 

Programme Facilitation

The project will be managed by a programme facilitation team. This programme facilitation component handles the management and transfer of resources to local governments, the replenishments of ADB and IFAD and also provides technical guidance and direction to the implementing districts. 

The Loan Terms and Conditions
This is a concessional loan with the following terms: Loan of amount UA 45.0 million (equivalent to US $60 million); maturity period of 50 years including a  10 year grace period; and service charge of 0.75 per cent on disbursed outstanding balances. 

Observation on performance of CAIIP-I

The Committee on National Economy in its interaction with the project management team of the Ministry of Local Government and while on its on spot field assessment of the project implementation activities in the districts noted the following: 

1.	There is an impressive participation by the benefiting communities including selection of projects, supervision and certification of works done. In areas that the committee visited, there was wide involvement and participation by the communities and district leadership in CAIIP-I programme. 
2.	The limit to three sub-counties per district as beneficiaries for CAIIP was causing complaints from non-benefiting sub-counties. There was an overwhelming demand that the project be expanded to cover all sub-counties. The proposal of increasing coverage to cover 35 per cent of sub-counties in the districts under CAIIP-II is a welcome development. 
3.	The committee further observed the need for the local governments to   plan and provide funds for continued road maintenance to avoid deterioration of the   roads under the roads under the programme.
4.	The construction of markets and value addition infrastructure is behind schedule in all the areas that were visited by the committee. This is because the districts are still identifying the suitable locations and are sorting out land ownership issues.
5.	The committee expressed concern that CAIIP may duplicate the interventions already being implemented by NAADS under the National Agricultural Zoning Strategy.
6.	The committee cautioned against wastage of borrowed resources through duplication of interventions. However, the committee was informed that NAADS interventions are mainly in production and that CAAIP interventions are infrastructure making the two programmes complementary.
7.	The committee wondered why the Ministry of Finance intends to borrow for CAIIP II before CAIIP I is fully implemented. However, the committee was informed that CAIIP I was formulated with the aim of covering the entire country.

The project was passed by Parliament on condition that it would roll out to new districts. CAIIP II will, therefore, cover more districts to implement similar interventions as under CAIIP I.

Recommendations

1.	The ministry should fast track the implementation of the project especially the construction of markets and value addition facilities.
2.	Local governments should provide for maintenance funds under the annual budget to maintain the infrastructure and facilities under CAIIP.
3.	The committee recommends the harmonisation of the CAIIP intervention with NAADS activities to avoid duplication of activities.
4.	Project implementation should be properly planned and monitored to ensure timely implementation. This will guarantee high absorption capacity of the loans and thereby reducing risks of attracting penalties on the loan.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and hon. Members CAIIP is a critical intervention in fighting against poverty and lifting the standards of living of our people especially in the rural areas. The need for value addition in the agricultural sector and linking the farmers to the market by constructing roads cannot be over emphasised.

The committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the request by government to borrow US $45 million from the African Development Bank to finance the Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme, Project II be approved by this House. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and the committee.

5.09
MR JAMES BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee for a report well prepared.

Let me be very clear from the beginning that I totally support government’s bid to get this loan for this project. As we have been told, it is going to handle issues of infrastructure, improvement of roads in particular, markets and agro processing facilities. Those are key areas, which will help our country, our rural areas to focus and develop. The major reason I stood up is to ensure that we get records correct because Luwero is not included in this programme.

In phase I Luwero was not included and they went around Luwero District, to Mpigi, Mubende, Mityana, Kiboga, Nakasongola, Mukono and Kayunga and then they left Luwero out. So as written out in 3.1, Luwero was also left out. In addition to Jinja and Wakiso, Luwero must be included. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, we have been told that this programme is going to work hand in hand in strengthening NAADS. This will be very good for us because even in NAADS, Luwero has been lagging behind; little has been brought there, so we want this one to reinforce the NAADS programme in Luwero so that we can also benefit from these programmes.

You have seen even where this programme was in phase I, there were complaints of the sub-counties which were left out. You can imagine a whole district being left out. So when I complain and ask that Luwero must be included, you understand my concern. Let me pledge here that we are ready to receive this programme -(Laughter)- and Luwero administration is ready to plan and provide for the continued road maintenance after this programme. So there would not be any problem about it.

Let me also pledge here that we in Luwero have already identified suitable locations for this project. There will not be any problem of land or land ownership. We are ready for this programme. So, I appeal to government to ensure that Luwero is included in this, in addition to Wakiso and Jinja, we must be included so that we can enjoy the fruits of this loan. I thank you.

5.12
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the request for this loan. From the report the chairperson says she met the Minister of Finance and then the project management team. The role of the Ministry of Local Government, which supervises local governments where this project is being implemented, is not being defined here yet government stands to lose a lot in terms of what is being done.

I have been involved in government projects of this nature and two sub-counties in my constituency are benefiting. But the problem is, unless the Ministry of Local Government is involved at the highest level and the districts provide sufficient funds to maintain these roads every year, then these are going to be one year roads. In places like Bugisu which are hilly and where there is a lot of rain in some periods, these roads are likely to be washed away and they will serve for a very short period. It will be very good if Local Government insisted and particularly a vote is provided so that there is money for road maintenance because currently there is no provision for adequate funds for road maintenance because the ministry does not give that money. What is given to local governments for roads is basically for opening roads by sub-counties and maintaining a few by the district. But there is no particular fund set aside for maintaining roads that are newly opened and worked on like it is being done under CAIIP -(Interruption) 

MR KADDUNABBI: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. I would like to inform the House that the Ministry of Local Government was involved and when the minister came before the committee he apologised - because the Minister of Local Government was not available but the technical staff from the ranks of commissioners and even the project implementation team is from the Ministry of Local Government. They promised that they will be providing the necessary funds in that line. Thank you. (Mr Nathan Byanyima rose_)

MR BUKENI: I know Nathan Byanyima knows a lot about roads but next time. I am using a document that has been supplied to this House to debate this matter. It is not written anywhere that there was an apology –

THE SPEAKER: But he has informed you that the technical team was there.

MR BUKENI: Personally, I need that commitment because government risks losing. But if it is to be done next time I hope the minutes will capture it. My biggest interest is in providing funds under local governments to maintain these roads that are costing us highly in terms of the rates they are using to open them up.

The other issue is that of being only in a few sub-counties. I think we should think very fast so that we equate CAIIP to NAADS because there is no logic in opening roads in one sub-county and you cannot access the one in between the two which have open roads. I thank you.

5.18 
MS HUDA OLERU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for their report. In this House if a loan is brought specifically to develop the country I do not have any quarrel. Therefore, I am here to support this motion. 

My quarrel is that this is my third year in this House; I do not know how much we have passed but when you relate the amount of money we have passed here as loans with the physical activities on the ground, sometimes you are so amazed and that is my concern. I know these are not free grants but loans which my children will pay. I feel these loans must have impact on the ground. I want to know the monitoring systems that we have so that we follow these loans to see that they reach the poor who need them.  

In the report the chairperson clearly indicated that there are other types of loans where West Nile benefits from. I agree with her. She says that North West Agriculture Small Holders Development Project is working in West Nile. This project no longer exists in West Nile. And when it was there the funny part of it is that the headquarters were in Entebbe and the people were supposed to work in West Nile. You can imagine that distance! I do not know whether they have started the second or third phase but that was the problem. Up to now they do not even have their offices in any district in West Nile. We feel more costs were being incurred by travelling from Entebbe to West Nile to monitor and at the end more money was spent in administrative costs than on the people for whom we voted the money. 

There is also another project - I have not even met the people but I was in Yumbe one day and I heard people talking of the project called the District Livelihood Support Project, which might now replace this North West Small Holders Agriculture Project. But I do not know what they are doing at the moment because you cannot even see the programmes in the district plans. Even if they are an independent body, the district must have now included their activities in their plan which I have not seen done. I do not know the methodology they are using. Thank you.   

5.22
MR TOSKIN BARTILLE (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank You, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also want to join my friends in thanking the committee and supporting the request for this loan mainly for the facts that this loan has really gone to the sub-counties and the beneficiaries are supposed to improve on their feeder roads and the construction of the markets which are not present in most of the sub-counties. 

I am also happy that my district is a beneficiary of the previous loan although I wanted to say, like the hon. Member for Yumbe said, that much as we give money to our local governments, I think there is still need for a proper monitoring system to follow these funds to do the work they are supposed to do. 

I also want to find out what is expected of the beneficiary sub-counties? Are they supposed to pay the counter funding? Are they supposed to contribute some funs to support this project? I am asking this because as we speak, I have this problem in my constituency. The sub-counties have been told to contribute funds to buy land where the markets are supposed to be constructed. And this is creating a bit of a problem among the people. The people are wondering whether government is reintroducing poll tax or not. I think the explanation does not seem to have gone down well. Allow me to learn from the chairperson of this committee what is expected of the sub-counties.

The plan of covering only three sub-counties is also creating problems within the districts. This is because the three sub-counties would like to have the same support. I thought that as we introduce more loans or as we borrow more money, we should go back to the sub-counties that might have not benefited so that at the end of it we really have proper coverage of the districts that will have received this support. We should think of extending to other districts as other programmes come by. 

My sense is that spreading little money here and there is causing a problem to the country because at the end of it there is nothing to show. I thought that as we borrow funds we should concentrate on areas that need support. We could for example go to the new districts that we know still have a lot to do. We could then move to other districts later with the coming in of other programmes. If we do it systematically like that we shall be leaving a real mark behind. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.25
MS BETTY AMONGI: (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say I support the motion for the loan. However, I would like to start with the background of what is being called the Second Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme – the context within which this was conceived.

When this loan came in 2007, the concern we raised as Members of Parliament from Northern Uganda, were that the districts in Northern and North Eastern Uganda that had been affected by the war had missed out on the previous programmes. At that time, as the committee rightly points out, the loan had been borrowed for central and mid Eastern. There was a commitment that is now being fulfilled and the committee has rightly indicated that at page 3, that there would an undertaking to borrow for only North and North Eastern Uganda.

On page 3, the districts in North East or the sub-regions that constitute North and North East are Teso, Lango and Acholi. And that is the purpose within which this loan is being borrowed. And that is why the committee states that this loan is for North and North Eastern Uganda. Okay, let me go to Acholi. In that sub-region there are four districts. These include Gulu, Amuru, Kitgum and Pader; this sub-region has been ably represented in this report. 

In the Teso sub-region there are six districts, that is, Soroti, Katakwi, Kumi, Kaberamaido, Amuria and Bukedea, which are also rightly talked about here. But when it comes to the Lango sub-region, there are supposed to be five districts: Lira, Dokolo, Amolatar, Apac and Oyam. What surprises me is that in the Lango sub-region you have chosen only three districts leaving out the other two. And instead, either intentionally or unknowingly, you decided to bring in two districts that have benefited from the other loans: Jinja and Wakiso. You chose to exclude Oyam and Apac districts, which are rightly defined for this loan; they are part of the North and North East. 

I would like to know whether that was done knowingly or unknowingly. I am asking this because Jinja and Wakiso have been included in here with Apac and Oyam getting deleted intentionally yet the loan is for the districts in the North and North East. I want –(Mr Kibirige rose_)- are you standing to give information on deletion or inclusion because those are the two clarifications I am seeking? Are you giving information or clarification?

MR KIBIRIGE: I am giving information. I thank you hon. Member for giving way. This loan was supposed to roll out to as many districts as possible. The honourable member next to me – much as the earlier project was for mainly central and south western they missed out these districts of Luweero, Wakiso and Jinja. The information is that we pray that in as much as all those districts – when CAIIP III comes, it should cover all of them because in the areas that we have visited even with the three sub-counties, people were complaining to the extent that they had to find a way how in a district at least every constituency should get one sub-county covered. So, the information is that please just wait for CAIIP III –(Laughter)- because this is a very popular project and please –(Interruption) 

MS AMONGI: I thought you were giving me information. No, no sit down; you are just consuming my time.

MR KIBIRIGE: Please, we –(Interruption)

MS AMONGI: I am a very diplomatic person; I don’t want to embarrass you because I gave you my time. I want you to be informed that the words are “North and North East”, and Wakiso and Jinja are not part of the North East. How did they come here? North East is Teso and North is Lango and Acholi. The only explanation is that they deleted Apac and Oyam intentionally and brought in Jinja and Wakiso. This loan is for the North East. I am, or we are, not going to sit here and see you use influence peddling, which is corruption here -(Applause)- to do what you want to do. Under the law we are about to pass this is influence peddling. 

If you had told me that the loan was not for the North and North East, I would not have talked like this. But it is clearly defined. Therefore, at an appropriate time - if you do not correct it that is - I will bring a recommendation for the deletion of Jinja and Wakiso and the reinstatement of Oyam and Apac -(Interjection) 

MS NANKABIRWA: I am rising on a point of order; an amicable point of order -(Laughter)- and I want to thank you, Mr Speaker for allowing me to make it. Hon. Betty Amongi has made a statement which will remain on record. She has said that there was influence peddling but has not substantiated and said who peddled. Please -(Interjections)- I need your protection, Mr Speaker, from Members. 

THE SPEAKER: You are protected.

MS NANKABIRWA: Being a senior legislator who has been here for quite sometime - I am serving my fourth term - I know our Rules of Procedure. If you make an allegation, you have to substantiate it. The statement is that there was influence peddling and that certain districts have been removed from benefiting while others have been brought on board by somebody peddling influence. I just want to know whether she is in order to make such a statement without substantiating it.

THE SPEAKER: Did she say, “suspecting” or did she say, “There was influence peddling”? Hon. Amongi, please clarify your statement. Did you say suspecting or did you say there was influence peddling?

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, I said, “I suspect that there was influence peddling,” (Laughter) because Jinja and Wakiso do not fall under the Northeast. That is why I suspected that it was either an omission knowingly or unknowingly or there was suspected influence peddling. So, at an appropriate time, Mr Speaker - 

THE SPEAKER: No, I think you have made your point. If it was an error they will look into it. But you have made your point. 

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, the last issue goes to government. We the people of Lango are very good people but we are also getting impatient. If you look at NUREP, although the war has affected Lango, Teso and Acholi, you will find that in Lango, under NUREP, out of five programmes, all the five are working in Acholi and Teso and only two are working in Lango. When you see PRDP pilot projects, while you will see pilot projects in Acholi and Teso and other places, in Lango, the pilot projects are not there. A pattern is developing in the case of Lango and as leaders from Lango we are not going to sit and see this pattern develop. We are going to stand up on this as our right. I thank you.

5.36
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Mukono): Mr Speaker, this is the first time I am interfacing with a document concerning this programme and from the description of it and from the face of it, it looks to be a very interesting one because it involves certain infrastructural developments, which are a transformation and can be visualised. For instance, improvement of feeder roads, construction of market places; construction of produce stores and so forth. However, the committee’s observations on the performance of CAIIP I have the following:

N0. 1 was “… an impressive participation by the benefiting communities.” Now this is not qualified and yet participation is a wide subject. Somebody needs to explain to Parliament what this participation really means. Participation alone without looking at the transformations that have been made through the investment that has already been undertaken is not enough. The rest of the observations are concerns of the committee.

If it were possible in the future, I believe it would be necessary for some of these oversight committees to carry electronic gadgets such as still cameras or even video cameras so that we can look at the transformations you have made so far. For us who have not seen some of these projects being implemented. We should be able to see photographically that something is being done and, therefore, be able to support another loan for more transformation to be made elsewhere. Otherwise, on the face of it and on trust that the committee did a good job, we would want them to implement this in Buikwe for instance so that we can also carry on. Thank you.

5.39
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Mr Speaker, I want to support this request with the whole of my body and soul because of two reasons.

One is that it is targeting the very needy of our society. This request should have come much earlier than this. 

Two, the activities are meant to address the actual problems of the poor people. For instance in the Teso region if you brought milk coolers now, it would help the people to generate income and be able to improve educational activities as it used to be in the past.

I also want to seek clarifications from the committee on a few issues. One: who does the selection of these sub-counties? Is it the local governments or are they directed by the ministry? 

Two, what is the implementation period for this programme? We have been borrowing money, for example we borrowed money for small bridges and I have seen some bridges in my place being painted. I do not know whether that is the implementation of the other project or that is another project. So, when do you expect to start implementing this project and what is its lifespan?

And three, what provision is there for the sustainability of these projects when we start with CAIIP and when it winds up? Is there a plan that local government will sustain it? 

Finally, what percentage of this loan is going to be utilised for the intended activities? This is because what is common is that when a new project comes in, a lot of money is put into buying vehicles yet there are Local Government District vehicles. You will find that a high percentage of the project money will go into workshops and inland as well as outside travel for the project. How much are we going to put for the poor people? 

I have visited one of the sub-counties where CAIIP is: Agule sub-county in Pallisa District. I do not see the difference that this project has created between Agule and Kameke for instance or Agule and Oboliso. What yardstick are we going to use to measure the success of this project? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.42
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this report to enable the government get this loan to help the CAIIP programme. 

Imagine this project was launched on 30 October 2007 and in phase I, Pallisa District was one of the beneficiaries but it is not until recently that the programme took off in Pallisa. We are aware that most of these districts are full of wrangles in their procurement systems. I wonder whether there will be a programme or a design in future where we allow the central government to handle the implementation direct to the beneficiaries rather than involving the structures at the district level. This is because it has been proved that this has caused a lot of problems in most of the districts.

CAIIP and its objectives are very necessary for our local people as regards value addition and accessibility to the markets. In Pallisa, hon. Malinga has mentioned that the impact now cannot be seen because all the enterprises selected for CAIIP have not been implemented. 

As we speak, my worry is how we are going to monitor the accountability because even the districts have programmes to open community roads and CAIIP is doing the same. Our request is that if stones could be poured on those roads, their lifespan would be sustained.

On the issue of accountability, Members of Parliament should take interest because if we leave it to the local people then our people stand to be cheated and eventually CAIIP will lose out.

As regards the issue of roll out to other sub-counties, this should be addressed by this Parliament. NUSAF came and went and most of us appreciate what it has done. When you look at the items covered under CAIIP, for us we selected improvement of feeder roads and construction of markets. When the markets are constructed, the communities will also benefit and likewise the government will benefit as regards the taxes collected.

However, I want some clarification. When we initiated CAIIP, the conditions were laid down but most sub-counties are now setting their own conditions that the sub-county should not access the CAIIP programme if they don’t have land titles for the sub-county land. In most cases, we know that these sub-counties have existed since Kakungulu times in the 1960s but nobody has grabbed the land. This has delayed the implementation of CAIIP because they want land titles and you know the process of getting the land titles takes a long time and it becomes very tricky for us to miss the implementation of these programmes.

Mr Speaker, in most sub-counties the funds of CAIIP have not been released. They have only released part payment for opening feeder roads and they are telling us that they are also going to release more money for building the markets. I want some clarification as to when the total amount is going to be released to our people. 

It is coming in phases, yes, but we are now in phase II and even then, in Pallisa and other sub-counties in the Teso sub-region, they promised that more sub-counties would be rolled over. What are we going to tell our people if they hear that Parliament has passed a loan to address phase I? There should be some clarification on that and we see how we can move with the implementation of CAIIP. I urge the government and this Parliament to roll over CAIIP throughout Uganda so that the benefits are complementary.

I also wanted to clarify on what hon. Amongi described as Teso. For us who have been facing wars under Lakwena then Kony, Teso sub-region is described ranging from Tororo, Pallisa up to Katakwi and Karamoja sub-region. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.48
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this noble cause of securing this loan to improve the lives of our people. I don’t need to over emphasise the importance of value addition especially among the 80 percent of Ugandans who are involved in agricultural undertakings. However, I have a few observations and appeals to make in as far as this loan application is concerned.

In the first place I want to make a very passionate appeal to the committee and government especially on the following issue that was raised by my colleague, hon. Betty Amongi. You have seen in this House that members from South Western Uganda, West Nile region and other parts of Uganda have kept quiet because their regions have had a share of the national cake in one way or another through project support. You will also agree with me that it is very difficult in terms of planning if we cannot bring on board Oyam and Apac at this time. It becomes very difficult under the normal programming system to specifically go out and secure a loan for these two districts when we know that this loan is supposed to benefit North and Eastern districts of this country. 

This is a very humble appeal I am making that Apac and Oyam for all purposes and intent and for a smooth planning process as government, these two districts are brought on board unlike other sub-counties even if it is by phases. But to leave these districts out, it will become very difficult for us as a country to provide for them. 

I also have some observations on the issue of enterprise selection. I have looked at these areas of intervention that this loan intends to enhance and I have also looked at the social, economic and agricultural paradigm of these areas. Because when you look at Teso, when you look at the Lango sub-region and Acholi from the war recovery point of view, people are trying to reconstruct their lives and are trying to restock their kraals with animals. So if you are talking about installation of milk coolers, it means that in the first place you have to have very healthy cattle. And one of the methods through which you can have health cows which will be able to provide enough milk for you to cool will be through the construction of cattle dips. 

It is my strongest suggestion that as a system or as a chain of production, that the construction of animal dips be part and parcel of this process so that if you want to maximize and realize higher production, you have to maximize that whole journey of how you can raise a healthy cow, how you can feed it and how you can raise and be able to acquire milk that will need to be taken to the milk coolers. 

At the same time if you look at the Teso region, Teso in Uganda is the largest region in terms of production of groundnuts. I have not seen where there is a provision for groundnuts shellers. I wish this could also be brought on board because if you are really going to produce groundnuts at economic level, how are you going to shell them in order to prepare yourself to take to the market? I think we are looking at value addition and I believe the provision of maize and groundnut shellers will go a long way in improving the image of this project.

Most importantly under enterprise selection, I want once again to make this passionate appeal to government, let us run projects professionally. Let us not over politicize projects. I say this because under the present system of the NAADS; NAADS, I am afraid has been over politicised. The selection of the six families per sub-county is done under the chairmanship of the Movement Party. And that is in itself bad. I say this without fear or favour. The Chairman of NRM, Arua District is here, you can deny it but that is the truth on the ground - that is my brother there – I say this with all sincerity that if you want us to succeed, let these things be professionally done –(Interjection)– time is catching up with me, I have a lot yet to say. 

Thirdly when we are talking about enhancement of agricultural production in this area and therefore talking about value addition, there is one major problem we face as a country, which is electricity services provision. For example, right now –(Mr Bikwasizehi rose_)– yes my former chairman, some information? I can accept.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you, hon. Wadri for giving way. You indicated that you didn’t see the provision for machinery for shelling groundnuts but in this case, the intended value addition is much more than shelling. If you look at page 4, they are talking of installation of a peanut paste machine. We are going for paste making and not mere shelling, which is at a higher stage. Thank you. 

MR WADRI: You see, I did not talk about that because it is coming under what I am bringing forward; the issue of electricity services. Many of these places that we have talked about lack sustainable electricity services. I want to share with you my experience in this North West Agriculture Small Holders Project where magnificent district agriculture institutes have been constructed in Zeu for Nebbi District and in Pakele for Adjumani District but of what use are these magnificent buildings going if there isn’t even a sustainable generator? So when we are talking about maize mills, groundnut paste milling machines and all these, it requires sustainable electricity. I wish government could come up with a plan on how the rural areas are going to access electricity through this project. Because if you are going to talk about providing and installing generators, these generators are not sustainable. They will break down within a day or two. 

Fourthly, the issue of sustainability through joint ownership, Mr Speaker and hon. colleagues, the concept of group work, of cooperative societies has by the way not been fully appreciated by many of our people. As we struggle with SACCOs here in Uganda - a few weeks back I was in Dar-es-Salaam. The Tanzanian government is also struggling with the issue of SACCOs. And the stories that I obtained from Dar-es-Salaam are not different from what we have here where people come together overnight and form SACCOs hurriedly in anticipation that government is going to give them money. And within a short time, the whole thing disintegrates.

This project is going to have heavy investment in terms of machinery and all these things on the ground. And when this project finally pulls out, what measures do we have so that what is considered there as cattle dips and installation of equipment will remain there? How are they going to be managed? Is the community going to be that responsive enough to say that this is their thing and they hold on to it? Or they will say that they are waiting for the Minister of State for Local Government, hon. Ahabwe who owns this project? And if it breaks down they say that, “Mr Minister, can you come, your machine has broken down”. I think it is very important that these communities amongst whom we are going to have this heavy investment are brought on board and they own these projects right from the word go so that they can be able to appreciate its usefulness and at the same time be able to own it for smooth sustainability. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support this motion.

5.58
MS ROSEMARY NAMAYANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion. I know Nakaseke is not included but we have just been included in the District Livelihood Support Project. So we are yet to see the benefits.

THE SPEAKER: You see the DNA shows that Nakaseke is Luweero. (Laughter)

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, for the benefit of Members, it is actually Bulemezi. One of the agriculture sector objectives in this country is promoting value addition and I will restrict my submission to particularly value addition. I will just pick out one of these proposed investments, which is grain milling. Some of us used to eat posho in school but today the situation has changed, and it has moved from actually subsistence, to commercial. It is a major commercial crop. 

In 2007 alone, we produced a lot but my concern is more on what we use it for. Mr Speaker, because of the global food crisis, exportation of maize has reached the highest levels. We export to Southern Sudan, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and elsewhere in the region. But what we are doing is exporting maize in form of corn, and then we are talking about value addition!

When we export maize in grain form, we are exporting maize bran, which would be used by the 30 million poultry we have in this country, which would be used for the animal feeds. Kenya had recently put a non tariff ban on milk and they were saying that the protein content of our milk was low. For them maize bran is used by their cattle for increase the protein content in the milk. So my suggestion, or appeal, is that Uganda should ban export of unprocessed maize. We get Kenyans deep in the villages – they have reached the farm level. In 2008 in the central business district, it was reported that out of the 120 maize mills, 90 had closed down because maize was exported in form of grain. Malawi banned the total export of maize, Tanzania did the same in 2008, Zambia did the same, and Kenya did the same. But in Uganda we have liberalised to the extent, yes, hon. Kyanjo!

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, thank you, and thank you honourable colleague for giving way. I want a clarification but I will give a scenario upon which you will base your response to the clarification I am seeking. I am a Ugandan living near the border, I grow maize in large quantities, the community around me is unable to buy it, and government has not provided me the market for it. Neighbours across the border are able to pay in cash quickly. What do I do?

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, I believe those are short term interventions, or isolated cases. But I am giving a situation where our neighbours – yes, we are talking about regional cooperation, but our neighbours totally banned the export of maize. And it is our responsibility to protect the farmers. As a country we need to protect them because traders from Kenya go up to Semuto to look for maize on the farms. They come from as far as Sudan and here we are saying we want prosperity for all, we are encouraging our people to get involved in poultry farming, piggery, but within six months, the cost of maize bran moved up from Shs 200 to Shs 600 –(Interjection)- I am told it is now Shs 800. The farmers we are telling to get involved in poultry and piggery farming can no longer afford the business because the rate at which the rate of production is rising is far higher than the rate at which the price of a try of eggs increases.

So I believe we have to have an intervention. Otherwise, we can put these grain millers down there, but people from Southern Sudan come and take the maize from the farm. Then what will be the essence of the maize mills you are putting there? I thank you, Mr Chairman.

6.03
MRS LOI KIRYAPAWO (NRM, Budaka County, Budaka): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to add my voice to those of my colleagues who have thanked the committee for a good report. I also stand to support the motion.

When I compare this programme with other programmes, I see that this is a programme which is directly helping the people in the communities. Because when I look at the infrastructure which they are putting in place, my district is one of those that are benefiting. I can even see now the community roads, which have been opened up. When I compare it to NAADS, there is no component of say capacity building where you find that most of the funds go into training. This programme comes and it is implemented on the ground. So there is something which you and the communities can see and say that actually they are benefiting.

I also want to support hon. Kassiano Wadri who brought up the issue of animal dips. We have government dips – if only they could also be included for rehabilitation! That way we will be sure of the health of the animals - when they are vaccinated. 

Hon. Malinga was talking about options – it is the communities to choose what they want. The only thing which we have to know is that it depends on how transparent the people in the local government are. If the leaders of the local government, the people at the district and the sub-counties – if they are mindful, they will choose those investments, which they know will benefit the people. If they want a milk cooler, they will get a milk cooler. I don’t think it is being done at the centre to say that, “They want this”.

But my problem is one: maintenance. When I look at the community roads, which they are opening up, and I consider who will be maintaining these roads; that’s why I would like to see – how can the Ministry of Works come in so that some of these feeder roads are upgraded to be taken over by the central government for better maintenance? Also, some of these community roads which are being opened up should be upgraded to feeder roads. 

MR EJUA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Most of these community roads, we will encourage the district to take them over for continuous maintenance. But where we see that the road is very important, because there are procedures of taking them up, most of these roads you will realise are connected to say, big markets. They are really linked to an activity and I want to say that this is a very good thing because the sub-counties had no money for the maintenance of these roads.

I think what is important is for the members to work closely to see which ones are the best to be taken because in the North West project where the roads have been taken, indeed it has been very good and linked to the markets and there are no quarrels because the activities are clear. Thank you.

MS KIRYAPAWO: I thank the minister for that information but why did I bring it up? I want to give you an example of one road. We have a feeder road but it is joining more than three districts and part of that road is a community road. So if we bring a proposal - because it is joining Butaleja to Budaka, Budaka to Pallisa and then Pallisa to Bukedea, but part of that road you find is a community road. Therefore, if it is taken over by the central government it would have helped four districts and there is a lot of business on that road. The maintenance part of it is our problem. We want to sit together with the central government to see which roads will be taken on.

Also, a road which should be gravelled by the central government, somebody who gets that contract just makes tractors to go through; there is no supervision from the central government. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that -

6.10
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to move a motion according to our Rules of Procedure, rule 48(1) which says: “When any motion is under consideration in the House or in the Committee of the whole House, an amendment maybe proposed to the motion if it is relevant to the motion.”

I would like to move that on page 3 of the report, paragraph 3(1), line 4, the paragraph reads: “The Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme CAIIP, is intended to be rolled out in a number of districts in the North and the North east of the country, namely, Gulu, Amuru, Kitgum, Pader, Lira, Dokolo and Amolatar ….”

I would like to insert after Amolatar, Oyam and Apac. The justification is that; one, it will facilitate the recovery exercise. Mr Speaker, you recall in the Seventh Parliament you appointed a select committee which you made me to chair, we visited Apac and we saw the dilapidation in Apac, caused by the war in Northern Uganda.

Secondly, it will facilitate the smooth implementation of the project. It will cover the region because isolating Apac and Oyam -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Alaso, you might as well put Luwero because -

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I have no problem. I got up to speak for Apac but if it is the feeling of the House that we include Luwero, I have no objection. 

I also think we should amend the definition so that we fit Apac and Oyam within the definition clause. This is the House that created the district of Oyam and we should be seen to be nurturing our baby to help this district grow. (Applause) Finally, it is politically expedient. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I think you have heard and we do not have to speak much about this -(Interjections)- do we have to waste more time?

MR AHABWE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Philanthropically, I do not think I would have a problem with that kind of motion, but technically, and –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: But why don’t we vote? I am putting the question to the motion that a list of districts mentioned should include Apac, Oyam and Luwero. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The motion is for a resolution of Parliament to authorise government to borrow UA 45 million to finance Community Agriculture Infrastructure and Improvement programme. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this brings us to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.15 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 12 May 2009, at 2.00 p.m.)
