Wednesday, 4 May 2016

Parliament met at 3.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Good afternoon, honourable members. I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I will make a slight amendment to the Order Paper to permit the Minister of Foreign Affairs to fulfil a commitment he made yesterday. I understand he has brought the report that we have been waiting for, for some time.

Secondly, the President has returned the Excise Tariff Bill. Unfortunately, I left the letter on my desk. When it comes, I will read it to you. He wants us to review it in relation to the telephone charges. I will be reading the letter in full when it comes. Thank you.

3.03
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity. The people of Mukono Municipality petitioned this Parliament on several matters. However, it is coming to five years now and we have not heard from the various committees where these petitions were committed. The Ninth Parliament is almost closing and we have not received our reports  from those committees, especially the Committee on Natural Resources where hon. Mawanda is also a Member. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, we would like to request that you find it appropriate to request these committees to avail these reports, because citizens should never petition this Parliament in vain.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether you remember the subjects because there must be many petitions before these committees. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, one of the petitions was about the way the land in the degazetted part of Namanve was being managed, without considering the local people of Mukono. The second one was about Bishop Senior Secondary School in Mukono. The other one was about Kiwanga Primary School that was saved by your interim order. Right now, land grabbers are threatening to throw out a Muslim primary school in Mukono. Madam Speaker, you may recall that you hosted pupils from that school. They are among the several other petitions.

THE SPEAKER: Can I know what is happening from the Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources?

3.05
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Eddie Kwizera): Madam Speaker, Namanve was degazetted for an industrial park during the Sixth Parliament. However, we have another business; item No. 10 in the business to follow on the Order Paper. When Parliament finds time, these issues will be on the Floor of the House. It is not that they are still in the committee. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I will ask the Clerk to put the matters on the Order Paper during the remaining time.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR REGIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Philemon Mateke): Madam Speaker, yesterday one of the Members suggested that this House should not pass the Budget until we produce the status report on the properties of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs abroad as promised. Here now, I would like to present an overview of the status of Uganda’s properties abroad and welfare of foreign service officers. 

Uganda’s Properties Abroad

An inter-ministerial taskforce to handle issues on properties abroad is in place. It comprises of officials from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Ministry of Works and Transport, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and on a need basis, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

A funding proposal for Uganda’s properties abroad is in the offing. In the proposal, a public/private partnership approach shall be used to provide requisite funds to complete the renovation, acquisition and development of new properties. 

Uganda’s properties abroad include 14 chanceries, 12 official residences, three commercial buildings and nine plots of land. Attached is a detailed matrix on Uganda’s properties in Annex 1.

Welfare of Foreign Service Officers

Much as there has been general outcry about the welfare of civil servants across the board, the foreign service officers face unique challenges by the nature of their duties, which involve working abroad where the cost of living is high. Such challenges have demoralised and demotivated the foreign service officers. The foreign service allowances paid to public officers posted abroad have been found to be inadequate.

Efforts have been made to ensure that the welfare of foreign service officers is improved by instituting an inter-ministerial committee comprising of officials from the Ministry of Public Service, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to review foreign service allowances every after two years.

In 2011, when a review was undertaken, it resulted in the re-introduction of education allowance, monetising shipment and removal of Group (C) in the payment structure for foreign service allowance.  In the current review (2016), it has been recommended, among others.

Foreign Service Allowances (FSA)

Harmonisation of foreign service allowance for Group (B) Missions with Group (A) Missions. In subsequent years, a provision of an additional 25 per cent for foreign service allowance to high cost missions based on the Consumer Price Index (CPI) of the UN. Based on CPI, Group (A) Missions will have: Geneva, Paris, London, Copenhagen, Canberra, Tokyo, Brussels, Washington, New York, Rome, Abuja, Kinshasa, Ottawa, Berlin, Moscow, Riyadh and Abu Dhabi. The rest fall under Group (B). The total cost implication for FSA increment is Uganda- (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister is giving this House very important information and we do not have those details for us to -

THE SPEAKER: Check your iPad.

MS ANYWAR: It is not there.

THE SPEAKER: Can I send you technical assistance?

MR MATEKE: The total cost implication for FSA increment is Shs 6,491,013,243 per year.

Education Allowance Review 

There is an increase in education allowance from $2,500 to $4,000 for non-English speaking countries and from $2,000 to $4,000 for English speaking countries. The allowance is applicable to four children, biological or legally adopted below 18 years. 

The cost implication for education allowance increment is Shs 2,640,000,000. It is believed that if the recommendations of this inter-ministerial committee on foreign service allowance are implemented, the welfare of foreign service officers will be immensely improved. Attached is a matrix describing the mission, type of property, address where the property is located, the current status and some remarks. 

We sent this to your iPads, and I hope that in order to save time, you will read it by yourselves. In any case, the Chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs read a report here, containing all these things that I am talking about. There was an annex, which should have been read. 

With these few remarks, I beg to stop here, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to thank the Minister of State for Regional Affairs for this statement. Let us use only 15 minutes.

3.17
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his report. I am the shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs and also a member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs. 

Madam Speaker, I have been taken aback. I have just heard something new; a public/private partnership to go and repair the properties of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs abroad. This is something new, and has never come in the committee.

Secondly, when the minister talked about 14 chanceries, I expected him to mention their status. The issue that was raised on the Floor and that has touched Members of Parliament and Ugandans whenever they fly abroad is the status of those buildings.

I was in Brussels one time,  and our ambassador’s residence was in a prime area. That building was brought down because the Belgians could not stand it for harbouring drug addicts and criminals. The neighbourhood complained about the same building. We would like to know what they have done with that plot.

He talked of 12 residences. What is the state of those residences and where are they situated? Three commercial plots - I was in Addis Ababa and the Ethiopians had given us land to build on. What happened? There was money that was allocated specifically to develop that land. We have not done anything. I understand that the money was misused as it was not used for that purpose. We would like to hear something about that. 

We lost property in Beijing. The Chinese asked us to buy property but we never did. We wanted to know all these things.

Secondly, when you talk of welfare - at one time this country had decided that we were going for the same system among the rest of the East African countries, where we would be represented by the diplomats of these countries in these other areas. However, when you look at the foreign service allowance of our neighbouring countries compared to what our officers get - let me give you a scenario. 

The third secretary, which is the lowest rank in the foreign service of a neighbouring country in Beijing, earns $4,000 as foreign service allowance. However, the Ambassador of Uganda in Beijing earns $4,000 as foreign service allowance. Can you imagine that the ambassador of a neighbouring country in Beijing earns $8000 as foreign service allowance compared to Uganda’s ambassador who earns $4,000? These are some of the things that we would like to look at. 

If you want these officers to do a good job and be compared to other neighbouring countries, this Parliament and this country must look at our foreign service officers as well. 

Secondly, when you talk of education allowance, to send a child to a British school in Beijing, a non-English speaking country, you pay $25,000. You are now telling us that you are giving them $4,000 per child and you think this- (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute for the shadow minister. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think the Members have got to know these challenges that our officers serving abroad face. You cannot pay them $4,000 and think that they can educate their children abroad. These officers are making a lot of sacrifices. 

When we asked for a detailed report, we thought that you were going to come up with something substantial that can help our people. We want to know the status- actually all these Members have been abroad and have seen what our officers go through. 

Therefore, these issues are pertinent and we want this country to help our people. That is all. When we raise these things, we are not against anybody. It is for the sake of Uganda. It is the window to the outside world and this is what we want you to look at. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.21
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a country, if we cannot benefit from what we have, other people will think that we are very unserious. 

We went for a Conference of the Parties (COP) meeting in France and visited our mission there. In fact, what we saw was really embarrassing. We have a whole building that people want to rent but it is dilapidated. The electric wires are hanging like the ones we see in Kisenyi; part of the floor is sinking and the carpet is rotting. The ambassador said that people wanted to occupy the premises but they had failed to rehabilitate them to the required standard. He took us on a tour but even providing us with tea felt like a burden. 

What is the problem with this sector? Can’t we allocate enough funds to rehabilitate our missions? Can’t we save the face of Uganda abroad? These missions should be acting as tourist centres, and they have the ability to earn money in terms of visa issuance and the like. We would be earning money to cater for the welfare of the officers stationed there. 

Madam Speaker, unless this Parliament comes to the rescue of the face of Uganda abroad, it is a real disaster. (Interruption) 

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, honourable, for giving me this opportunity to give you some information. Earlier on, hon. Jack Wamanga-Wamai asked why we are talking about a Public Private Partnership (PPP) in foreign service. Hon. Beatrice Anywar has raised an important point that some of the buildings and properties we have abroad are in a sorry state. 

To that extent, we agree that some are in a bad state. Therefore, what we want to do is to use the Shs 15 billion that we have been allocating for properties and rehabilitation to borrow over Shs 200 billion. We can then start rehabilitating those buildings that can actually earn money like the mission in New York. That is where the PPP comes in and that is the plan that Government has to rehabilitate those properties. Thank you.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, PPP means Public-Private Partnership. Therefore, how can you use Shs 15 billion to borrow? 

Madam Speaker, I suggested on this Floor that the National Social Security Fund (NSSF) has got a lot of money. Why can’t this Government borrow money from NSSF and construct abroad? The Minister of Foreign Affairs will pay rent directly to NSSF instead of resorting to public/private partnerships. 

MR BAHATI: PPP may include institutions and people; so NSSF could be one of the options we are looking at here. 

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, we should realise that we have a problem. Once we agree that we have a problem, the modality of how we tackle it should not be an exchange between two colleagues. Let this Parliament take it on and direct on how to save the face of Uganda. If these properties were put up for sale, people would be rushing to buy them. Now that we still want them to be owned by Ugandans, all this - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have been very generous with your time. Hon. Milton Muwuma, three minutes. 

3.27
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this report and I salute Government for considering a review in the education allowance. 

Last week, the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Appointments Committee interacted with the Uganda mission in Dar-es-Salaam and one of the key concerns raised was the issue of allowances. The $2,000, paid to them annually, cannot sufficiently help them to educate their children. Most of them have resorted to abandoning their children here because they cannot afford to keep them abroad, since the $2,000 can only run for a term. 

Therefore, this review is a big credit to Government, assuming it is within this financial year’s budget. I do not know whether we are just being given a promise. We need a commitment from Government that this has been provided for in this current budget that we are passing. This will give our foreign service officers a reason to smile. 

Madam Speaker, still on Dar-es-Salaam, the issue of titles has been pending for many years. For example, they are telling us here that they dispatched money for renovation of the chancery, which is our official building. However, we are investing money in this yet we do not have ownership. We have never gotten the title. 

We have a swapping arrangement with Dar-es-Salaam. Uganda gave them property. So, they are also supposed to give us a building on the other side. We have begun injecting money in the plot that was allocated to Uganda, so that we can improve it. However, we do not have ownership because there is no title to that effect. 

My appeal to Government and the minister present is that you expedite this process. I am told that Tanzania has waited for so many years. You keep telling them that you are processing their title before they give us ours, but it is taking longer than expected. 

Therefore, I am appealing to the honourable minister to fast-track the process of transferring this title and handing it over to them, such that they reciprocate, according to that arrangement. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

3.29
MR TIMOTHY LWANGA (NRM, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for having tried to give us a report, which is fairly informative. As we are all aware, it was done in a hurry because we demanded for it yesterday. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for insisting that by this afternoon, we have a report. 

I will start by commenting on the foreign service allowance. Does it take an inter-ministerial committee to come up with this? I think it should have been obvious to Government that it is long overdue. What we have got to ask is, when are you going to implement this? Is it during the 2016/2017 budget or are you thinking of FY 2017/2018? I think we should demand that these allowances become effective 1 July 2016.

Secondly, when it comes to the properties, it is wonderful that we have had a report but I am afraid that the report is not comprehensive enough. So, I am not surprised that my colleague from the Opposition has come up to challenge the PPP. What I actually understand that is being done, and I hope the minister can throw more light on this, is that they are taking the Shs 15 billion, which has been in the budget for the last three years.

This money is supposed to be for renovations and buying new properties. They are now using this as buffer money to be able to go and borrow more money. Over the years, they hope to be able to pay, while being sure that they have an income through our allocation in appropriation of Shs 15 billion. Hopefully eventually, all embassies and missions will be as good as the one in Rwanda. That is all I have to say. Thank you.

3.31
COL. (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also join my colleagues to appreciate the minister’s timely report. Although the report was not comprehensive enough, I would like us to appreciate the steady progress by the Government that – [Mr Wamanga-Wamai: “For 30 years?] - but for 30 years we have been facing other problems, hon. Wamanga.

Within 30 years, the Government has done a lot of things. Embassies have been reconstructed; I have been to South Africa and I saw some good work – (Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the colleague for giving way. I would like to know, from this report, what you gather. Is it steady progress or steady deterioration of the embassies? (Laughter)

COL. (RTD) MWESIGYE: I think it is steady progress because at least there is some work done although you do not appreciate it. We need to be realistic. Recently, you saw the comparisons of our salaries as Members of Parliament of East Africa. Here, our salaries as Members of Parliament are seen as outrageous but in Kenya and Tanzania, you saw how the salaries were so different; they were tripling ours. 

The problem, I think, is the economies of these countries. Our economy is definitely still growing and we cannot try to pay everybody as you will be the same people complaining that we are spending on consumption rather than development. We, therefore, have to take a decision, as Members of Parliament, whether to reduce the embassies so that we can sustain the existing ones, pay the staff well, construct good buildings, among other things. Let us not apply double standards. Let us either develop or consume.

I would think that we allow and support Government to continue with the steps that are being taken but also try to improve on the welfare of these foreign officers. For sure, the work that is being done is very good for the time being -(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, the Member is talking of steps that are being taken yet we have been talking about the alarming situation of missions, the suffering of our officers, the state of properties, among others. Is he, therefore, in order to tell us that we maintain the status quo? 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know if he talked about the status quo. Did you say that we keep the status quo?

COL. (RTD) MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, I did not say the status quo. I appreciated the steps; steady progress of the Government. There is definitely steady progress.

THE SPEAKER: He is talking about steady progress.

COL. (RTD) MWESIGYE: Yes, I talked about steady progress not the status quo, my dear brother. If you go to South Africa, there is definitely some work being done. The same applies to New York, Rwanda and Nairobi. We really need to appreciate. In Dar es Salaam, some progress is taking place.

I, therefore, appreciate Government and we should really support it but also appreciate that we cannot handle everything at the same time. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.36
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minster for attempting to bring a report here. 

First, the minister never took into cognisance what generated the desire for this report when he was preparing it. The status of the properties of the Government of the Republic of Uganda cannot even be established by this report. We would like to hear this, honourable minister. Go back and prepare as follows: One, the property in terms of nature. What type? Regarding land, when was it acquired? Regarding the buildings, those in engineering know that a building has a life span. Some buildings stay for a certain period of time and then deserve to be condemned for demolition.

Maybe what my colleagues have been talking about while referring to buildings in bad state like the one in Brussels is not because of lack of proper care by the Government or the ambassador or the team of Ugandans who are there. It may be because of the age; the time that building has lived. Therefore, can you take off time and be specific? You need to point out when the property was acquired and established as that will give us an insight into whether the building is worth occupation or not.

Secondly, the cost of living is not uniform in different countries. Some of our brothers and sisters who are sent to work for us are really being punished abroad. When we give them some allowances at the rate of the cost of living in Uganda, they find it very difficult to sustain their lives on the basis of that cost of living. Is there a minimum standard calculated to cater for the differences in the cost of living? This is a very important factor to be considered in what is given to our people abroad. 

It is not only the buildings that may be killing our ambassadors but also what we are giving them as welfare. I visited the one in Ethiopia. We went to the embassy but they also invited us to go and see where they live. We found the deputy ambassador, an old man, living alone. Imagine if this person falls sick due to the pressure of living a very poor life and dies there quietly, who can help him? 

When I asked him why he was living alone he told me, “My son, we cannot sustain a family here. What is given to us is very little.” Therefore, somebody may die because of loneliness, which arises out of the unsustainability of the cost of living due to what we give them. 

We, therefore, need to establish the cost of living and give them minimum standards. Finally – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have a response? If you could just use three minutes -

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Philemon Mateke): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Members for the concerns they have about the lives of our officers abroad. It is a concern but there is considerable improvement. If you could consider what our officers were getting 10 years ago and what they are getting now, there is substantial improvement. However, they still need more.

Secondly, there was talk about rehabilitation –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inquire from the honourable Minister of Foreign Affairs regarding the statement he has made about the cost of living in relation to the number of years lived long ago. 

He said that if you compare what the staff in the foreign missions are getting today to what they were getting 10 years ago, there is a big difference. Whereas some of us have been seeing how miserable these staff and our ambassadors are, the minister is trying to insinuate that what they are giving them now is much better than what they were getting 10 years ago, without taking into consideration factors like inflation, changes in foreign exchange rates, among others. Is the honourable minister giving us the right information?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are taking a lot of time on this matter. We should resolve to support the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to improve the working conditions of our officers. That should be our aim; to support them so that our people can leave a better life abroad. Thank you.

Honourable members, the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on Budget should take an interest in that for the next budget. Let us do something positive for the foreign service officers.

Honourable members, I had informed you that the President has returned the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016. Let me just read the letter written on 24 April 2016:

“I am returning the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016 for Parliament to reconsider clause 3, paragraph one, which repealed item 13(b) of the Excise Duty Act. I am requesting that the position be reinstated in the Act. 

The repeal of excise duty on international incoming calls was proposed because of the sharp decline in revenue since the tax was introduced in Financial Year 2013/2014. The revenue yielded was Shs 68.2 billion for Financial Year 2013/2014 but when we joined the One Area Network in January 2015, incoming calls reduced and even projected to Financial Year 2015/2016 with Shs 45.9 billion. 

This was attributed to incoming international calls terminating in Kenya and South Sudan and routed to Uganda as domestic calls, thereby denying the Government of Uganda excise duty and the telecom companies in Uganda revenues from incoming calls termination fees. 

However, I have been informed that it is not calls being terminated in Kenya and South Sudan that are a problem but rather a process of illegal SIM boxes both within Uganda and at the borders.

I have further been informed that this vice can be fought as Rwanda and Tanzania have done. Therefore, the removal of excise duty will not lead to an increase of incoming international calls but will benefit the illegal Sim box owners and lead to loss of Government revenue.

It is for the above reason that I exercise my powers under Article 91, clause (3)(b) of the Constitution to return the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016 for reconsideration of clause 3, paragraph one, which repealed the excise duty on incoming international calls.”

Therefore, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development is requested to sit again and give us a report very quickly. It is work in progress. Next item. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORTS AND OPINIONS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDING 30 JUNE 2012 - DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS

THE SPEAKER: Commissioner Bahati, can you lay those papers?

3.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is a commissioner. Madam Speaker, I would like to clarify that.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is a commissioner and so is the Prime Minister. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table reports and opinions of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ending 30 June 2012 for district local governments for the following districts:

    1. Abim District Local Government
    2. Arua District Local Government
    3. Amuria District Local Government
    4. Otuke District Local Government
    5. Kamwenge District Local Government
    6. Kaabong District Local Government (Kapedo Sub-county, Kalapata Sub-county, Sidok Sub-county)
    7. Kaabong District Local Government (Kalenga Sub-county)
    8. Kaabong District Local Government (Kaabong West Sub-county, Kawalokol Sub-county, Lobalangit Sub-county)
    9. Serere District Local Government
    10. Nebbi District Local Government
    11. Ngora District Local Government
    12. Katakwi District Local Government
    13. Soroti District Local Government (Asuret Sub-county, Tubur Sub-county, Arapai Sub-county, Katine Sub-county, Gweri Sub-county, Kamuda Sub-county) 

THE SPEAKER: I thought there was Nakapiripirit.

MR BAHATI: Oh yes, and Nakapiripirit District.

THE SPEAKER: They are sent to the Public Accounts Committee for perusal and report back.

B) REPORTS AND OPINIONS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDING 30 JUNE 2014

4.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table Reports and Opinions of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ending 30 June 2014 for the following institutions:

    1. Kyambogo University – NORHED MVP Project – Norwegian Programme for Capacity Development in Higher Education and Research Development
    2. Uganda Embassy – Tehran
    3. Ministry of Health – Uganda Cancer Institute
    4. Directorate of Ethics and Integrity
    5. Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development
    6. Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development
    7. Ministry of Water and Environment – The Programme Management Support under the Joint Water and Environment Sector Support Programme
    8. Uganda Management Institute
    9. Uganda Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria Project – Malaria Component Round 10 in the Ministry of Health 
    10. Ministry of Water and Environment
    11. National Animal Genetic Resources Centre and Data Bank 
    12. Hotel and Tourism Training Institute
    13. The Avian and Human Influenza Preparedness and Response Project
    14. Uganda Embassy, Washington
    15. Mulago National Referral Hospital
    16. Uganda Development Bank Limited
17. 	Cotton Development Organisation

I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all those are sent to the Public Accounts Committee. I would like to correct the remission; 4(A) will go to the Local Government Accounts Committee.

C) REPORTS AND OPINIONS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDING 30 JUNE 2015

3.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table reports and opinions of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ending 30 June 2015 for the following institutions:

    1. Uganda Bureau of Statistics; strengthening evidence-based decision making projects
    2. Uganda Bureau of Statistics
    3. National Social Security Fund
    4. Makerere University Business School
    5. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
    6. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – Government of Uganda Consolidated Fund 
    7. Road Sector Support Project (ADF Loan No.2100150015793) 
ID NO. P-UG-DB0-018   
I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. All these are sent to the Committee on Public Accounts for perusal and report back.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE CAPITALISATION OF BANK OF UGANDA

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I move under Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and section 14(2) of the Bank of Uganda Act to authorise Government to increase the capital of Bank of Uganda:

“WHEREAS the capital of Bank of Uganda is currently Shs 860 billion making conducting of monetary operations difficult; 

AND WHEREAS Government is proposing to increase the capital of the Bank of Uganda by Shs 240 billion over the next two years starting with Shs 150 billion in the Financial Year 2016/2017 and the balance of Shs 90 billion in the Financial Year 2017/2018;

AWARE that under Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, the minister may introduce to Parliament a motion; 

AND NOTING that under section 14 (2) of the Bank of Uganda Act, the authorised capital of the Bank of Uganda may be increased by the resolution of Parliament to ensure adequacy to the operations of the bank; 

NOW, THEREFORE, this motion is moved that this honourable House authorises Government to increase the capital of Bank of Uganda from Shs 860 billion to Shs 1.1 trillion.” I beg to move.

3.54
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to support the minister. The last time he brought this proposal, people had concerns. However, economically, if you do not have stability of funds in a country, it leads to the exchange rate being high and you cannot control it. Therefore, I feel that if we stabilised our finances, we would have the competitive advantage against other currencies.

Sometimes some of us look at the rates on the East African Community market. However, when you go externally, when you look at the dollar, which is the common currency, it may not really augur well if Bank of Uganda cannot have proper funding to regulate the operations within an economy. On that particular point, I do support the recapitalisation of Bank of Uganda.  Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that this House do authorise capitalisation of the Bank of Uganda.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Supplementary appropriation? He is not here? 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2016

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, the chairperson of the committee is not here. I would propose, with your permission, we handle item No.7 as we wait for the chairperson.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE TIER 4 MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2015

Clause 66

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 56 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 66, agreed to.

3.57
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule): Madam Chairperson, we had changed earlier that licences will be renewed annually so the committee recommendations are consequentially changed such that they are not tenable. Clause 66, 67, 68 and 70, therefore, fall on the wayside. So, they remain as was proposed in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you abandoning your proposal? 

MR KASULE: Yes

Clause 67

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we can just proceed? Honourable members, the question is that clause 67 do stands as part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 67, agreed to.

Clause 68, agreed to.

Clause 69, agreed to.

Clause 70, agreed to.

Clause 71, agreed to.

Clause 72, agreed to.

Clause 73, agreed to.

Clause 74, agreed to.

Clause 75, agreed to.

Clause 76, agreed to.

Clause 77, agreed to.

Clause 78

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that on reporting of non-deposit taking microfinance institutions, on clause 78(1), replace the words “thirty days” with the words “three months.” 

The justification is that 30 days period is not sufficient to generate an audited financial report.

Clause 78(2), replace the clauses (a) (b) and (c), with the following:
    a) Audited financial statements
    b) Structure of management

The justification is to provide prudent and standard reporting and ensure that the authority is up to date with the affairs of the SACCO.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 78 be amended as proposed?

MR MAWANDA: Madam Chairperson, we are dealing with non-deposit taking financial institutions and not SACCOs. Therefore, the word “SACCO” should be replaced with the phrase “non-deposit taking microfinance institutions”. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we delete the word “SACCO” and substitute it with “non-deposit taking microfinance institution?” Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 78 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 78, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 79

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposed:
 
    1) In sub-clause (2) to replace the word “ten years” with “seven years.” 
The justification is to be in conformity with the Uganda Evidence (Bankers’ Books) Act Cap 7.

    2) Delete sub-clause (3). The justification is that accounting firms are already regulated by the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda (ICPAU). 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 79 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 79, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 80

MR KASULE: The committee, under the head note, “Merger and acquisitions of non-deposit taking microfinance institutions”, delete sub-clauses (2) (3) and (4). 

The justification is mergers and acquisitions are consensual in nature and therefore, cannot be directed by authority. The spirit of ensuring that the authority manages affairs of a non-deposit micro finance institution, which is in financial distress is covered in Clause 33 of the Bill. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that Clause 80 be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 80, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 81

MR KASULE: Clause 81, under part v, “Supervision of money lending business”, the committee proposes to delete (d) and replace it with the following:
“(d) Conduct inspection and examination of records and any other documents relevant to money lending.”

The justification is that it is not necessary for the authority to inspect and examine books of accounts, and returns because this is a private business and returns are filed with Uganda Revenue Authority.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Much as I agree with the chairperson, we need to maintain premises. These people’s premises must be inspected because as we agreed, we would like to regulate them and be able to know their physical address. Therefore, if you remove their physical address - you know these are the people, when it comes time for paying the loan who just disappear. We would like to know where they are so that they are able to pay their loan. Now, if you remove the premises, we shall not have tied these people.

MR KASULE: It is under “supervision of money lending business.” That is the authority supervising. Therefore, among the supervision, the authority shall in the exercise of its function under sub section (1) grant, renew, and revoke money lending license. That is acceptable. Keep and maintain a register of money lenders; sensitise the public about money lending business.

On (d) the committee is proposal reads “conduct inspection and examination of books of accounts, records, returns and any other document or promises of a money lending business.”

Therefore, Members said this is a private business and the authority has no business in examining records, returns and any other documents but the House may take it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chairperson, if I were a mobile money lender, how would I even be taxed? Today, I am in Kawempe, the following day in Bwaise with my annual license. I just keep moving. I should know your address.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Why we are insisting on the physical address; these shop keepers you see in town sell clothes and after two hours become money lenders. When the tax people come, he says “I am a business person trading in this.” We would like to exactly know where these people are operating from. The moment you get out that one; one, you lose out on taxation and secondly, when it comes to paying back the loan, these people try to dodge so that they can take people’s property. Thank you.

MR LWANGA: Madam Chairperson, much as I am a Member of that committee, on that day, probably, I was not there. (Laughter) We want people to be accountable. We want people to pay taxes and make sure that the records are right and not fidgeted with. Therefore, it is not right that their books cannot be inspected; they should be inspected.

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Many people have lost property to money lenders because of their being mobile. The practice in Kampala is that you borrow money today from parliamentary avenue, when time comes for payment, the man is not there; you cannot find him anywhere and the phone is off. You cannot deposit the money anywhere and thereafter, you find your property already transferred because you have failed to pay.

Therefore, leaving out inspection of premises will not be regulating and/or supervising.  We will have given them a leeway to steal and take people’s property if we do not include premises.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Taking into account the concerns of Members, I would like to improve on the amendment by the chairperson to read, “Conduct inspection and examination of records and any other document relevant to the money lending business and premises of a money lending business.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: In the amendment of the chairperson, they had deleted the business premise. Why don’t we just reinstate the old one?

MR KASULE: Due to the concerns of the Members who have lost property, I concede to the amendment. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 81 do stand part of the Bill?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 81, agreed to.

Clause 82

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposed on the application for a money lending license to replace the clauses as follows: “A person intending to engage in money lending business shall apply to the authority on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed in the regulations under this Act.”

The justification is that while the committee acknowledges the legality of the one man company, the committee notes that the provision does not allow partnerships and individuals to operate as money lenders. 

The same is re-echoed in Clause 84, where the authority shall not issue a license if it is satisfied the management of the company is not fit and proper.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would argue that we retain sub Clause 82 as it is because we are trying as much as possible to regulate moneylenders. When you look at how we have dealt with SACCOs, we are giving a leeway to moneylenders and yet, these moneylenders have done more harm to people than SACCOs.

When you look at Clause 82(d), you are still saying “The address of the company” and this is what we have just passed, that we need the physical address of these people. Therefore, when you say the address, for example, Mr Rukundo, P. O. Box 72, Kabale. We would like to know the physical address of these moneylenders. So, when you remove that, you still give a leeway to the moneylenders.

I, therefore, urge colleagues that we retain Clause 82 as it is to be able to regulate the moneylending business. I thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, thank you. I agree with the amendment. If we leave it to say “A person intending to engage in money lending business shall be a company”, I think it leaves out an individual who could as well conduct the business. We stand a danger of – you know, money lending is such a business that somebody enters into sometimes with a lot of money but then, if it is a company, you may talk of a share capital of about Shs 1,000,000 then the person starts a company.

If it defaults, what are you going to attach? However, if it is a person then you can go after his property. My understanding from the amendment is that the greater includes the less; when we leave the amendment to read “A person intending” that gives us the leverage whether this is a legal person that maybe a company or an individual. To me, the amendment is all encompassing. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What about the other conditions like the certificate of incorporation?    

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I would to seek clarification from the chairperson whether this amendment affects Clause 82(1) only or it replaces the whole clause because if you look at sub clauses (2) and (3), they seem not to be affected by his amendment.

MR KASULE: I think it only affects Clause 82(1) because as you continue to Clause 82(2) it says “…money lending does not include a company or registering with other acts.” However, what the committee did not want to say is that if you say “company” those who do money lending just begin doing money lending whether they sold their land and put the money into money lending without registration.

Therefore, if you say “shall be a company” then many will go under and you will never get them. As long as you are dealing in money lending, you are required to get a licence whether you are a company or not.

MR LWANGA: Madam Chairperson, while we are trying to simplify things to ensure that all those who have money can lend, we better do it in an orderly manner. There is no better way than making sure that a person or persons who are going to lend are properly registered and the easiest way is to have them incorporated at whatever level.

However, this idea of thinking that every Tom, Dick and Harry will go on the streets and start lending money is confusing us in the economy.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MS AKOL: Madam Chairperson, I would like to seek further clarification from the chair about the amendment on Clause 82(1), and in comparison with sub-clause (3), because in Clause 82 a person can be either a company or an individual. 

However, in Clause 82(3) it is very specific and it reads “An application for a license for money lending shall be made in writing to the authority and shall be accompanied by the certificate of incorporation of the company, a resolution of the particulars of the directors of the company; a resolution of the particulars of the sector of the company.” 

Everything is about a company and yet, the initial clause opens and allows this business to be either for a person as an individual or as a company. That is the clarification I would like to seek.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, since there is controversy in the amendments, I will yield for the money lenders to be registered as companies and in future, if they want individuals also to be money lenders, then they will include them. The preceding clauses, unless deleted, talk of a company.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we should discourage informality; you know a person who is mobile - today he or she is here or there. That person lends money from different places. How will that person have an address when he or she is mobile?

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, when we say “persons” we give an allowance of an individual and a company. We are not running away from premises or addresses. Since you are a person and we are saying your premises will be inspected, it will imply that you must have an address that will be inspected.

The issue here is not that we are defeated by the amendment proposed in Clause 82, because if we did then we shall proceed later, a mere assertion of – assuming we went to Clause 82(3), we can make a provision that “where the applicant is a company…”, then we lay down these procedures; it will cure it automatically. 

Madam Chairperson, I have tried that business; the danger is that people in downtown - an individual has an office, you come to him and he defaults. You say I am coming against you because you overcharge me and I overpaid you, it was two weeks, later I defaulted and it was not in the agreement that two weeks will amount to a month.

What will happen is that he will tell you, “Well, how are you going to drag me” and if you have a person who has a company of a share capital of Shs 1,000,000 and the company has no property, you cannot sue that man. 

That is why I am saying, if you are joining the money lending business as an individual, you must be ready that your property will be taken so that the money lenders do not take advantage of us who go to borrow.

You must know the dangers of coming as an individual and also starting a money lending company as a legal person like a company. Therefore, in this case I would suggest we leave the amendment as is done but then we go and provide for where you are a company or an individual, we also provide for itand in that way, we will cure it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have moved from the Stone Age; let us encourage people to formalise. Why don’t you want to have an address and office? 

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Chairperson, if we are talking about registering, then already we are eliminating the individual because even if you are an individual, the requirements to register a company they cannot allow you just to go as a person. If we say we are formalising money lending, then that is it. It will have to be a company.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chair, I think we should retain the status quo and keep clause 82 as it is.

MR KASULE: We can say in the amendment that, “A person intending to engage in money lending business shall apply to the authority on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the regulations under this Act.” However, if we left it, then the only amendment we have to make with him is where we reach (3) and say, “An application for a licence for money lending shall be made in writing to the authority where the money lender is a company.” And we list the things he should come with. But also leave both companies and individuals to be registered by the authority.

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are making a law to regulate and supervise moneylenders to make this business formal and easy for Government to tax, supervise and monitor. We are trying to run away from the problems that are being encountered by the people currently. I do not see any problem for a person to register a sole proprietorship company and get licensed as a moneylender. As a borrower, I do not see any liability in borrowing from a registered one-man business. It is easier to have a formal business supervised and even taxed. 

Therefore, I believe we should run away from the informal way of doing business; allowing everybody in a shop downtown to become a moneylender. Let us have them registered as businesses; let them pay tax. If today, Uganda Registration Services Bureau and KCCA are registering people and advising them to register as businesses formally, why are we leaving these moneylenders to do business informally? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this Bill has a history; I do know whether you remember something called TEAM or Dutch International, COWE – they conned people of money in billions of shillings from Jinja to Teso. (Interjections) So, how can you encourage informality? I do not know. 

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I think I do not have much more to add; what we want is to formalise the process. Let us do it properly. Let us do what is right as opposed to what is politically correct. When we do what is right, we do not have to go back to it; we will always look back and do exactly the same thing; and that means formality. Thank you.

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I will begin from what the Chairperson has talked about. There were companies, especially in eastern Uganda, which came up as moneylending entities, but in one year they had disappeared. People started sitting where they had put their money but the companies were nowhere to be seen. 

In addition to that, we want more revenue. If you are generating money, we should know that you are making a lot of money so that you contribute to the country’s income. So, in that regard –(Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chair, the information I would like to give hon. Kabaale is that that is the very reason we are suggesting that instead of having a quack company without offices and directors just come in temporarily and take advantage of people, let us allow people to lend as individuals; you can go after that individual.

Now, the formality here, Madam Chairperson – actually the amendment of the committee chairperson is a formality for individuals because he is saying: “A person who wants to start a moneylending business… will do it in accordance with what is provided for by the Authority.” That actually caters for individuals who want to start moneylending businesses.

Madam Chair, it is not very different from SACCOs; when we were discussing SACCOs here, there was an amendment in which the committee suggested defining limits of what would be called Class “A” SACCOs will be from Shs 500 million to Shs 1.5 billion and so forth. We had a hot argument here. We said that this is not a strictly formal sector. We should not make it as if the Authority is going to begin registering businesses called SACCOs but we should leave it such that any SACCO that wants to be called a SACCO, irrespective of how much they have – like the Wazalendo of the UPDF – can still operate as a SACCO.

Therefore, this is more of a formal-informal sector where – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I want to draw your attention to the title of this Bill: “Tier 4 Microfinance Institutions” not individuals. 

MS KABAALE: That is the very reason - if you it is an individual doing business, it means that that person has the ability to mobilise people to form a company. We would not like to debate as if an individual is immortal; supposing you die after opening up a moneylending company? How will the recovery be done? So, that is why we are saying that when you form a company, you can have it belong to your relatives and wives. It becomes easier for us to trace for the company. Companies have assets and liabilities, so we woul not only look at the assets. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, with the guidance you have given us, I propose that, if the committee chairperson allows, we maintain the current proposal as it is in the Bill. And also try to persuade hon. Anywarach to abandon the issue of individuals because you cannot capture this individual in this business. It will not be good for taxation and the economy. It is actually not constructive. So, I propose that we maintain the clause as it is in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: (Hon. Mawanda rose_) Is it about the address of the company?

MR MAWANDA: This is what we have passed before – that we would like to locate the physical premises of the moneylenders. But in (d) they are just flatly saying “address” without specifying which address we are talking about. Let us be specific and say, “The physical address of the company.” Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Will that not lock out the – maybe we say the “postal address and physical address”. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 82 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 82, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 83

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, the issue of moneylending licence in sub-Clause (3); the committee proposes to delete (c), which reads: “The licence issued under this section shall not authorise a moneylender to carry on business at more than one address or under more than one name.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that Clause 83?

MR KASULE: That is Clause 83. The committee proposes to delete sub clause (3)(c) which says: “The licence issued under this section shall not authorise a moneylender to carry on business at more than one address or under more than one name.” So, one moneylender cannot say: “I am here as Kasule; then I am there as Anywarach…” You must use one name wherever you are. That is the amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, if I am Kasule in Kampala, can’t I have a Kasule office in Gulu?

MR KASULE: No, you can have Kasule office in Gulu but in Kasule’s name not in other names because money lenders tend to have different names by different addresses. If it is registered as a company, it should be one with many addresses but the same name.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then, if we allow it to operate in many addresses, we have to amend and remove the “under more than one name” and then correct the one of the address because I can be in Gulu and also in Kitgum; I may have two offices.

MR BAHATI: I thought the chairperson should be speaking and supporting his proposal. He is actually against his own proposal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, but you have just said that you can have Kasule’s office in Kampala and Kasule’s office in Gulu. Therefore, you can have more than one address. 

However, what we need to remove is the name. You cannot change names. I think we remove the “more than one address” and leave the “more than one name”; that is what we are prohibiting.

MR KASULE:  Yes, Madam Chairperson, that is so essential. You can have many addresses but under one name.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, we leave “under more than one name” but remove the provision of one address because you can have several addresses of the same company.

Honorable members, I put the question that clause 83 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 83, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 84

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, under the head note; “refusal to issue money lending license” the committee proposes:

    1. Replace the word “character” with the word “conduct” and delete the words “and are fit and proper persons to conduct the business of money lending.”

    2. Add the words “or firm” after the word “company.”

The justification is that money lending should not be a preserve of only companies and (2), that the word “conduct” is too wide to cover the phrase “fit and proper person.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know why you are replacing “character”. Is it because you might be a shady character but conduct yourself well? Why don’t you leave it as it is? 

MR KASULE: I agree with you, Madam Chairperson, on the word “character.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: And in sub clause 2, you wanted to add the word “firm.” I think there should be no problem because “firm” is like a “partnership”. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 84 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, that particular clause needed some additional clause or notice. How do I know that my request for a money lending license has been rejected so that I take the appropriate action that is recommended in 84 (2)?

Therefore, there should be an additional subclause or notice to be given to the applicant whose application for license has been denied and probably prescribing also the period within which such notice should be given to the applicant. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: If I apply, I am entitled to know whether you are giving me or not. So, if we do not give you, we should let you know that we have not given you. Can you draft something chairperson? Is it there? Therefore, we add a new sub clause there to the effect that “where the application has been rejected, notice of rejection shall be given within 30 days.”
 
Honourable members, I put the question that clause 84, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 84, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 85

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, the headnote on 85 is “annual fee.” The committee proposes that that entire clause be deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why?

MR KASULE: The justification is because we have already said that you must get a license annually. So, there is no need for us to mention the annual fee because when you get a license, it comes with a fee. There is no need for any other annual fee apart from the license.

It says the moneylender shall pay a prescribed annual fee in respect of money lending license- (Interjections) Maybe, for emphasis. Where the money lender fails to pay the prescribed annual fee, then the license shall be canceled. The annual fee payable under subsection (1) shall be payable on the issue of license and thereafter annually upon application for renew of license. I think it was a repetition.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you are saying that annual fee is the same as the license fees? According to him, the annual fee is the same as the license fee. If you paid for the license it means you do not have to pay again. That is what the chairperson is saying.

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Radio operators for example pay an initial fee to have a radio station but also pay an annual fee because they have a radio station. In this case similarly, you are going to come in, registered your company and they have given you a license to operate but you annually pay a fee as a kind of renewal. That gives the authority chance to come and inspect you annually to make sure that you are doing what you should be doing. That is, a kind of renewal but you are not renewing a license but just paying an operating license annually.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to propose an amendment and it would be smarter to have this section read that “The license shall be renewed annually upon payment of a prescribed fee” We do not, therefore, need all these sub sections.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We need to agree on the difference between the license fee and annual fee.

MR SIMBWA: Madam Chairperson, when you look at sub-clause (1), I think you pay then you a get a license. Then sub-clause (2) is redundant because it says’ “Where the money lender fails to pay the annual fee prescribed under sub section (1)” where you pay and get a license. There is no way you would fail to pay after you have got a license. 

One should remain very free. For renewal, you continue paying, which is talked about in sub section (1); you continuously pay it annually. I think sub-section (2) is redundant. Sub-sections (1) and (3) make meaning under this Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there any other place in this Bill where they talk about licence fees?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, there is no where we are talking about the licence fees. The purpose of this clause was actually to talk about that annual fee.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, I concede. It does not differ very much from clause 86; they are one and the same.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 85 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 85, agreed to.

Clause 86, agreed to.

Clause 87

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, on revocation of a moneylending licence, the committee proposes, in sub-clause (1) to delete paragraphs (e) and (g). The justification is that liquidation and dissolution are processes of dealing with an insolvent company. 

We also propose to rephrase paragraph (d) to read as follows: “Has been declared insolvent.”

Further, we propose to delete paragraph (i) because the sub-clause is already provided for in sub-clause (1)(c).

In sub-clause (3), insert the words “Publication of” immediately after the words, “Date of” to make clear the effective date of revocation of a licence.

And in sub-clause (4), replace the word “Minister” with the words “High Court.”  The justification is that the High Court is better suited to hear and determine appeals. The High Court is more accessible to dispense justice than a minister. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 87 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 87, as amended - 

MR ANYWARACH: I have a concern on Clause 87(1)(a) that if you do not commence business within six months, the committee may automatically consider revoking the licence. 

Madam Chairperson, I propose one year. The reason is that ideally you will have already paid and, therefore, Government does not lose. However, the question is, why is someone delaying after paying for a licence? 

We have now put very many conditions such as address, premises, etcetera.  It would be fair to give a period of at least one year because we do not lose anything. What are we curing here? We will have already got the fee.

MR MAWANDA: Madam Chairperson, for purposes of uniformity - because this is what we have done to SACCOs and other non-deposit taking micro-finance institutions - we have given them six months - I don’t think we should give special attention to moneylenders by giving them a year. For purposes of uniformity, let us retain six months because this is what we have done to SACCOs and non-deposit taking microfinance institutions. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: If I pay a licence and I do not use it, what is your problem? Why are you complaining, yet I have given you the money for that year? (Laughter) You are penalising me for failing to start?

MR MAWANDA: Madam Chairperson, the Authority will be spending money in inspection. If you take a licence and you do not use it, we need to know why.

MR LWANGA: Madam Chairperson, one of the acts in this game is getting money. If you want to open a company to lend money, you come to get registered and pay the fees, which I believe may be something like Shs 150,000. If you do not open, why should I bother you? At the end of the year, if you do not renew, you get off the register.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, it is more than receiving the licence fee. It is more to do with developing this sector into a vibrant one that contributes to the economy. We are establishing an Authority to license, regulate and inspect. 

Therefore, if you are going to have people who are just going to come and pay money and go and sit with the licences, it is not good. I agree to one year, but the spirit is to make sure that we develop this sector into a much organised one.

THE CHAIRPERSON: If I fail in one year, I do not know whether I will really come back to renew because I will not have been doing anything.

MR LWANGA: Madam Chairperson, when we are talking here, it looks like it is a very simple thing. I do not know how many of us have actually started companies and after six months they realised that they are not doing the way they want and go back to the drawing board to fidget a bit to make sure things work out. So, it is not as easy as saying that within six months one must be ready to go. It might take one about two months to get their company registered to operate and another month trying to furnish the place. 

When you think you are going to start, is when you will realise you do not have an accountant to handle the books. By the time you find an accountant, it is already six months. Therefore, let us leave it at one year. If after one year, one does not operate, they lose their licence and that is the end of the story.

MR MAWANDA: Madam Chairperson, we should distinguish between registration and licensing. When you are going to start a company, you do not start by licensing. You go and present yourself and when ready, you go for the licence. You can’t say “I will go for the licence and after they have told me that they are giving me a licence, I then start thinking of starting a company, employing people and seeing how I am going to do the business”. That happens prior to – (Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: I would like to agree with hon. Mawanda. Actually, the difference is that with registration, you have already legally incorporated yourself while with licensing you have been given permission to operate. In the preceding section, we talked about the lapse of a licence – up to 31st December. That means we can also say, “one year for a starter.” It is okay because if the licence is considered to have lapsed at the end of the year, why then do you limit that “as soon as you are licensed we are giving you six months?” 

The danger here is that the person is going to suffer irreparable damage within the six months when he is still organising himself.

Madam Chairperson, hon. Mawanda, knows very well that it took me three years to start operating my radio station. Why? I incorporated a company and I had to pay for a licence as soon as I was applying for spectrum. As hon. Tim Lwanga is saying, within one year I was not done. I went to Uganda Communication Commission and they told me “you have to pay again.” The next year I was again not done, until the third year.

Therefore, it is just good practice that we give 12 months. After all, Government does not lose anything; it will be the applicant losing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us give it one year. Six months is a bit tight. We substitute 12 months for six months. Honourable members, the question is that clause 87 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 87, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 88, agreed to.

Clause 89

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chair of the committee, I think you had something.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, in clause 89, under the headnote “Form of moneylending contract” in sub-clause (2)(c), delete the words “Expressed in terms of a percentage per year.”

The committee thinks that “The interest charged on the loan” is enough. To say “Expressed in terms of a percentage per year” is redundant. You stop at interest charged on the loan.

MR LWANGA: Madam Chairperson, for the sake of everybody involved in this business, it might be better that, instead of just having an amount charged, you give a percentage per annum like they do in banks. First of all, some people will tell you that you have been charging them 10 per cent per month without telling you what the charge is, per annum. 

Many people have gone into borrowing thinking they were going to pay 10 per cent per month because interest is indicated as 10 per cent per annum when it is 120 per cent per annum. So, it is better to express it in percentage per annum so that people know what they are committing themselves to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that those clauses 89 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 89, agreed to.

Clause 90, agreed to.

Clause 91, agreed to.

Clause 92

MR MAWANDA: Madam Chairperson, the last sentence says “The money lenders shall produce the records referred to in Clause 87.” When you go to clause 87, it talks about revocation of a money lender’s licence. This is where one goes to court and presents details in respect to the loan they have given out.

What they meant is Clause 89 and not 87 because Clause 87 talks about the terms of the contract and not the revocation of a licence. We need to crosscheck that.

MR KASULE: It is referring to Clause 91 because it talks about records and reads, “Where a money lender applies to court for the recovery of any money lent or the enforcement of the agreement or security made or taken in respect of the money lent, the money lender shall produce the records.” Records are in Clause 91 which talks about, “money lender to issue receipts and keep records.” Maybe we include clauses 89 and 91.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That will help. I put the question that clause 92 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 92, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 93

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, on reopening transactions of money lenders: 

    (a) Delete sub-clause 1(d). The justification is that the sub-clause is catered for in (c);

    (b) Replace 2(b) with the following: “The amount charged for the expenses is excessive.” The justification is to give the sub-clause more clarity; and

    (c) Replace sub-clause 4 with the following: “Where a court reopens a transaction of money lending under sub-section (1), the court may order the Authority to revoke a licence.” The justification is that the court has the powers to direct the Authority on such matters.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know why you are removing the premiums, renewals and others in (b). Here is a borrower who goes to court to complain that although they borrowed money, the fine is too high and that premium was exorbitant. They might say that although they renewed, it is still expensive. Are we not taking away their right to complain?

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, are you proposing that we leave (b) because it is elaborate on expenses, inquiries, fine, bonus, premium, renewal and any other charges that is excessive?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, because that protects the borrower and/or gives them the opportunity to say something.

MR KASULE: I concede, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your problem with (d)? Why are you deleting it? Why don’t we just leave those things as they are?

MR KASULE: Madam Chair, you are the lawyers. On, difficult matters, you are the authority. I concede. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, leave it there as it is. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 93 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 93, agreed to.

Clause 94

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, on control of interest rates, the committee proposes to delete the entire clause. The justification is that Government cannot control interest rates in a liberalised economy. I beg to move. 

They are saying that, “The minister may, in consultation with the Authority by notice in the gazette, prescribe a maximum interest rate.” 

However, the committee says that if the minister is not proposing interest rates for banks and for microfinance institutions, then they cannot control interest rates with the money lenders.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable chair of the committee, the reason this law is coming is to help small institutions and small people. If they are going to sit and also decide they are going to lend money at 23 per cent, like the other banks and the Government has no control over them, don’t you think it will be a problem?

MR LWANGA: Madam Speaker, Government may not control interest rates in the banks, but there is a central bank, which controls and regulates what they are doing. The central bank sets a central bank rate, which is an indicator of what kind of rates they can charge.

In this case, we have money lenders who can charge anything. Because they are charging a desperate person who wants some money; they can decide to lend to such borrowers at even 50 per cent per month. So, the ministry must take responsibility and do consultations with the financial institutions and set a maximum. They do not need to necessarily set a minimum, but they can set a maximum.

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Right now, there are institutions charging 10 per cent per month. That is, effectively, 120 per cent annually. Some are charging 20 per cent per month, which is 240 per cent per year. So, it is wrong for the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to say, there should not be some control over that type of interest rates.

If the Central Bank’s rate is at 17 per cent, how do you justify asking somebody to pay 150 per cent annually? Maybe, the interest rate could be thrice the central bank’s rates. For example, if the central bank’s rate is at 17 per cent; three times of that will be 51 per cent and that will be the maximum annual interest rate. That is still a lot, but compared to what people are paying now in those microfinance institutions, at least that would be reasonable.

Madam Chairperson, I propose that the chairperson should not get rid of that clause; it should remain but we can also propose something that can work for this country. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  In fact, I am very surprised by the committee’s recommendation when they know what we have been going through. (Laughter) This must not have been their interest. 

Madam Chairperson, I think in doing this, the minister will be reasonable. The minister will make consultations and so the current formulation of the proposal in the Bill is okay. The chairperson should, therefore, be persuaded to abandon his proposal without any further argument. 

MS AMALI: Madam Chairperson, I cannot imagine the committee removing this clause that would try to control money lenders. As you know, Members in this House have suffered under the hands of money lenders. Some of us have hidden in latrines and toilets, just because they are on rampage. 

Madam Chairperson, I would like to beg and urge Members that we are regulating for the good of the economy and so we should support that the cap be put on money lending. Thank you. 

MR MAWANDA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I am also surprised because this is the heart of the Bill. We are coming in to stop overcharging in terms of interest rate to poor peasants. If you suggest that we leave it, then you will not have done any service to the people, as well as the Bill. Remember there is commercial banking and money lending; we are regulating money lending. This is supposed to be bridge financing; it is for a short term. If you do not control the interest rate, you would not have done anything. They will tell a person to pay 3 or 5 per cent per month and they will think that is little money. But when that percentage is multiplied by 30 days, you get 300. Right now, the interest rate of money lending is between 20 and 25 per cent, which is still per month - (Interruption)

MR SSIMBWA: I just want to give information that in clause 93, we have just passed something, under reopening transactions of money lenders - the interest charged in respect of the sum actually lent is excessive. How are you going to calculate the excessiveness, if there is no limit? I am also wondering what they were considering. I do not know whether this was a proposal from one of the -  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson of the committee, do not forget the rationale for this law. 

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, given the trend of the debate, it is progressively saying I should withdraw my amendment. (Laughter) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 94 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 94, agreed to.

Clause 95

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you have an amendment? 

MR KASULE: Yes, in Clause 95, the committee is proposing to delete the whole clause on restrictions on money lending advertising. The justification is that it is not proper to cripple private business. 
Allow me read the clause, “A person shall not send or deliver or cause to be sent or delivered, to any person a circular or other document advertising the money, the name or address or telephone number of a money lender or containing an invitation.”

Essentially they are saying that money lenders should not advertise their businesses. The Authority is now restricting the money lenders from advertising themselves. That is why the committee said that this being a private business, one can decide to advertise it. For example, hon. Tim Lwanga from Kalangala can decide to advertise that he offers money lending services to whoever goes there and gets stuck financially. That is what the committee is saying that we should not restrict money lenders from – (Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Madam Chairperson, that is basically similar to what I wanted to propose. I just want to give an example and request to probably be educated. I know we are dealing with money lenders but banks in a way also - we have banks pitched up around the precincts of Parliament. What are they doing?  Why would we segregate against this sector? I think it is not fair and right. I request that we remove that restriction, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, look at it carefully. There is Clause 95 (1) and clause 95 (2). Clause 95 (2) permits the money lender to publish, address and so forth. But clause 95 (1) talks about probably hon. Lwanga sending a message that hon. Nankabirwa is a money lender. I think that is what they are addressing here.

MS OSEGGE: Madam Chair, that is true but not all these institutions have the same capacity. I can probably do that on a small scale as I grow because I may not be able to advertise in a newspaper. I think we should allow growth because what is the end purpose? It is still delivering information, letting people know where you are and making business.  

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to improve on the amendment by the chairperson of the committee. Instead of deleting Clause 95, we should just delete Clause 95 (1) and retain Clause 95 (2), which says thus: “A money lender may publish in a newspaper or exhibit at an authorised address of the money lender, a notice which contains the authorised address at which the money lender carries on business; (b) the particulars of the address at which the money lender carries on business; (c) the address at which the money lender formerly carried on business; of course in case he moves to another premise; (d) a statement that the money lender lends money with or without security; and (e) a statement of the highest and lowest terms that the money lender offers.”

I think this is good information for the public, which we cannot remove from the Bill. I would therefore, propose that the chairperson concedes that we delete Clause 95(1) and retain Clause 95(2).

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, in conformity with what hon. Akol has said, Clause 95(5) says that where it is shown that a money lending transaction was entered into in contravention of this section, the transaction shall be illegal, notwithstanding and so forth. 

You can see that there are parts of this clause, which are good. We should not delete the whole thing just because Part 1 is not okay. It would probably be better for the chairperson of the committee to propose that we delete only Clause 95(1) but leave the other parts with amendments. There are some parts of this clause, which are useful and it would not be good to delete them. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I do not see any problem with Clause 95(1) because it guards against fraud. Why would you want to advertise another person’s premises? The minute we allow this to happen, it means that people will send clients to someone with ill intentions. I think Clause 95(1) is good for the public and business. 

MR LWANGA: Madam Chairperson, sometimes it is hard to understand how lawyers, who draft laws, think. I am trying to scratch my head and understand what the benefit of Part 1 is and I do not see it. What harm does it do?

In Parliament here, next month when Members of Parliament come in, I am sure there will be agents from banks coming in to persuade them to secure loans from them. Is that illegal?

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think it would be erroneous of Parliament to carry on with Clause 95. When you talk about restriction on advertising, it is like we are indirectly dealing with financial indiscipline.

You will agree with Members, I have been frequenting money lenders places, not even on issues concerning advertising - there are also others who have not gone there because they have financial discipline. So, for us to legislate in this way is like doing away with money lending. This is, in a way, interfering with their operations. Otherwise, how would one get to know they are in that business? In any case, they are even licensed to run that kind of business.

Under the law, if I lent out money without a money lender’s license, I am not supposed to collect interest on it because the law does not allow it. So, for us to sit in this House and target a certain group of people, yet we are allowing banks to advertise because they do the same business, is unfair. Let money lenders also advertise. So, I would like to propose that we delete sub-clauses (1) and (5) because they tend to do away with the freedom of the money lender, who is also in business to look for money like any other business person. I beg to submit.

MR ANYWARACH: I was of a different opinion, Madam Chairperson. I actually support the chairperson of the committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you supporting him to delete the whole clause?

MR ANYWARACH: Yes and the reason is - imagined I tell someone that hon. Paul Mwiru lends money because that person has told me they have money problems. I tell him to go to maybe plot number this and that, along Kampala Road to find him. That is already illegal under Clause 95(1). However, what is wrong with me volunteering information?

Two, a moneylender may have so many people operating with him. We then go ahead and – I looked at Clause 95(3), which says, “Shall not employ any agent or converter for the purpose…” I mean, we are going as far as touching their root of business. I must employ.

MR MWIRU: I would like to give my colleague more information. When you look at the object clause of the Bill, it is intending to provide for the licensing of money lending, not to restrict. However, when you look at what is being done, it is contrary to the object clause, which is the long title of the Bill. That is the information I would like to give you.

MR ANYWARACH: In effect, if we do away with the whole of Clause 95, we will then say that, well in a free market economy, advertise whatever you want but under Clause 96, we will get you, if you misrepresent yourself.

So, let us have them do their business, advertise and/or do whatever they want if they can afford it. After all, advertising is very costly. I am not even sure whether a money lender will squeeze his little money to go to advertise in the newspaper. A quarter of a newspaper page, for example, in the New Vision is a lot of money. Advertising even on radio is also lot of money.

Let us, therefore, leave them to do their advertising for their business but restrict them under Clause 96; they need to do it in good faith and with a little bit of decency – not to give false information, not to misrepresent themselves; we will get them under clause 96.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, suppose we delete everything except Clause 95(2)? Would that be a problem?

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, we may delete the rest apart from sub-clause (2) but the headnote will then not be restriction on money lending advertising. We don’t want to restrict, we can actually change the headnote on money lending advertisement.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We just make it “money lending advertisement”? We leave out the word “restriction” then we retain sub-clause 2 and we remove the others?

MR KASULE: Yes, thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, the question is that clause 95 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR ANYWARACH: Before we proceed, my understanding is that publishing in the newspaper or exhibiting at any authorised address of the money-lender is not to do away with electronic media adverts, including television and radio.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is the reason why we have made the heading to read as “Money lending advertisement.” Okay, the question is that, clause 95, as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 95, as amended, agreed to).

(Clause 96, agreed to).

(Clause 97, agreed to).

(Clause 98, agreed to).

(Clause 99, agreed to).

Clause 100

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to delete the entire clause on prohibition of charge for expenses on loans. The justification is that this supervision is not enforceable in a liberalised economy; there are expenses that are necessary to verify the collateral or security before a loan is granted. 

Clause 100 reads thus, “An agreement between a money lender and a borrower for the payment of a sum on account of costs, charges or expenses, incidentals to or relating to negotiations for the granting of a loan, is illegal and if a borrower pays a sum to a money lender on account of any such costs, charges or expenses, that sum shall be recoverable as a debt due to the borrower or be offset against the amount actually lent.” 

Honourable members, if somebody lends you money but has other costs that he prescribes, as to why you are taking his money - we are saying that the lender and the borrower should agree to transact in that respect plus those expenses. That is why the committee is proposing to delete this clause.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But you are not protecting the borrower because the lender can tell that person that if they want such a loan, the lender will have to go to Mombasa to execute some duties and that so the lender needs funding to go there in order to negotiate for money, among other issues. This is not good for the borrower.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In fact when you look at Clause 93, when there is a disagreement, then transaction has to be re-written. When you agree that this is a short-term bridge-financing solution and you charge a higher simple interest rate, why should you levy other charges on top of the interest rate, which charge is not levied by commercial banks? 

So, when you say that these charges are paid, somebody is already distressed. You will end up failing to control the interest rate and charges as it is being done by many money lenders. 

Therefore, I suggest that we retain Clause 100 as we have already passed Clause 93, which is more related to it. Thank you, Madam Chair.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I am addressing my mind to the contract law, under the freedom to contract. This law assumes that when two persons, with capacity to contract, meet and enter into a transaction - of course there are incidental charges because they are not even defined. What are the particular charges we are trying to do away with?

For instance, you will agree with me that most of the people, who borrow from the money lenders, do not pay that money back because of the nature of the payment and other expenses which accrue as a result of the efforts to recover. If such expenses are not recoverable, I think we would be in a way – (Interruption)

MR KASULE: The money lenders told us that everybody is assumed to be trustworthy. However, this is a borrower who takes your money but they will shift from Jinja. The next day, you hear they are in Kasese and you have to look for them. Those other expenses of looking for this person who is hiding somewhere – that is why those other expenses may be added onto the interest rate; it is just because the money lender has to look for the borrower.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, when I come to borrow, you add five per cent for looking for me? (Laughter)

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, the reality is that if the money lenders - even those who have accepted to come out and operate as such - there are also many who do not even register. Once you go to them, they say, hon. Tim Lwanga, please, what is your security? The borrower will say it is their house. You will sign a sales agreement with them. Those ones are not regulated because they are not envisaged under this Act. This is because we are only talking about money lenders who have registered under the Money Lender’s Act. The requirement for registration is a certificate of good conduct issued by the Police.

So, unless we are saying that those money lenders operating under the law should also go underground - they will still be fleecing our people. Once, you go to them, they will ask for a security? You may give your house. The next thing is for you to sign a sale agreement with them. They can ask you to bring your wife to consent to that transaction. Those ones are very dangerous. 

Whereas the ones, who lend under this Act, try to indicate that as if there is recourse, one can go to court and say, the Act does not allow you to go over and above this. So, the Act should be intended to enable the upcoming lenders, who have not been licensed, to get licensed. Otherwise, when we take this path, others will not even register because under the law, the money lenders’ license operates for only one year. Once that license expires, you cannot carry on interest from one year to another year; the interest only s within that particular year. That is why it is important that if we do not take the chairs position, we will be creating more problems than we intend to cure. Thank you.

MR SSIMBWA: Madam Chairperson, it is better the chair of the committee and hon. Mwiru look at the provisions of this clause. The issue is not about following up on the loan. The charges, which are being talked about are charges in relation to negotiations. I am negotiating with you that you give me such an amount of money. 

However, there are charges that emerge; charges for photocopying papers, for example and so forth. The charges which are being talked about are not charges of following up when the borrower has failed to pay; they are charges for executing the loan.

I believe that since it is about charges in relation to the execution of the loan, there is no need to delete this clause. If we allow them, they will say okay, you are putting a limit on the interest, and then let us go to the charges. At the end of the day, the loan you will be asking for, about one third of it will go to charges. How will you be assisting this person who is coming for such a loan?  

MR LWANGA: Madam Chairperson, I believe that majority of the Members of Parliament have borrowed from the bank. When you go to borrow money, while there is an interest rate that you are going to pay, they tend to charge you that one per cent. The one per cent is a set-up fee. Why don’t we provide for a fee, like the way the banks do? We can say that they can charge –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you are forgetting the rationale for this law.

MR LWANGA: No, Madam Chairperson, the reason I am proposing that is: if I am a money lender and I am not allowed to charge that one per cent, I will fix it in the interest rate. I would rather be specific and know that since we have said that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development may set a maximum that is chargeable - I would rather, know that the chargeable is actually the interest and that there is one per cent, which is supposed to help with setting up, as he said, the books, the running of the place, among others, and recovery might also come on that one per cent. If we do not, the price of this loan will definitely be higher than what it would be.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we know from the minister, what the rationale for this clause 100 was? What is the mischief you wanted to cure?

MS AMALI: Madam Chairperson, the rationale for this clause was the excessive costs; we wanted to get rid of that. There are some of those hidden cost that are not even disclosed. I would like to beg this House to look critically at this clause, because it is Ugandans who borrow.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, the controversy arises out of a situation like this: if money lending is a negotiation between two people - the borrower and the lender, then at the end of the day, the Authority prohibits any charges or expenses, apart from interest rates. How will this person do business? It is a private business. The person benefits from giving you money overtime at some interest rate plus other expenses incidental to the business. So, if we prohibit – because the headnote talks about prohibition of charge for expense on loans –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, what we need to contextualise is the fact that - I now understand where we are coming from. The Money Lenders Act does not allow lending at an interest, which is more than 30 per cent per year. The problem is that when people go there, the money lenders even charge them 10 per cent, per month, which is 120 percent per annum and that is illegal.

However, the spirit of this is that we are looking at the both Acts - the Money Lenders’ Act, which sets the interest rate at 30 per cent per annum plus the little costs. But if we look at it from a perspective that they charge from 20 or 10 per cent and Members of Parliament sign such agreements, then may be this makes sense.

However, if we look at it the way the law is, it is a totally different thing. If you are to look at what prevails in the markets, then this clause makes sense.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You have not assisted us. How are you assisting us to resolve this thing?

MS KWAGALA: Much as they bar us from debating with conflict of interest, I wonder what hon. Kasule has in mind –(Laughter) because if the minister is telling you that this law is coming up to save people from the practices of some money lending institutions – a gentleman told me that when he went to the bank for a mortgage, they asked him to pay for inspection fee, which was Shs 2 million. The gentleman paid that money and got the mortgage.

However, when he went for another mortgage, they still wanted another inspection fee paid. What saved him was the fact that he was a lawyer and he said, “But the other inspection fee is still there and I am using the same property.” That was a lawyer but what about our people whom we would like to protect? That is why this law should be put in place. In fact, we should retain that clause so that people are not taken for a ride. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, do you still insist? 

MR KASULE: Is the debate progressively against my proposal? If the costs that we want to prohibit are not in the negotiation, then those would be illegal. However, if they are part of the negotiations, then we should not prohibit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, again we would like to remind you about the rationale for this law. It is for people who cannot pay those duties that hon. Kwagala is talking about.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, if we are to consider hon. Kasule’s proposal, it is almost like banning costs. That if I filed a suit against hon. Tim Lwanga and at the end of it –(Interjections)– yes, that is the meaning. What we intend to legislate is that if I filed a suit against you and I recover the decreto sum arising from the contractual amount, the cost of the suit will not be recoverable. 

Whereas the money lenders’ Act sets an interest rate for money lenders, the problem is that they have been operating outside that rate and setting an amount which is over and above what the law allows. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not supervised these money lenders.

Therefore, as a result of failing to supervise, she has come to Parliament to compel us to come up with a provision of the law to deter these money lenders from recovering any other incidental costs arising out of the negotiations. What the minister should do is to supervise these money lenders.

Under the law, it is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to supervise money lenders to ensure that they charge within the moneylender’s Act; that is the starting point. However, it is not right for us to come and raise that they are doing the work of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which they have failed to do. 

Madam Chairperson, you will agree with me that even my good friends, the ministers, at times also borrow from money lenders at very high interest rates, which is even against the law. I wonder how you can regulate yet you are also borrowing at an illegal rate. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 100 do stand as part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 101, agreed to.

Clause 102

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 102-

MS OSEGGE: Madam Chairperson, on Clause 102, concerning savings, in the microfinance institutions which are micro deposit taking institutions, the clients pay for savings and they have to deposit compulsory savings. I do not know how you are going to - because I believe that these MDIs all fall under TIER 4.

However, the on-going practice is that there is mandatory savings. It does not matter what kind of loan you are taking from them; you are supposed to give mandatory savings to a certain percentage of the loan that you are going to take. You can only get your savings when you have cleared the loan. Sometimes those savings are used to offset the loan if you default, but they also pay insurance.

I do not know how we are going to execute this clause when there is already a certain practice on the market. There is already a practice that they are operating under. Madam Chairperson, where would Pride Micro Finance fall?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this provision says that if you have contracted a loan where you use a chattel, you do not require savings. Also where you are using a bill of exchange or a mortgage, you do not require savings.  

MS OSEGGE: Madam Chairperson, my question is: already the likes of Pride Micro Finance take chattels but they also require savings. How do we marry the two? How are you going to reason that TIER 4 which is supposed to be larger than TIER 3 is not going to do what TIER 3 is doing?

MR MAWANDA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to give information to hon. Osegge that Pride Micro Finance is regulated under MDIS. It is a microfinance deposit taking institution, which has a law in place that regulates them. We are looking at TIER 4 microfinance institutions which do not have any law that regulates them. 

Secondly, the savings she is talking about are regarded as loan guarantees because they do not have any fall-back position. Therefore, they are using that loan guarantee as security such that if you fail to pay the loan, then you have the insurance fund and that loan guarantee. 

MS OSEGGE: Madam Chairperson, before I came to this Parliament, I was the branch manager to one of the Pride Micro Finance branches and this is what they do until today. They take chattels, they take savings but they also pay insurance. My question is: TIER 4 is supposed to be larger than TIER 3 or MDIs; why would you have that do what it is doing and then what is supposed to be bigger is not doing the same?

MR LWANGA: The honourable member has said that MDIs are smaller than what we are doing. MDIs are bigger and different.

MS OSEGGE: Madam Chairperson, even if they are bigger, why do they take chattels and savings and the clients pay insurance? Can we marry the two? That is what I would like to understand.

MR MAWANDA: Madam Chairperson, in this part, we are dealing with money lenders. We have finished the part of the SACCOs and the non-deposit taking institutions. We are specifically dealing with money lenders. Money lenders do not take savings; you just go there and get the money.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I would also like to know; if we are dealing with TIER 4 and the emphasis on moneylending, which has its own Act – actually, the other clause which we were dealing with –(Interjections)– but the Act does not intend to repeal some issues –(Interruption).

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, this particular part says that these savings exclude moneylending and it is now confined to SACCOs. SACCOs are for savings and credit; they do it but not money lenders. I think that is the only difference with this clause.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that Clause 102 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 102, agreed to.

Clause 103, agreed to.

Clause 104, agreed to.

Clause 105, agreed to.

Clause 106, agreed to.

Clause 107, agreed to.

Clause 108, agreed to.

Clause 109, agreed to.

Clause 110, agreed to.

Clause 111, agreed to.

Clause 112, agreed to.

Clause 113, agreed to.

Clause 114, agreed to.

Clause 115, agreed to.

Clause 116

MR MAWANDA: Clause 116 reads that, “The minister may make regulations for the better carrying into effect of the provisions of this Act.” I would like to suggest that we amend this clause to read, “The minister may, after consultation with the Authority and with the approval of Parliament by a statutory instrument, make regulations for the better carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.”

Madam Chairperson, I am saying this because we would like the regulations to be brought to Parliament for its contribution. When we leave it open like, we removed the 1 per cent from Uganda Communication Commission because earlier they were making the regulations - they now used the regulation to increase the tax on the broadcasters and with effect from this financial year, they have increased the tax on broadcasters because we reduced what they were supposed to retain.

Therefore, when these regulations are brought here, we shall be able to crosscheck as Parliament that they are not going to misuse the regulations against the law. I thank you.

MS AKOL: Madam Chairperson, we have been making laws in this Parliament and the clause that my honourable colleague is referring to is generic. When regulations are made, it is to operationalise provisions of the law and nothing outside the law. Therefore, I would not like him to express those fears and bring in provisions that are going to impede the fast-tracking of this law by making all those references.

I would prefer that we are comforted with the way we have been doing these things and allow this provision to be approved the way it is.

MR MAWANDA: In fact, when we put this in the UCC law; they have now come back with a Bill, and it is before the committee, trying to amend that the regulations should not be brought before Parliament. They tried to hide behind the regulations to stampede the institutions they oversee. We have the Communications (Amendment) Bill, 2016 that is coming to change what we passed - that regulations should be brought to Parliament for approval so that we can protect these institutions from being – (Interruption)

MR KASULE: I would like to give information to hon. Mawanda. I appreciate his concern but we should not be seen to legislate for mistakes by an institution. In fact the Speaker ruled that regulations are not passed by Parliament; maybe they are laid on the Table in Parliament. Otherwise we have given authority to the minister to vary interest rates in this sector.   

Would you like every time the minister is going to vary interest rates, given the situation, that he comes here and we debate? It is going to be done in the regulations and very many regulations are going to be done for this Bill and they will not be done at once. All other laws are done like this; regulations are done by the minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, our work is to make the law but not to administer it. This means that we are going to be partners with the minister. Instead of them running their ministry, we shall be telling them to bring things here so that we clear first. Let us leave the ministers with their powers. Let us make the law and give it to them. If something is wrong, they will come back to us.

Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 116 do stand part of the Bill?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 116, agreed to.

Clause 117, agreed to.

Clause 118, agreed to.

Clause 5

THE CHAIRPERSON: Any changes in the interpretation? [MR KASULE: “No.”]I put the question that clause 5 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 35

MS AMALI: Madam Chairperson, we stood over clause 35 concerning costs of management when the institutions are taken over. However, after deep consultations and seeing what we are trying to cure by enacting this law, the ministry decided that costs of management of the TIER 4 finance institutions during the period of takeover, shall be by the Authority and shall be payable by the institution and shall be a debt due from the institution to Authority. That is how it was.

However, our position right now is to go with what Parliament agreed that the costs of management during takeover should be borne by the Authority. 

The justification is that it is done by other regulators for the effective management of these traced institutions. However, this does not give leeway to the people and institutions that have been mismanaging these institutions. It is a warning to them that the law is now in place and it is not going to be just parties as it has been. Thank you.

MR KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, I am one of those who stood on the Floor of this Parliament and objected that the cost should be borne by the Authority because of the so many microfinance institutions and also considering that this may give leeway to the managers of these institutions to mismanage, knowing that the cost will be borne by the Authority. 

However, I agree that this is the right thing to do and I support the minister, although there is still that worry about the cost of so many institutions.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 35 be amended as proposed by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to

The first schedule, agreed to.

The second schedule, agreed to.

The third schedule, agreed to.

The Title

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, the committee agreed that the title be changed to “The Tier 4 Microfinance Institutions and Moneylenders Bill, 2015.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the title be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Ms Caroline Amali): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Ms Caroline Amali)): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Tier 4 Microfinance and Moneylenders Bill, 2015” and passed it with many of amendments. (Laughter)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Ms Caroline Amali): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE TIER 4 MICROFINANCE AND MONEY LENDERS BILL, 2015

5.53
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sorry that I have to do this, unless otherwise advised. Clause 88(1) (b) says, 

“Offences in respect of moneylending licence 
(1) A person who- 
(b) carries on business in a name or at any other place other than the name or address specified in the moneylending licence commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine of…”

My problem is: I wonder if we are not prohibiting expansion of this business because somebody can transact business under the same licence name but at different sale points. How is this provision going to cater for that? I think it defeats the purpose of expansion. I could be in Gulu but still run under the same licence; however, you are saying have a different address - the address definitely has to change - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we handled that. What we considered a problem is the change of name but you can have several addresses - Osegge and Company in Kitgum, Kumi and Kamuli. However, if you change the name, then that is a problem.

5.55
MR JOHN SSIBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Madam Speaker, when we were considering the issue of revocation of a licence to a moneylender, we gave it a year. However, under clause 45, we gave the SACCOs six months. That means if somebody has not commenced business within six months, their licence will be revoked. I propose that for uniformity, we also give a year to the SACCOs.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, are you suggesting that they should collect my money and put in a SACCO for a year? You are collecting my money; you cannot just sit with it for a year. These are my savings; you cannot sit with them for a year. You must be able to use it and give it to me and I do my things. Six months is okay to me.  

5.57
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Madam Speaker, I seek to recommit Clause 118(2)-

THE SPEAKER: You did not give notice; hon. Osegge gave me notice.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I propose that this is the right stage for me to –

THE SPEAKER: Normally, you give notice when I am there. Hon. Osegge gave me notice that she wanted to recommit clause 88.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, this is in the interest of this Act. I see a problem that we did not address our minds to and I would like to address Members on it - the effect of sub-clause (2). 

In my opinion, it seems to have a prospective defect. We are saying that Clause 118(2) intends to affect transactions entered into prior, by virtue of the minister coming up with rates and giving three months’ notice. The effect of that, Madam Speaker, is that if hon. Bahati had a loan with a moneylender, he would have to play hide and seek until the new rates are out. Once the rates are out, he can assert that the new rates will apply to the loan he contracted before the coming into force of this Act. That is the meaning of Clause 118(2). 

I am not a moneylender but I know that they are not represented in this House. As a legislator, I do not know whether this would be in the best interest of business in this country or it is about us or those who do not wish this law to take effect. That is the justification. 

The Act now provides for 24 per cent per annum but the minister may bring it down to 12 per cent or below and a borrower could hide until the new rates are announced by the minister. Once the notice is out, the moneylender is required to comply with the new rates within three months. This means that this Act will affect the running contracts yet my understanding is that since the law does not apply retrospectively, this Act would have effect from the time it is assented to by the President. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I do not see a strong argument for this. Even with commercial banks, interest rates are adjusted and they can go up or down. You recall that when people got loans here, the interest rates went up and we had to adjust this. Therefore, this is just for adjusting the interest rates; I do not see the point that you are making.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I would be surprised if hon. Bahati saw the point because the Bill is coming from his ministry. 

The point is that the law does not apply retrospectively. There is even a constitutional provision to that effect. What we are saying is that once this is enacted as law and the minister - (Interjection) – Hon. Bahati, it is you who did not understand. Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence so that hon. Bahati understands this point. The law does not act retrospectively; that means that the date of assent is the date on which the Act is presumed to commence. 

The effect of clause 118(2) is that when this Act is assented to and the minister comes up with a rate – assuming the maximum is 12 per cent - and he gives a notice, all those moneylenders who have agreements with you will have to comply within three months. So, they will adjust those loan agreements you have with them to that 12 per cent within three months. However, for us to enact a law to affect an existing contract would be like enacting a law to cover criminal acts which were committed before the coming into force of the Act. (Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, hon. Mwiru, for giving way. There will be a reason why the interest rate would be changed or reviewed and why the minister has to come up with that new rate. 

The terms of the contract will run up to the time when the new rate has come out. So, if I contracted you and I was to pay you at 30 per cent but the Government thinks that 30 per cent, which has been running in the market, is too high and is affecting the economy and they cut the rates to 20 per cent, I will pay up to the time when the law comes into effect and then we can move on. That is not acting retrospectively. Yes, it affects the contract but you move forward with the new rate as of now.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what hon. Mwiru is saying is that we should not interfere with running contracts, that we should leave them to run but once the law is made, any new contract must be under the rate prescribed by the minister. I think that is what he is saying.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, one of the reasons as to why we are regulating moneylending is to make sure that the people of Uganda have an opportunity to do this business. However, we also want to guard against extortion – charging somebody an interest rate of 10 per cent per month, meaning 120 per cent per annum. Government cannot just sit back and watch things happen like that. 

Therefore, what this law is saying is that once it comes into effect and the minister decides - after consultation - that the rate is 24 per cent or 30 per cent, we are telling the moneylenders to adjust accordingly. I think that is fair, otherwise we are not curing the problem. 

For you to suggest now that if I entered into a contract of 10 per cent per month, I should leave it as such until it is fully executed, I think that would not – The purpose of this clause is to intervene in such situations. We are saying that once the Act is assented to, we give the people who have been doing the business of moneylending three months to adjust their rates according to the rates issued by the minister.

MR KASULE: Madam Speaker, I think the committee was wrong not to look at this matter of transition. If I can read for Members, the transition provision says, “(1) A Tier 4 microfinance institution, which at the commencement of this Act, is carrying out business to which this Act applies shall, within 12 months from the date of commencement of this Act, apply for a licence under this Act.” I think that is okay; that is a grace period of 12 months. 

“(2) A moneylender who, prior to the coming into force of the notice prescribing a maximum interest rate, may have entered into a moneylending agreement with a borrower which provides for an interest rate that is higher than the prescribed maximum interest rate, shall comply with the notice within three months after the issue of the notice.” This means that if you have a loan with a moneylender, after the minister has come up with a maximum interest rate, all other agreements that have been running should now conform. 

I do not think the courts can even stop this. It is as though this law would be working retrospectively - three months. These are agreements that have been done. I think we can leave the first part and then we ask the minister to concede on the second one. From when they announce the new rates, contracts from thereon will comply with those rates but not the old contracts.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the moneylending business in this country has been operating mostly on a weekly or monthly basis. You cannot go anywhere to borrow money for a full year from moneylenders; it is for two weeks, one month or two months. It is just short-term. I have not seen anyone going to a moneylender to borrow money for a year.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, what we are saying is that hon. Bahati’s docket has the duty to supervise so that nobody is lent money by the moneylender over and above the interest rate of 24 per cent per annum, but you did not do that. You are now talking of 120 per cent; where have you been? It is you, as Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic development, to supervise but you have failed or you have negated your duty. You do not regulate by bringing an Act; there are supervisory powers, which you have not applied. 

THE SPEAKER: But how could hon. Bahati supervise what is not registered?

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, the Moneylenders Act, under Section 12 as it is today, sets a rate of 24 per cent and yet that has not been observed by the moneylenders because they have even been charging at 10 per cent per month, which would come to 120 per cent per annum. That was the failure of the  Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic development.

However, there are also other people who could have entered into contract, but for you to say that because the law has come into place, therefore you should adjust these contracts backwards – (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I do not think that this clause would mean that the interest accrued would be affected, which is his worry. The interest accrued would not be affected but the interest you apply going forward from the three months would be adjusted.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, then this clause should not mention existing contracts -(Interjection)- Yes, it does in its wording; it mentions prior agreements entered into before coming into force of this Act. 

By law, once an Act is assented to by the President, it has to take effect from the date of assent. Therefore, no moneylender would enter into a contract and charge any other rate other than this. However, the meaning of Clause 118(2) as it is stands, as I have said -

THE SPEAKER: Under this law, it will come into force on the date that the minister decides; it is not just on assent. 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to allay hon. Mwiru’s fears. I do not think there is any retrospective application here when you read the provisions in Clause 118(2). It says, “A moneylender who, prior to the coming into force of the notice prescribing a maximum interest rate, may have entered into a moneylending agreement with a borrower which provides for an interest rate that is higher than the prescribed maximum interest, shall comply with the notice within three months after the issue of the notice.” 

Now, the current moneylenders actually quote for you a monthly interest rate and you have to pay what you have committed to. However, as soon as this law comes into effect and the minister issues that notice, it means the moneylender now should charge you that interest rate which is prescribed by the minister going forward, not retrospectively, because the charges have been on a monthly basis and you have to pay it anyway. However, if they charge you monthly and you have not paid for the last four months, you have to pay. When the minister issues this notice, the new interest rate takes effect.

THE SPEAKER: Therefore, the notice is issued and then three months elapse before it becomes effective.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I had moved to recommit the clause but from the look of things, despite the fact that the interpretation given by hon. Rose Akol is not the correct one, I withdraw the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you move for the third reading?

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE TIER 4 MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS AND MONEY LENDERS BILL, 2015

6.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Ms Caroline Amali): Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Mwiru for conceding because these issues are blank and clear.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Tier 4 Microfinance Institutions and Moneylenders Bill, 2015” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Tier 4 Microfinance Institutions and Moneylenders Bill, 2015 be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE TIER 4 MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS AND MONEY LENDERS ACT, 2016”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes.

MS AMALI: Madam Speaker, I cannot sit without expressing our gratitude to this House. I am humbled by the work that has been done on this Bill.

I would like to congratulate the Members; I have a big “thank you” for you for holding our hands. (Interjections) Do not worry. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, just give me some little time. 

I would like to thank you so much, honourable members, and I would like to thank all Ugandans who have been patient with us. As you know, this Bill has come a long way; it has been a thorn in your flesh and all of us. It has caused a lot of setbacks and shortfalls even in the economy. As Government, we have been losing taxes. There is a project that we passed here and approved money for but it is lagging behind because we had not passed this Bill - the project for financial inclusion in rural areas. It is now going to take off and we are going to fast track it. 

Madam Speaker, I remember standing here during that time and promising you and colleagues that the Bill will come and we begged for your support. I would like to thank you so much. There have been a lot of consultations. Almost everybody was consulted because, as you know, it is a big sector. Very many institutions gave their side of the story. We even consulted His Excellency the President who gave us a lot of wisdom on this Bill, which I am grateful for.

Madam Speaker, I want to end by urging and requesting Parliament; now that the microfinance sector is going to benefit a lot from this Bill, I would like to urge that this sector that is fully supported under your stewardship in the Tenth Parliament. (Applause) Our eyes are on you to support over 80 per cent of Ugandans who depend on this sector. I count on you because you have been there, given a listening ear even when I called you at midnight. I am grateful to you and the House.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. On behalf of the poor Ugandans, I would like to thank the Government for coming to their rescue. I hope this law will help them not to be fleeced as they have been suffering in the past. Thank you.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2016

6. 19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2016” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is the Bill seconded? Yes, it is seconded.

6.20
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Committee on Budget on the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2016. It is a brief report because the House has already considered Schedules 1, 2, and 3 and provided the necessary supplies of resources to the various votes. In this report, we are simply proposing the necessary amendments to the Bill on the figures that we find inconsistent with what we supplied. These figures are to be found under the following votes:

Vote 001 - Office of the President 

The committee recommended, and the House agreed, that under vote 001, Office of the President, the supplementary provision of Shs 2.5 billion that was meant for the facilitation of Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) and deputy RDCs be disallowed. This is because the activity was not of an emergency nature and should have been provided for in the normal budget process. This amount of money, Shs 2.5 billion, has been deducted from the provisions in this Bill. 

Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture

During the consideration of the supplementary schedules for the financial year 2014/ 2015, the committee noted that due to failure by the accounting officer to pay Shs 3.3 billion on time to Spencon for the construction of five valley dams, Government incurred a cost of Shs 12.3 billion. We thought that this was a heavy loss that the Auditor-General should take interest in. We did recommend a special audit for this.

Madam Speaker, when we move to the committee stage, we shall propose relevant amendments to the Bill for those two items. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Are there any contributions? I put the question that the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2016 be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2016

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

The Schedule

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, I propose to amend the provision in vote 001, Office of the President (recurrent supplementary budget), to replace Shs 18,685,754,453 with Shs 16,185,754,453. The justification is that the Shs 2.5 billion that was meant for RDCs was not approved by Parliament during supply.

MR MWIRU: Aye.

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, hon. Mwiru, for the spirit of co-operation. (Laughter) 

Madam Chairperson, I would like the House to understand this: As we debated yesterday and the day before, if we disallow this figure, what does it mean? This money was spent in the Financial Year 2014/2015. As you had guided earlier, it is better for us to appropriate the money and then seek to account for it. If we say we are not appropriating it, what do we mean when the money has already been spent? We will have removed it from the bracket and then we would not play an oversight role over this money that we have not appropriated. 

We would rather appropriate this money and go out and seek for accountability through the Auditor-General. If we want, we can even have an investigation. If RDCs have been paid, how can we say we did not appropriate the money? What is the House doing? I beg that this House approves the money. If we want more clarification or even to investigate, we can do it later.

Secondly, this idea of saying that every supplementary should be an emergency is not correct. There are some technical supplementaries; there are supplementaries that are provided for, for unforeseen circumstances. Emergencies are only handled under the Contingencies Fund which we provided. 

Colleagues, let us appropriate this money. If we need accountability, we have a different system of demanding for accountability. Thank you very much, hon. Mwiru, for supporting me. (Laughter)

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, we must accept that because of the way you have steered this House, you have put it at a certain level that ensures that our work is not to rubberstamp. 

The Shs 2.5 billion we are talking about was spent on monitoring and evaluation. However, there is no stencil of evidence that was provided in form of accountability. Therefore, having listened to my good friend, hon. Bahati, I am of the considered opinion that public money was spent in an irregular way. In as far as Parliament is concerned, this is nugatory expenditure. The law says something about spending money that way. As Parliament, we should not come in and take liability and soil the good image of this Parliament, more so when the Ninth Parliament is ending.

Madam Chairperson, every Government programme has a component of monitoring and evaluation. The question would be, why were the RDCs spending money for monitoring and evaluation? They are not project managers. Their duty is different and they are paid for it.

I am of the considered opinion that we should support the position of the chairperson of the committee. Maybe once the Government receives these accountabilities – Uganda is not going anywhere – they can forward them and the Tenth Parliament can look at them, other than soiling our image. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to support the minister, not the chairperson. The RDCs are civil servants and they are the representatives of the President in the districts. Their sole purpose is to monitor the Government programmes. If they have spent any money more than was planned, they are entitled to have extra money through a supplementary, which we have got here. 

The money has already been used as was mentioned. If we do not approve this, we are blocking our budget. I suggest that we supply this money and follow it up later. The RDCs are known; they are not just any kind of people. They are appointed to oversee Government programmes. Please, let us all co-operate and support the minister. Thank you.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This vote is an on-going concern and, therefore, this is not the last time that the minister is coming to Parliament to ask for money. Therefore, I would support the proposal by the minister that we supply this money. However, its release to the ministry should be conditional –(Interjection)- Okay, the money was spent. Since the money was already spent, it is better that we appropriate it and –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I think we need to contextualise one thing; whenever a budget is presented before this House, there is a component of monitoring and evaluation. Supplementaries rise in only two ways; one of them is when a need arises which was not foreseen and the second is due to foreign exchange loss.

In the budget, Government had a component for monitoring and evaluation, which was spent. The RDCs also got Shs 2.5 billion for the same component. I would like to applaud the chairperson of the committee-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Mwiru, I would like to know about the money which was in the budget. Was it for the sector officials or the RDCs?

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, the money which was in the budget was for the sector officials. I would like to give an example-

THE CHAIRPERSON: The money was for fisheries officers, agricultural officers and the like.

MR MWIRU: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where was the money for the RDCs?

MR MWIRU: That was not in their work plan as one of the activities they would undertake. The way monies are appropriated in this Parliament is such that every financial year, once there is a work plan, Government draws up a budget and components of what they want to do. 

What Government is telling us is that they did not envisage that in that particular year, there would be monitoring and evaluation. However, after some time, they came up with a component of monitoring and evaluation and they spent Shs 2.5 billion under that component. I am saying, Madam Chairperson, that there is no government, even if it is this NRM Government, which is run like that. 

What we are saying is that for us to start on this, we shall set a precedent that people can sit in ministries, spend money and then they come to Parliament for approval of money they have already spent. This is what it means –(Interruption)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Chairperson, the report quotes Article 156, clause 2 of the Constitution. Article 156, clause 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda stipulates thus: “If in respect of any financial year it is found- 
(b) that any monies have been expended for any purpose in excess of the amount appropriated for that purpose or for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act, a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid before Parliament and in the case of excess expenditure, within four months after money is spent.” 

This is what the minister is doing. It is not illegal. This Article caters for the unforeseen circumstances that administrators meet in the field, where they could not do otherwise except spend the money. Therefore, to insist that approving this supplementary budget is going against the Constitution - It is here; you are covered.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I am doing the work of the Prime Minister. It is supposed to be him to ensure that such public money is safeguarded. When you look at the Ministerial Policy Statement and particularly, the one of the Office of the President, they knew what they were supposed to undertake in there. 

Mr Prime Minister, you should be questioning the technical people in that department. They had the work plan and the budget which they brought to this Parliament and we appropriated money to them. For them to go and spend above the budget by Shs 2.5 billion-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, did we appropriate money in that budget for monitoring?

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, the answer is actually “no”, simply because the ministry did not come up with it. For them to now go and spend Shs 2.5 billion and come to seek for retrospective approval, is like usurping our power as Parliament.

Madam Chairperson, the Public Finance Management Act does not allow any accounting officer to spend any money over and above the budget. What they did is even an offence. 

MR BAHATI: Hon. Mwiru, we need to understand the purpose of a supplementary budget. You cannot suggest that the Public Finance Management Act does not allow any vote holder to spend more than what has been approved here. It does, through a supplementary budget of three per cent, or if it is beyond the three per cent we come for prior approval. What Parliament should be asking is whether we got value for the Shs 2.5 billion. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I have stood on the Floor of this Parliament and stated that the country has a National Development Plan. From the National Development Plan, we draw a strategic investment plan, work plans and then budgets for these entities. The strategic management plan of the Office of the President and the Ministerial Policy Statement do not include monitoring and evaluation as one of the activities they intended to undertake. 

This is why for some of the projects, the centre normally enters into agreements or contracts with the district where there is a component for monitoring and evaluation. If there are projects, there is that component –(Interruptions)

MS MUTONYI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to inform the House and hon. Mwiru that I am very sure there were unforeseen projects, like wealth creation. I have seen RDCs chasing villagers who sell cows belonging to the wealth creation project. They take them for sale, and the RDCs have to follow this up. I believe this was unforeseen from the beginning. 

Therefore, I support the minister. I have ever been an RDC and they used to give us a monthly salary and a little allowance for fuel to run around. However, this particular wealth creation project has expanded their expenditure as we have seen. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you. You need to contextualise this. When an RDC is appointed, they have duties they must do. A Member is telling us that there was even Operation Wealth Creation and we are not aware whether that is one of the activities which was supervised or not. It cannot be done in an ad hoc manner like that. It is up to the Prime Minister; he should be the one to say this because he is the Leader of Government Business. However, if public money is going to be squandered in that way, then there is a very big problem. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: It is not enough, hon. Paul Mwiru, to come to the House and say we should disallow this expenditure because it was not budgeted for. All this expenditure we are approving is part of the supplementary budget. There should be a clear justification, not just because this money has gone to the RDCs. There should be a clear justification that this activity was not carried out or something like that. To say that they should have planned for it and, therefore, we should disallow it is not right.

We are within the law of a supplementary budget. What is the problem with this expenditure? This money was meant to facilitate RDCs to monitor Government programmes and they did it. 

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have a copy of the Constitution here and it spells out the role of an RDC. Part of the functions of the RDC are to coordinate the administration of Government services in the district, and to advise the district chairpersons on matters of national nature that may be affecting the district in its programmes and plans - that is monitoring and evaluation. Those are some of the functions of an RDC.

Madam Chairperson, I would like us to agree, just like hon. Mutonyi who has ever been an RDC said, that the RDCs are under facilitated. In large areas or areas where there are evictions, the RDCs have to reinforce the monitoring and evaluation because the local government cannot do it alone. The honourable member has informed us that monitoring and evaluation is embedded in the programmes. Ten per cent of any money for local governments is taken for monitoring and evaluation but it is for those departments, not the office of the RDC, unless you would like the office of the RDC to beg for finances from the local government 

We should agree that this status quo of funding monitoring and evaluation for the office of the RDCs must be maintained. We should stop thinking we are talking about RDCs who are political. This is a public officer who helps with monitoring and evaluation, which is actually a role of this Parliament. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the schedule stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, under vote 10, Ministry of Agriculture, I propose an amendment to replace Shs 29,987,124,014 with Shs 17,674,731,191. 

The justification is that the Shs 12,312,392,823 arose as a result of the failure by the Government to pay a contract in time. This contract was for about Shs 3.3 billion but the cost went up to Shs 12.3 billion. Therefore, we are actually paying for the time lost in this contract. 

The committee felt that this money should be re-audited by the Auditor-General before it can be allowed to pass. That is why the committee, in the main report, recommended that this money should not pass for now as supplementary expenditure. When we presented the report, this was accepted and we did the necessary supply. Therefore, the recommendation now is to suppress the provision in the Supplementary Appropriation Bill by this amount. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you saying that we supplied Shs 17 billion not Shs 29 billion? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: It was not Shs 29 billion. We supplied Shs 17,674,731,191. We also propose that this is subjected to a special audit by the Auditor-General. 

MR KASULE: I am just wondering what is going to happen. We incurred Shs 3 billion for rehabilitation of dams. In 2014, Shs 12 billion was expended to contractors. If we do not pass it here, it means there will be nothing for the Auditor-General to investigate. You are saying that we are not passing it but it should be investigated. It is just like the previous one. 

Since the money has been expended, let us pass it here, formalise it and then the Auditor-General will have cause to audit. He will ask questions such as, why didn’t you contract this person in time? Thereafter, he will report back to the House and in the next expenditures, we shall make requests accordingly. However, if we do not pass it, it will remain in the books of Government but nobody will have authority to investigate it. That is my suggestion. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have had the benefit of looking at section 25 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, in particular sub-section (9). It reads, “Any expenditure which is in excess of the appropriated budget of a vote and which is not in accordance with this section shall be treated as loss of public funds as provided for under Section 80 (1).” 

What I make out of this is that we must respect the Supplementary Appropriation Act because if anybody acted outside what is permissible by law, then he commits an offence. To answer my colleague, hon. Kasule, if the people who spent the money did not do it in accordance with the law, then the law says something about them. 

I want to end by supporting the position of the chairperson of the committee. The chairperson, together with the members of the committee, gave it considerable thought. Since I was unilaterally defeated on the other one, let us move on with this one. I thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, you probably need to give guidance on this issue. If it is within the three per cent, that expenditure is done legally; we can appropriate it and instruct the Auditor-General to look at it, like the way we have done. If it is beyond the three per cent, we can actually refuse to appropriate it here because that requires approval of Parliament before spending. 

However, if money has already been spent and you say that you are not appropriating it and yet you want the Auditor-General to look at it, procedurally I do not know what we will achieve. Let us put it in our appropriation and then demand for its accountability. This is because the money has already been spent. What you need now is value for money. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I think what can be contextualised is that, there is a supplementary and a contingencies fund. What we expect is- (Interruption)

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, it is as if this is just a matter of spending. As a committee, you gave us guidelines to follow in assessing supplementary expenditure. One of the things you mentioned in those guidelines was that the expenditure must be unforeseen. 

These two particular expenditures were actually foreseen; they knew they had to pay this money for a long time and yet they were not paying it. They waited for the value to accumulate up to Shs 12.3 billion and then chose to pay through supplementary expenditure. A series of budgets were passed and they did not include this in the budgets for payment; they had to wait for a supplementary expenditure of 3 per cent. It is therefore, not just a matter of spending and then coming here to claim, “after all, we have spent, therefore go ahead and approve.” I do not think that is the way we should do it. 

If you are amending the guidelines you gave us, then the Committee on Budget will follow accordingly. However, we do not want to ignore the guidelines that you gave us, the ones that we are using to make these recommendations. 

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Chairperson. We have already mentioned that this money has been spent within the law because it is within the three per cent, but you are now telling us to remove a certain amount of money. If you do mathematics, what is the answer to zero minus your amount? It is zero. There is nothing you are trying to remove. Now, tell me where you are going to get this money that you are removing and where you are taking it. Clarify that because the money has already been used.  

Now that the money has been used, we should pass it. Thereafter, we shall get the accountability on how the money has been used. This is because you cannot remove what is not there. Thank you very much. I think we should not waste our time with this obvious thing.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The Chairperson of the Committee on Budget said that this money has accumulated to this amount. Clearly, if we do not pay, it will accumulate even further.  The earlier we pay, the better. 

We, however, need to exercise caution with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; they should cease spending money to that magnitude without the approval of Parliament. For now, since we have already spent, let us go ahead and supply so that we stop this debt from accumulating. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, this money was already paid and we have already supplied without this money. We are now amending this Bill to match with what we supplied. That is exactly what we are doing.

MR BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I was part and parcel of the team that formulated the Public Finance Act and this was the reason why we put in place a contingencies fund; we wanted to do away with such supplementaries. Let the minister tell us whether they have used up the Contingencies Fund. You could only be allowed to resort to a supplementary after you have exhausted the Contingencies Fund.The purpose of creating the Contingencies Fund was to do away with these. I am sure that even the Chairperson of the Finance Committee knows why we put in place the Contingencies Fund.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I do not know how much I can emphasise this point, that a supplementary is not only for emergencies. You passed a number of unfunded priorities, for example; assuming that during that financial year the revenue increases, we can fund them through a supplementary.

The three per cent is also a route for appropriation. Not all supplementaries are emergencies and not all supplementaries are unforeseen. I am giving this guidance, but the House can take a decision. As hon. Baba Diri has said, to deduct this money which has already been spent is puzzling because we do not know what it means.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I have come across a ruling you made in respect of supplementaries in this House. You set up seven conditions to be satisfied before any supplementary is made. For the benefit of some Members, this matter has ever been discussed on the Floor of this House. I have obtained a copy of the Hansard of 10 July 2014. You set up seven grounds as follows: 

1. 	The minister shall have to satisfy the House that Government has endeavoured to get resources from the Contingencies Fund provided for under Article 154 of the Constitution and section 10 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act to meet expenditures that are unforeseen before presenting a supplementary request in Parliament.

2. 	That the amount appropriated for any purpose under the Appropriation Act is insufficient. They will have to satisfy us that the money is insufficient.

3. 	That a need has arisen for expenditures for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by the Appropriation Act. 

4. 	The minister will have to satisfy us that the monies have been expended for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by the Appropriation Act.

5. 	That the total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what was appropriated by Parliament does not exceed the three per cent of the total approved budget for that financial year.

6. 	That the supplementary request addresses the effect it has on the financial requirements of the Government for that particular financial year, and that further disbursements are required in respect of services which-
(a) could not have been foreseen; 
(b) may not be postponed without detriment to the public interest; 
(c) cannot be appropriately charged on an existing item of the estimates; or 
(d) would cause an excess on the estimates.

7. 	That the sought expenditure cannot be met by virements within the votes from items with savings. 

Madam Chairperson, what I understand from this is that the expenses as brought by the chairperson offend the ruling and that is why the chairperson was saying that we are largely opposed to these expenses. He is saying that an audit should be conducted on these expenses so that we satisfy ourselves that actually this expenditure does not offend the ruling of this House, which you, Madam Chairperson, gave and have not departed from.

I am, therefore, only wondering whether it is procedurally right for us to proceed by negating a ruling you made in this House, which you have not actually departed from, just because we want to pass money and move to the next session. I seek your guidance on that, Madam Chairperson. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, sitting in that Chair, you guided then. Now the same ruling is being sighted to the same person under similar circumstances. I would like to know from the Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development whether he has failed to satisfy the Members with regard to the conditions being stipulated. 

If he has not failed, then the honourable chairperson has liberty to depart from the ruling. That ruling was actually guidance, in my understanding. It was not anything cast in stone, but guidance that any minister coming with a similar request or motion should first satisfy. Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development, are you satisfied that you have satisfied the criteria?

MR BAHATI: We have satisfied the guidance that the chairperson gave us. I would like also to tell you that in that financial year, you remember we provided for Shs 150 billion but Parliament removed it and left zero. So, that guidance cannot apply. Madam Chairperson, you can guide us on that issue. (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, especially if there was no contingencies fund because it is very important, and I thought that the minister was going to continue widening on that justification, so that it is justifiable.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I think what the House wants you to say is that you were not able to get money from the Contingencies Fund because it had been depleted and that is why you resorted to this. Has he said it?  Honourable members, I put the question that the schedule stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to).

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2016” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2016

7.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2016” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2016” be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION ACT, 2016”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and the Bill passed. Honourable members, I would like to thank you for the work done today. House adjourned to tomorrow 3.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 7.01 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 5 May 2016 at 3.00 p.m.) 
