Wednesday, 5 May 2010

Parliament met at 3.04 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I would like to inform the Christian Members of Parliament that Dr Thomas Anderson of the Living Word Christian Centre will be sharing with us on the theme, “Building the Great Nation with Great People” in a prayer breakfast tomorrow, Thursday, 6th May at 7.30 a.m. You know we have these weekly prayer breakfasts. So, we have a guest coming in tomorrow. The Christian fellowship, please attend. 

The Law Reform Commission has organised a residential workshop on the Marriage and Divorce Bill to take place from tomorrow Wednesday, to 8th May at Imperial Botanical Beach Hotel in the new wing. The purpose of the workshop is to familiarise the Members with the provisions of the Bill. So, Members are requested to attend. Please, go and give support to the Law Reform Commission.

Tomorrow again, Members of Parliament are invited to attend a humanitarian chat between Parliamentarians and the Uganda Red Cross Society in the Conference Hall at 10 O’clock. The Speaker will be opening that chat. So, please let us share with all these people who are coming to meet us. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED UNDER ARTICLE 179 CLAUSE (4) OF THE CONSTITUTION PROVIDING FOR CREATION OF NEW COUNTIES 

3.07
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, copies of the motion are being distributed. I beg to move a motion for a resolution of this Parliament under Article 179, clause (4) of the Constitution, to provide for the creation of new counties. 

“WHEREAS Article 179(4) provides for the criteria for alteration of the boundaries of or creation of administrative units including counties;

AND WHEREAS Section 7(7) of the Local Government Act empowers Parliament to approve the alteration of the boundaries of or creation of a new county;

AND WHEREAS the District Councils of the districts of Lira, Mubende, Nakaseke, Katakwi, Buyende, Nakasongola and Kibale have consulted their county councils and resolved to create new counties within their areas of jurisdiction, it is considered necessary to create the counties specified hereunder for the effective representation and administration of those areas and to bring services closer to the people; 

HAVING taken into account the means of communication, the geographical features, the population and the wishes of the people, I now move that this Parliament resolves to create the following new counties in Uganda:

    a) Katerera County out of Bunyaruguru County in Bushenyi District
    b) Ajuri County out of Moroto County in Lira District
    c) Kasambya County out of Buwekula County in Mubende District
    d) Nakaseke North County out of Nakaseke County in Nakaseke District
    e) Budyebo County out of Nakasongola County in Nakasongola District
    f) Toroma County out of Usuk County in Katakwi District
    g) Buyaga West County out of Buyaga County in Kibaale District
    h) Bugangaizi East County out of Bugangaizi County in Kibaale District
    i) Budiope East County out of Budiope County in Buyende District

I move that the new counties take effect from the date of passing of this resolution.” Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, my understanding is that it is not us who are creating, but it is the concerned people who have created. Our job really is to approve, isn’t it? So, can I put the question? 


3.11
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to be guided, especially since you are in the Chair today. Yesterday, we created districts; these are more counties; that means more Members of Parliament. (Interjections) Wait. That is good. But where is the money to put up a new Chamber for these Members of Parliament. Shall we continue sitting on each other like yesterday?

Much as we are creating all these, this is the time for us to budget. I would request this Parliament that we have money in the budget specifically for the new Chamber. There, I would be seeing some light at the end of the tunnel. We cannot continue creating more –(Interjections)- fine, it is good; but why don’t we also cater for ourselves so that we can sit comfortably in the House? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to confirm on behalf of the Commission that we have provided for that money. The plans have been approved and we are soon going to break the ground for the construction of the new Chamber. (Applause)

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, that is good, but this was said at the beginning of this Parliament. We know that the procurement period is quite long. I would be happy if you told me that you have written a letter or the accounting officer has written a letter to the PPDA asking for a direct procurement so that we can get somebody to do the job as there is ground breaking. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I can brief you on that one tomorrow. Let me assure you that I am not happy when I see my Members standing. I am more concerned than you because I see everybody who is standing. (Applause)

3.12
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was also reliably told that Dokolo was divided into two counties, but I do not see it here. I seek clarification on that. Thank you very much.

3.13
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you. The creation of these counties is actually good for administrative units, but the problem we have is that currently this Parliament cannot accommodate the capacity we have. And in here, it says that this approval takes immediate effect from today when we give a go-ahead to have them approved.

My question is, there are many big counties with over 80,000 voters, but they are not on this list, despite the fact that they presented their resolutions for dividing of the counties. 

The other thing is that this is politically motivated. When you look at this, most of these counties which are divided are from areas that are always pro-NRM. This is very clear. And it should be our duty as Members of Parliament, and as a government, to see that the counties that are big, and for the interest of taking services nearer to the people, they are also divided up into administrative units and not necessarily for representation in Parliament.  

When you go to Pallisa, Pallisa County that I represent has 12 sub-counties with a voter population of 120,000 people. We presented our resolution in 2001 requesting the Minister of Local Government to have Pallisa County divided. 

Also in 2007, they brought a resolution to the Minister of Local Government. I want to know from the minister - because when this Order Paper came out, I got a call from the district asking me whether Pallisa County is on the list. I want to know whether it will be easier for Pallisa County to also be included on this list. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before I give opportunity to other Members, for purposes of the record, I think it is not fair to say that the NRM is creating more constituencies. Yesterday, in many Opposition areas, we created new districts, meaning that automatically, there are additional MPs from those areas. (Applause) Whatever the number, we created additional constituencies in the Opposition areas: Ngora and Kole, they are recorded in the Hansard. 

3.16
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek your guidance and critical indulgence in this matter. We have in the past seen how the issue of districts came and how it has temporarily ended, and the way it was moving. Some of us continue to think it is not a good idea to continue to split, but we are fairly democratic. We think that if the majority Members have an opinion that overrides that of the minority, we can go with the opinion of the majority. 

I think it is our responsibility, through your guidance to the nation, to guide the population on how to go about this business so that we avoid these accusations and counter accusations by you directing the minister to put up a clear criteria, which can be read, understood and comprehended by every member of society wherever they are, so that this exercise does not turn into a fighting ground; and so that people know that these are the criteria for obtaining a new county and the moment you beat this benchmark, you qualify for a county. 

Otherwise, I have the fear that we are going to stampede on each other. This one saying, “I want a county”, another saying, “you do not qualify for a county” when actually we have started with those counties whose benchmarks by way of communication, or geographical area, are not actually as badly off as others. 

So, I would beg that you indulge in this matter and instruct the minister, not to necessarily halt this exercise, which has been tabled by the minister this afternoon, but task him with the duty of presenting clear guidelines for qualification of a new county so that they are known by everyone. So, those who wish to split will be catered for under those guidelines without query. I thank you.

3.09
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I am a Member of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, and just only last week, the Electoral Commission appeared before us to respond to the MTEF ceiling. I am glad the ministers of finance are here and so is that one of Local Government. 

Here with me is their response in full - the paper they presented to us and honourable colleagues, it makes very interesting reading. This financial year, the submitted estimates for 2010/2011 is Shs 177.4 billion. The affordable MTEF ceiling is Shs 119.05 billion. That leaves a funding gap of Shs 54 billion. Shs 54 billion; that is the funding gap. And that is before we created these new districts yesterday. The Electoral Commission has a funding gap of Shs 54 billion and this was just only last week. We are getting excited about creating these new administrative structures without taking into consideration whether the resource envelop can afford it.

If Finance was aware and the guarantee they gave was that the money was there, why are we having this funding gap of Shs 54 billion? That is before these new districts. What are we doing? I am glad the Chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee is in the House, and this is what they say, if I may read: “Basing on the Commission’s well costed submitted estimates and the MTEF ceiling for 2010/2011, this activity shall highly remain underfunded by a gap of Shs 54 billion due to budget constraints and MTEF ceiling. The implementation of the court decision to recruit, train and deploy election officials of sub-county and parish level to handle election activities instead of depending on the existing administrative unit leaders, shall also have a huge cost implication to the operations of the Commission.” 

And again they say, “The creation of new districts, administrative units between now and the general election….,” now is only last week, “The establishment of regional assembly offices and holding of village elections for council leaders under the multiparty system shall all have heavy cost implications on the day-to-day and general elections operations. Each new district shall have: An established office, a vehicle, new staff, furniture and running overheads. And as of now, there is not even a single shilling for it.” 

This is what the Electoral Commission said last week. And here we are creating even more. The Ministry of Finance has said they do not have the money. That is why they have given this ceiling. But irrespective of this, we are sitting here creating new administrative structures. 

Can we now get the assurance from Finance that actually, you have the Shs 54 billion - the funding gap - before even creating the new districts of yesterday, and now, while we are creating others? I do not want to spoil the pattern and excitement of people getting new districts, but this is actually the government position.

What I am telling you is what is in the government purse. There is no way we can proceed with passing this when the current position is that the money is not there. And the ministers know there is no money – they have already prepared to table motions.  That having –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, I wanted to conclude, but when I saw the Minister of Finance standing, I thought he was going to give information. If that is the case, then I am ready to take the information. Well, these are the gambles we are going to have.

Anyway, having said that – and really I implore my colleague – I have been privileged, for the last one and half years, to chair the Local Government Accounts Committee. In that period, I have noticed that the biggest problem we are having is the human resource to man these districts. There are many districts in this country where accounts assistants are actually working as chief finance officers. And the problems we have been having, for those who sit on this committee, throughout the country, is that most of these districts do not have well-trained personnel to handle district matters.

As you get enthusiastic to create them, you are not putting in place mechanisms to run these units. That is why today you will find accounts assistants with these units under their hands, and sign for money from the Central to the Local Government in billions. An accounts assistant overseeing a budget of Shs 20 billion! That is the mess we are finding in local governments. 

I am really persistent on this because Government, in its bid to create these districts, should know what problems are associated with them. And it is also our duty to tell them so. We may need these units for political purposes, but we must note that they have got their own effects.

In the last Auditor-General’s Report – and we are only talking about local governments – over Shs 100 billion has been either misappropriated or not accounted for. Shs 100 billion is equivalent to US$ 50 million. What are we doing about it before we create new district structures?

Madam Speaker –(Mr Ekanya rose_)– if there is any clarification, I will allow it.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As a lawyer by profession, I really want to request that –(Interjections)– no, I am talking about the Speaker –(Laughter)– I really want to point out that this motion has a legal lacuna. And at this juncture, I would like to seek your indulgence that the matter be referred to the committee for further scrutiny.

I would like to advise colleagues to read Article 63 of the Constitution and the provisions of the other laws. That article is very detailed – the matter needs to be referred to the committee for more analysis.

I would like to call upon this House –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Ekanya. I just want to offer some assistance because people were asking hon. Ekanya to read the said provision of the Constitution. So, as a paralegal, I want to read for you Article 63 –(Interjections)– yes, I am a paralegal – of our Constitution, which we strongly believe the hon. Minister should have considered when bringing this motion.

Article 63 (1) reads: “Subject to clauses (2) and (3) of this Article, Uganda shall be divided into as many constituencies for the purpose of election of Members of Parliament as Parliament may prescribe and each constituency shall be represented by one Member of Parliament.” And Clause 2 reads: “When demarcating constituencies for purposes of Clause (1) of this Article, the Electoral Commission shall ensure each county, as approved by Parliament has at least one Member of Parliament”

So, we would have loved to see the minister relate the creation of new counties to Article 63, which provides for each county becoming a constituency. I think that is why hon. Katutntu said: “Are you looking at the financial implication?” This is important because the way the Minister of Local Government is proceeding, he seems to want to make this House believe that you can create a county, which is not necessarily going to be a constituency –(Interjections)– yes, because that is what the minister wants us to believe. 

At the same time, he also wants us to believe that we are just here to approve yet we have the mandate to prescribe these matters. I think that is why hon. Ekanya is thinking of having this matter being looked at – if you continue to read the same Article 63, you realize that clauses (3), (4) and (5) talk about a quarter, meaning a population quarter. But the hon. Minister seems to tell us that we can create, for example, Katerera County out of Bunyaruguru without looking at the population quarter as required by the Constitution. 

If he really takes this Parliament seriously, he should tell us for example, that Katerera County reached a threshold of this population to qualify to be curved off. Otherwise, there is no way the minister would run away from the impression that is being seen that you are just creating constituencies for the sake of the politics that is coming up.

And most importantly, Madam Speaker, there is the issue of financial implications – I should have read it. Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, Article 63 (5) reads: “Subject to clause (1) of this Article, the Commission shall review the division of Uganda into constituencies within 12 months after the publication of results of the census of the population of Uganda and may as a result re-demarcate constituencies.” You can see that these things are related. And because of time, I am moving that this matter be referred to the committee because it has a legal lacuna.

3.35
MR ISHAA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to start by agreeing with you on one fact in this House; the trend of voting and support for the creation of districts in this House was regardless of whether you are in Opposition or Government. And I want to agree with you.

This trend can be noticed from yesterday’s Hansard and the voting style. But at the same time, I want to be on record that since I joined this Parliament, I have been totally opposed to the creation of new districts and constituencies considering the factors that are attributed to procedures and budgetary implications.

Just before a while, hon. Katuntu gave a very important message to this House relating to budgetary, management and planning implications. However, over time, I have noticed that because of too much interest for creating political districts, we have not taken this debate seriously. 

Recently, I was in my district of Oyam – yesterday one of the district technical staff was arrested for corruption. Indeed as we talk now, Oyam District has almost collapsed because 60 percent of funds that are being given to that district and all the other new districts being created are not helping the people. We have just got the Local Government Accounts Committee report –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to inform my colleague, that actually he represents one of the new districts in Uganda called Oyam. Secondly, I also want to inform him that if we do not develop power and resources for the districts and lower levels, corruption will continue to be at the higher levels. So, the best option is to decentralise corruption. (Laughter) Thank you.


MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether that is a tongue-in-cheek, but on a more serious note, I would like to inform my colleague that as a result of our committee’s work, over 40 percent of the officials in that new district have been arrested. And as we talk, I do not think they even have officers to man that – even yesterday we picked others. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Chairperson of the Local Government Accounts Committee, are you suggesting that if they were in a bigger district they would not steal? A thief is a thief whether he is big or not. (Laughter)

MR KATUNTU: I really do not know whether you need an answer from me, but it is not only about stealing; it is also about capacity to manage funds. If you have no capacity to manage and monitor funds, you lead to wastage of resources. I will give you an example. If you do not have capacity to monitor and supervise your officers, chances are those officers will take advantage of you to steal those resources. That is why we are saying these two are much related – that is capacity and the bad manners of stealing.

3.38
MRS LOY KIRYAPAWO (NRM, Budaka County, Budaka): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance. I want to find out from the Minister of Local Government why Budaka County is not among the counties we are now considering creating, yet they followed the Constitutional procedure. The district council consulted with the county and sub county councils where stakeholders requested them to divide it into two counties – Iki-Iki and Budaka. This was due to the fact that the population is over 200,000 people, whereby Iki-Iki County would be having a population of 101,000 people while Budaka would remain with a population of 114,000 people. 

Also, there are 13 sub counties in that county. So, I would like to know the reasons that made Budaka miss out on this list yet they also submitted their request for a split. The answer to this would help them know why they are not among other Ugandans who are benefiting from what the NRM Government is giving to others yet they are also Ugandans. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.40
MR PETER NYOMBI (INDEPENDENT, Buruli County, Nakasongola): Madam Speaker, I rise to support this motion. However, I would like to say that as far as I know, my district complied with the law. A resolution was passed by the district council with all the different stakeholders being consulted.

We have had one district and one county. The district has an area of 3509 square kilometers, which makes it too large for effective representation. The distance from Kakooge, the boundary of Nakasongola with Luweero to Kafu is 75 kilometres - that is if you follow the main road - while the distance between Bammugolodde in the southern end of the district to Rwabyaata is 95 kilometres. The district is also bordered by about four districts. It has a population –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleague for yielding the Floor. We thought this information should have actually come from the mover of the motion because that is the way he would justify it. So, to have Members come up with figures – how sure are we these are the figures –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence – this motion as it is, is naked. One, it has no figures; it has no data and Members are now coming up with figures – what is the mover of the motion doing?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, really, hon. Members, when the motion is moved and we allow a debate to take off, how can we stop some Members from talking about figures, which they know? No, I cannot stop him.


MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, it is not about stopping Members from talking about the figures; it is about the mover of the motion justifying it by giving us the details as to why he is doing this? That is not really asking for too much. It is not that we are opposed to this motion, we have to do things the right way and this is the right way; this is a Parliament and we want to debate from an informed position and so the burden lies squarely on the minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I expect that the minister will respond to all the issues you have raised; he should answer those questions. 

MR PETER NYOMBI: I thank you, Madam Speaker. As I was saying, the population of this district is projected at 175,000. It has nine sub counties each being about 15 square kilometres. The district also has about 58 parishes.

This district deserves a sub division if it is to be represented effectively. Thank you. 

3.44
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (NRM, District Woman Representative, Nakaseke): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support this motion and to inform this House that actually, Nakaseke, as everybody knows, was part of Luwero just as Nakasongola was. Ours has not been a one-off or a one-day request. When we were requesting for a district in 2004, a resolution was passed by the county council and district council. Even when we were being granted a district status; it was the same request for two reasons. One; Nakaseke, as we speak, has 15 sub-counties. That is nine sub-counties and six town councils. We all know that there are constituencies here that actually have two sub-counties, three or four; but for a Member of Parliament to traverse from Lumansi River in Kasangombe sub-county to Kijunjuba bordering Masindi and Kinyogoga bordering Nakasongola - it is a very big area - and given the nature of the landscape; it is really very difficult (Mr Kyanjo  rose_) – hon. Member, please allow me to use my time effectively. 

So, I want to support this motion in view of the fact that Members representing such constituencies -(Mr Kakoba rose_)- will effectively represent their people.

Two; like hon. Nyombi said, as we speak right now before I talk about hon. Nyombi’s submission -(Interjections)- hon. Members, let me conclude. Nakaseke District is actually bigger in terms of area. It is bigger than the mother district of Luweero and Luwero alone - I mean in its size. It has three constituencies and Nakaseke, which is bigger than Luwero, has one constituency. This makes it very difficult for us to move in those vast areas. 

I would, therefore, appeal to honourable members to support this motion and pass it and we move services closer to the people. I thank you so much.  

MS BYENKYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want us to look at paragraph 4 because there are some sentences, which I feel are misplaced and I am kindly requesting the Minister, if he can, to remove them. “Whereas it is considered necessary to create the county specified here under for the effective representation and administration of those areas and bring services closer to the people...” I do not think dividing a county brings services closer to the people because we are having a Member of Parliament who is supposed to cater for the effective representation. Therefore, “bring services closer to the people” should be deleted.

“Having taken into account the means of communication,” that is okay – “the geographical features, the density of the population,” that, likewise, should be deleted. That is my opinion. Thank you. 

MS ALASO: Thank you. Madam Speaker, we raised some concerns, which we thought would benefit from your guidance so that we proceed in a logical manner.

First of all, whether we are just – whether approval means that we do not get into the nitty-gritty and, therefore, go into the way Parliament does its work; go into the committee and get a committee report with the details that we need - I see my colleagues shaking their heads - but you know we can get this thing done in a very neat and smart way, and we do not have to attract unnecessary scrutiny. I think that we should ask if we could go into matters of the committee. 

Two; the way the Minister has framed his motion, if he is talking about Article 179(4) of our Constitution, which deals with alteration of boundaries and then he says that it is supported by a majority of votes, I think that is deliberately in error because 179(4) talks about a majority of all Members of Parliament –(Interjections)- yes, about 168 of us. So, which section is he addressing in this matter? (Interjections) 

The Minister knows this thing better than I do, by the way. (Interjections) I said if the Minister is bringing this motion premised on Article 179(4), which provides for power to alter and create new districts; then you would probably want to look at Article 179(2), which says, “Any measure to alter the boundary of a district or create a new district shall be supported by majority of all Members of Parliament..” –(Interjections)- yes, I am asking this because he draws the mandate of his motion from 179, which is very clear. If we are going to do alterations, we must have a majority of all Members of Parliament. 

So, I thought we would technically sort out matters of procedure, if we want to debate when we know that we are not going into the committee and we are going to sort this thing here and now.

MR MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, let me clarify this legal procedure at this point because it will help us debate the matter from a point of legal knowledge. 

Article 179(3) says, “Parliament shall by law empower district councils to alter the boundaries of lower local government units and to create new local government units within their districts.” Article 179(4) says, “Any measure for the alteration of the boundaries of or the creation of districts or administrative units shall be based on the necessity for effective administration, and the need to bring services closer to the people, and it may take into account the means of communication, geographical features, density of population, economic viability and the wishes of the people concerned.” 

I will come to 63 arising from Article 179(3), which empowers Parliament to empower district councils to create lower local government units - This Parliament, in the Local Government Act, section 7 sub-section 7, provided that, “A district or a city council, may within its area of jurisdiction, with the approval of Parliament and in consultation with or at the request of a relevant county council or city division council, alter the boundaries of or create a new county or city division.” It goes further and says, “Notwithstanding anything in this section, a local government or administrative unit created within six months before a general election, shall not be taken into account by the Electoral Commission for purposes of the general election. Where an approval required under this section is not given, the authority withholding the approval shall in writing give reasons for its action.”

So, in brief, the law is very clear because Parliament empowers district councils to create counties with the approval of Parliament. The district councils of the districts, which I have mentioned, have already sat and created counties. I am now here to request for Parliamentary approval. I do not see any breach of the Constitution or the law. 

Article 63 talks about demarcation of constituencies by the Electoral Commission. The Electoral Commission is enjoying, by law, the consideration that a county is a constituency; that is all. So, when this Parliament creates a county, the Electoral Commission has no option but to adopt that county as a constituency. 

On the certificate of financial implications, the Minister of Finance is here. I went to Finance – no law requires me to bring a certificate of financial implications when I bring a district or a county; we have just approved districts here, we did not first bring certificates. The only situation in which the Budget Act requires a certificate of financial implications is when any Member from Government side or a private Member brings a Bill. In any case, this motion was approved by Cabinet, and before I went to Cabinet, I got clearance from the Minister of Finance that he has funds for these counties. The Minister of Finance is here to confirm or deny whether he cleared – (Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking further clarification from the minister. I was privy to the application from Kitgum District creating Lamwo District. The application to the Minister of Local Government had attachments of full data on Lamwo - population, resources and so on - justifying its creation. 

Similarly, I believe the districts that needed to be created presented that kind of data; and that is what is missing. The motion is not being justified. Are we in order to debate a motion that has not been justified by the mover?

Secondly, Article 63(6) reads as follows: “Where the boundary of a constituency established under this article is altered as a result of a review, the alteration shall come into effect upon the next dissolution of Parliament”.

In the motion, point No.2, talks about immediate effect – do we read our Constitution? Do we read the laws before we move these motions?

MS AMONGI: Madam Speaker, I also want to draw the attention of the minister on Article 63; the minister in his defence says, “When Parliament approves the county, the Electoral Commission automatically makes it a constituency. But Article 62 reads as follows:

    1. Subject to clauses 2 and 3 of this article, Uganda shall be divided into as many constituencies for the purpose of election of Members of Parliament as Parliament may prescribe and each constituency shall be represented by one Member of Parliament. 
    2. When demarcating constituencies, for the purposes of clause 1 of this article, the Electoral Commission shall ensure that each county as approved by Parliament has at least one Member of Parliament except that no constituency shall fall within more than one county.”

 My interest is on five. Five says:
    5. Subject to Clause 1 of this article, the Commission shall review the division of Uganda into constituencies within twelve months after the publication of results of a census of the population of Uganda and may as a result re-demarcate the constituency”. 

The clarification I want to seek is, when was the last time we published the results of the census of the population of Uganda. And on the basis of that, section two, still subjects this to 63(1).

So, I want the minister to relate the constitutionality of making the county an electable constituency in respect of Article 63(5) which mandates that the Electoral Commission should demarcate constituencies based on the results of a census of the population. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I am a Member of the Budget Committee. We have just been handling the Budget. The entire shortfall – and we agreed with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. There is no money; there is a shortfall of Shs 1 trillion. There is no money for setting up administrative units: LC1, II and IV. 

Supplementary to that, can we have the position of the Attorney-General on this matter; he needs to give us the legal position –(Interjections)– I speak with authority; we need the position of the Attorney-General who is the legal advisor to Government. The Minister of Local Government is not the Attorney-General, and it is provided for in the Constitution. 

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the certificate of financial implications of the creation of new counties that are contained in this motion was duly issued by the Ministry of Finance. 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, now that the Minister is here, I want some clarification – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think this is the first time that counties are being brought here over a long time. So, let us benefit from Members’ contributions then we shall take your information. 

MS OLERU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In this Parliament, I represent the interests of the people and the local council of Yumbe District. In the interest of the people of Yumbe, I fulfilled all the Constitutional requirements. They had all the documents and they were given to the Ministry of Local Government. Now, I want to know why Yumbe District is not on this list because Yumbe District needs a county and they have fulfilled all the requirements for which a county is supposed to be given. I want that clarification from the minister. 

If they have failed to follow the requirements, I want to know from the minister what criteria he used to select these counties which are listed on this paper because I know I am going home and it will be the first question that my people will ask. So, I need to have the answer so that I explain to them and I am not seen as a problem and as not performing and not representing their interests here.

I want to use this opportunity to request the Ministry of Energy to at least come to this Parliament and give us the estimated revenues that we shall get from our oil so that we stop the fears people are creating of saying that we do not have the resources to bring people to Parliament. Now that the oil and its products will support our revenue, can they give us how much we shall get yearly so that we support it in creating these new counties?

Outside there -(Member timed out.)

4.06
MS JULIET SEKITOLEKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand up to support the motion and I am here to testify that in Kibaale district, wider consultations were made, resolutions were passed in the district council and resolutions were passed at the level of a county. Whereas other people are actually talking about population, I am here to testify that the population growth in Kibaale district, especially in Buyaga County, is very big. 

Whereas other people are talking about 160,000 people, as I speak now, in Buyaga County, the population is 344,000 people. Therefore, this gives a clear justification why a county like Buyaga should actually be divided. If you take an example of Bugangaizi County, it has a population of 163,000 people and, therefore, this is equally a good justification for division of Bugangaizi County. If you take an example of Ndaiga sub county near Lake Albert, the distance from that place to Kagadi Town Council is actually between 60 and 70 kilometres.

Therefore, for Kibaale district, wider consultations were done. The population is big, the size in terms of area is actually big and, therefore, I would like to appeal to my colleagues to support this motion because there is all the justification to create the different counties in Kibaale district. Thank you.


4.08
MS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. While we pass the motion, I still want to assert that we are still faced with a problem of planning. Last week, we debated the issue of new districts which continued into this week. Today, we are dealing with creation of new constituencies and you realise that the concerns of the Members are the same.

To me, it is not whether we are empowered to create new districts and constituencies, because the Constitution empowers us to do it, but it is when we create them, how we create them and where we create them.  The voices that you hear here are not just us, the Members of Parliament; it is also the people that we represent. It is not very clear why constituencies are being created now; why they are being created in this area and not that area; and when; and even in terms of resources? 

I want to request without further debate and so on, that, through you, Madam Speaker - so that you help this Parliament because we need to save our face as a serious Eighth Parliament- that Government calls a workshop and addresses the concerns that we have been asking about. Let us have a workshop where Government will say, “This is the criteria; this is why in your constituency there is no new county; this is why it is here; and this is why we are doing it at this time; so that there is no further ado; the rest will just be politics.

It is a serious issue and I think it needs to be addressed. Otherwise, I have no doubt that the minister is right to say that these are the people who asked for new counties to be created and others did not ask; but in my view, I do not have to ask. (Applause)

If the National Planning Authority was doing its work, the government should be able to say, because of this population or because of this distance; there should be a new county. For sure, it is not a matter of bringing services to the people, because we know according to our decentralisation policy, power and resources are at the district and at the sub county. By creating a new county, we are only creating new Members of Parliament, but not any power or resources; the resources are at the sub county and that is not affecting the sub counties -(Member timed out.)

MR WAMAYI: Madam Speaker, hon. Okello-Okello raised the issue of the Constitution; my sister behind there raised the issue of the Constitution, which was very clear. Is it in order for us to continue debating this issue when the Constitution does not allow it? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They will be answered.

4.12
MR TRESS BUCYANAYANDI (Independent, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me the opportunity. I am raising a question to the Minister of Local Government to explain what has happened to the application made by the district council of Kisoro in regard to the creation of three counties, namely, Kigezi, Mutanda and Nyarusiza out of the former Bufumbira County. They are not asking for constituencies because there is already a de facto recognition of the sub counties represented in Parliament by Members of Parliament.

The county of Bufumbira East is currently represented by hon. Dr Nsaba Buturo; I represent South; and North is represented by hon. Bahane but all we are asking for is recognition; that these counties exist within the old Bufumbira County.

I expect the Minister of Local Government to explain what has happened to that application. Thank you.

4.14
MS MABEL BAKEINE (NRM, Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Madam Speaker, I stand to support the motion. I support it because it is in relation to the size and vastness of my own constituency, Bugangaizi. It has been very wide. Moving from the northern border of the constituency where it borders Hoima to the southern border where it borders Mubende is 80 kilometres. From the western axis of River Ngusi to the eastern axis where we border Kiboga District, it is 55 kilometres. So, Madam Speaker, contact time between the Member of Parliament and the constituents has been greatly overstretched. 

Creation of another county out of Bugangaizi County is long overdue. When you take into consideration an individual moving from whichever axis to the county headquarters, it has been a span of 65 kilometres. There are services we get from our county headquarters - people in the rural areas where services are just localised, for example in Bugangaizi County our Health Centre IV is at the headquarters and someone had to travel 55 kilometres to get these services. As for me and my people, I think this split is long overdue. 

Yesterday I was consulting my colleague from Kigulu South and I was inquiring about how vast his county was. He told me that the size was comparable to one of my sub-counties and yet we have six such sub-counties. 

I strongly support this motion because the people of Bugangaizi are even right now saying that in future if there is another opportune time they should get another county out of what has remained. Thank you. 

4.17
MR KIRUNDA BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Budiope County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising in support of this motion. I have with me some figures, which will help to dress up the motion like earlier proposed by my honourable colleague, Mr Katuntu.

The pertinent issue in Budiope is to encourage promotion of equal accessibility to the available social services in the county. Madam Speaker, you are aware, because until we get a substantive woman MP for that area you will continue to diligently represent that constituency in Parliament and some of these details you have them.

Honourable members may wish to know, for instance, that to access the nearest health unit at grade IV level, which is the only referral health unit in the area, one has to trek  a distance of over 80 kilometres. This is the fact and not only that, we also have a physical barrier in the name of the Lake Kyoga arm called Wakuukuuta. This one has caused distortions in the geographical boundaries of this county to the extent that it has almost split this constituency into two. 

There is also the fact that for one to move from the furthest east end of that constituency to the other end of the constituency in Bukungu, one has to go a distance of more than a 100 kilometres, that is from Dongi Swamp which is neighbouring Kaliro District to the Kasato hills in Kidera sub-county.

Madam Speaker, these are facts, which any well meaning Ugandan, and I want to believe that honourable members here who have good intentions would wish - I want to plead that we indeed support this motion. I thank you.

4.19
MR CHARLES OLENY (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Madam Speaker, I rise to support this motion. Unfortunately, I have interest in what is contained in the motion but it is not the first time I rise to support a motion by Government which is well intentioned. 

I want to put it on record that while I agree with the challenges that were alluded to by the presentation of hon. Abdu Katuntu, who is my OB, I think this is a challenge that Government should be able to deal with.

To speak for the people of Katakwi, Usuk County, which I represent here, I want to put it on record in this House that the initial request for the sub-division of Usuk County started way back in 1988 when we were under Soroti District Council. Indeed in 1992, the District Council of Soroti did write and submit a resolution to the Ministry of Local Government. This went on and in 1996 this issue was reactivated together with the demand for the district. Fortunately for the people of Katakwi, in 1997, this House granted district status to Katakwi District and so I say thanks to the Sixth Parliament for having granted Katakwi District status. 

This matter of the creation of the new county has been on since 1999. Before I go beyond that let me also mention that in 1994, His Excellency the President visited the people of Usuk. Particularly at that time he was visiting the proposed new county of Toroma. So, we have a long history of our demand for the creation of a new county.  

The point I have to make, Madam Speaker, is that finally in 2007/2008, again when His Excellency was touring the area, the people of Katakwi made a very similar demand and this time strongly -(Member timed out­­_)

4.23
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, I have only three short concerns before I decide whether to support this motion or not. One, the minister in his motion, states that district councils sat down and created counties. However, he has selectively brought the district councils of Lira, Mubende, Nakaseke, Katakwi, Buyende, Nakasongola and Kibaale. I want to find out from the minister how many district councils in Uganda submitted to you creating new counties? And what criteria did you use to leave out the others and bring only these ones?

My second concern is that the minister says this will help effective representation and administration. My concern is: is effective representation and administration tilted only to specific areas in this country? Yesterday we created five districts for Bushenyi in Ankole; we created five districts in Buganda. Today – how many did you create in the East? One in Lango; one in West Nile, we forced out Maracha and wow, today we are again creating three for Buganda. 

MS NAMAGGWA: Rt Hon. Speaker, information -(Interruption) 

MR MALINGA: I will take the information, but later. Madam Speaker, my last concern is whether the minister has a specific problem with the people of Amuria because I want it on record. The people of Amuria asked for sub-counties but they were not given any. The people of Amuria created Orungo County; they were not given. The people of Amuria asked for Kapelebyong District; they were not given. Should I go and tell the people of Amuria that my dear people, as long as hon. Adolf Mwesige is the Minister of Local Government, forget. Should I? (Laughter)
 
4.27
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The fact that the minister could stand up to present the Certificate of Financial Implications trying to prove his point of how far the Cabinet went in approving the districts and the new administrative units, is quite laughable. This is a time when we are reading that there is a budget shortfall that would affect the Ministry of Health and various other important ministries. So I do not think that there is good planning and intentions in the creation of the administrative units. 

My concern goes straight to the capacity of the central Government to manage the administrative units being created. Each unit is coming up with very many sub-units where you will need GSOs; you will need MPs and in fact at this point, as a Parliamentary Commissioner, you are running faster than Parliament can almost plan for you. If you are creating very many MPs, and yet we are ending the budgeting process, and we have not planned for these many administrative units coming, how do you expect this country to run faster than what is being planned? At this point we find that Government is getting something very wrong. You can imagine driving a distance of 100 kilometres from Mbale along Tirinyi Road; you now cross five districts. What does it really mean? 

You should also look at the tax base, which we are widening. Let me give the example of the district that I represent, Kaberamaido. What is being done means that the districts cannot manage themselves, including the units coming under creation. People have resorted to burning charcoal in order to raise taxes that can be brought back to the central Government and later disbursed. So at the end of the day, what are we doing to this country is milking what we have not provided for?

Of recent the people have been told to construct police units – the small grass thatched huts to house policemen; is this the planning we are talking about? Not that we have bad intentions for the creation of units but Rt Hon. Speaker, the planning in this country has gone completely amiss. Some of these units emerged; they are not created. What about when we talk about the 12 months mandated by the Constitution, where are we putting such issues? So at the end of the day, I really feel that we are trying to milk what we are not feeding. 

We are not planning for this country as intended. Creating more administrative units; creating more districts; creating more counties - plan for the country and then you administratively and orderly plan and demarcate as per whatever organised way is requested and required. (Member timed out_)  

4.29
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I only have three small concerns. One, I would have absolutely no problem if there were criteria put in place that are understood by everybody that when a sub-county has graduated in population and arrived at a certain stage, it should become a county. I would absolutely have no problem if there was a set standard. My problem is that the criterion of selecting some and leaving out others is the biggest challenge that the minister must answer before we can actually support this. 

I have listened to my colleagues talking about distance, saying that, “My constituency is this big.” If I tell you the size of my constituency - if I move from North to South, I move 96 kilometres and if I am to move from East to West, I move a distance of 102 kilometres. That is one constituency but I have not come here to ask that we should have two counties. 

I expect Government to have a criterion put in place – because if I ask myself: how were these counties put in place in the past? How did they come to exist? Were people demanding for them? What about in places where people would not demand for them? So, I think that the most fundamental thing is that we must have criteria put in place, which is acceptable and would be understood by everybody. 
  
Secondly, Madam Speaker, we are Members of Parliament but we represent the people of Uganda. This is why when issues come like this, our individual votes are very important. When I am driving, I pass through some of my kinsmen’s land in Bunyoro. And I am greatly concerned about the creation of counties Nos. G and H because apart from reading in the newspapers -(Interjections)- you have contributed, my sister. You sit down. I have read from the newspapers the concerns of Bunyoro Kingdom that these counties should not be created. And as a good citizen, as a parliamentarian, I would really like to get the clarification from the minister whether due consultations were carried out with all the stakeholders so that tomorrow we are – (Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Is it in order for my colleague to come here and claim to be representing Bunyoro and particularly Buyaga constituency when I was duly elected and I am fully representing the people of Buyaga County? The Bayaga fully endorsed the creation of this county. Is he in order to come here and confuse this House that there was no due consultation?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, I think what he was saying is that that is where he passes on his way to Aswa. You conclude.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, let us not be shallow. If this matter were between Members of Parliament elected from the constituency, it wouldn’t have come to the Floor here for all of us to debate. You need my vote, my friend. This is why you are here and you have to convince me. The reason I raised this issue, and I was just seeking clarification from the Minister of Local Government, was that I read from the newspaper about the concerns of Bunyoro Kingdom about creation of these counties and I want to know whether due consultations were carried out with all the stakeholders in Bunyoro. 

4.35
MS REBECCA OTENGO (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the contributions by my colleagues. However, as a Member of the Committee on Local Government Accounts, I would like to challenge this Parliament that we should empower the counties further. I have heard many Members say that the counties are not useful but we have made them redundant. So, I would appreciate if Members gave a way forward on how we can empower the counties so that they help us. We have talked of very many districts coming in but if the counties were operating effectively, those small districts would again converge into counties and I tell you it would be useful.

Madam Speaker, I do agree that the criteria must be clear and the planning must also be clear. I also agree that the Members whose counties have not been created and yet they requested for them should duly be communicated to so that they know what to report back to their people. 

I would like to encourage Members and counsel them that I believe that the minister has all the documents and maybe at an appropriate time, he will lay them on the Table because I have an example of one which came from Lira and I want to tell Members that they were rejected almost thrice because they did not meet the criteria. I sat in a county meeting and we were guided by the technical people at the district level. So if you look at the document, you will realise that they actually sat from sub-county level to county level and then the district ratified it and that is the document that I believe the minister has. 

Madam Speaker, I want to believe that after having the National Planning Authority, the planning of this country probably will improve but this does not stop us from supporting the motion, which has been brought by the minister. So, I stand to support the motion. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister of Finance, the Members are specifically not against the motion but they have two problems; the criteria and the cost. I wish you could address it. 

4.37
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I want to start off by responding to the issue concerning finance, and I really want to congratulate colleagues for raising that important concern. But on the other hand, I want to state it here that when the proposal came, it was submitted to us and we factored the cost into the medium term expenditure framework. So, the cost is catered for and it was on that basis that we issued the Certificate of Financial Implications - for both the Members of Parliament and the ACAO because those are the only two people that have been added in the constituency plus what is expected to be an increase in the electoral costs. All those have been catered for and I would like to ally the fears of hon. Members of Parliament. 

Speaking as a Member of Parliament for Nakaseke County, I want to say that I support the –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, really we have –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let her make her submission. 

MRS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, we need to examine the role of the Member of Parliament because a county will lead to a constituency and the constituency will create a Member of Parliament. What is the role of a Member of Parliament? If it is representation, picking the voices of the people or picking the concerns of the people, it means you must reach the people. If a county is too large and you are given the same resources, the same Constituency Development Fund and the same amount of time when you go on recess to traverse the constituency, then I think there is no equity. 

Speaking about Nakaseke, a constituency I know very well, it is larger than many districts. It is larger than the parent Luweero District, which now has three countries. Luweero is smaller than Nakaseke. With a geographical spread of 180 km, spreading from Wakiso District at Lwanika up to River Kafu, and on the other side it starts from Kyankwanzi and runs up to Migyera, which is another 90 km; there is no way a Member of Parliament representing such a county can be effective and yet we are all the time talking about equity. If it is equity, it must be applied across the board, Madam Speaker. 

Some of these constituencies were created soon after the war. You all know what happened to Nakaseke during the war. By the time the constituencies were created, it had been depopulated and many of the people who had run away had not yet returned. Now people have gone back and the population is big; it is now 15 sub-counties and over 120 parishes. However efficient a Member of Parliament representing such a huge area, he cannot perform in the same way that people representing smaller areas do. 

Many of the government programs are not being properly implemented. Members of Parliament are supposed to play the oversight role. His Excellency the President, is all the time complaining that Members of Parliament are not playing the oversight role in their constituencies and that is true because if a constituency is too large, then there is no way – if I get time off during recess, I am going to have to cover over 120 parishes, 15 sub-counties and traversing 180 km by 90 km. 

Based on that, I support and I invite all my colleagues, because I have already allayed their fears on costs and I think that was the main issue. I issued the Certificate of Financial Implications [HON. MEMBER: “It is not a legal requirement.”] It is not a legal requirement but I issued it and it was on that basis that Cabinet cleared it. I am inviting colleagues to support the motion. 

Some of these constituencies, especially Nakaseke - before we broke away from Luweero, we applied for a constituency and that was in 2002/2003 and when we created the district, they said, “Let us wait. It will be created when others are being created.” Colleagues, I beg you and I pray that you support the motion. I thank you very much. There is money coming. I thank you.

4.44
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): I wish to thank you so much for –(Interjections)- but there is a motion. Bearing in mind that Members have made their contributions and all the pertinent issues have been raised, under rule 68 and subject to 46(n), I beg to move that the question be put –(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the following counties be approved: Katerera County, Ajuri County, Kasambya County, Nakaseke North County, Budyebo County, Toroma County, Buyaga West County, Bugangaizi East County and Budiope East County. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED UNDER ARTICLE 179, CLAUSE (4) OF THE CONSTITUTION PROVIDING FOR CREATION OF NEW MUNICIPALITIES

4.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Perez Ahabwe): I want to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament under Article 179(4) of the Constitution providing for the headquarters of regional governments and Section 7 (2)(a) of the Local Government Act providing for the creation of municipalities. The motion reads as follows: 

“WHEREAS Article 179 (4) of the Constitution provides that the headquarters of the regional governments shall be located in Municipalities and Section 7(2)(a) of the Local Governments Act empowers a District Council; with the approval of Parliament, to create a municipality within its area of jurisdiction in accordance with paragraph 32 of the Third Schedule to the Local Governments Act;

AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to create the municipalities specified hereunder for the effective administration and organised delivery of services to the people, proper planning and expansion of the area to ensure orderly development; having taken into account the multiplier effect on the economy of the areas, the economic viability, the destiny and wishes of the people concerned;

AND WHEREAS the creation of the said municipalities is approved by Parliament; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that: 
    1.  Hoima Municipality (to cover the current Hoima Town Council, Busiisi sub-county, the villages of Bulera, Kitagi and Kisweka in Kinogozi parish from Buhimba sub-county; the villages of Kigabu, Kirubika, Wabiku, Wakyoya/Kiduuma and parts of Kiriisa, Kihamba, Kihungura, Nyarugabo in Nyarugabo parish from Bugambe sub-county, the villages of Bujwahya, Kyesiga East, Kyesiga West, Kijwenge, Buhiiga, Parajwoki, Bulemwa, Mwendante area, Kikere area, Karongo area, Bubale and Budaka from Kitoba sub-county; the villages of Mparo West and Mparo South, Kyaruiru and Bulinda, Bwanya and Kyedikyo, Kiryabana and Kichwamba, Bucunga and Kihembe, Butanjwa and Kihanga, Kyentale, Kidoti, Kyakepeya, Kikwatamigo, Butebere, Kitinti, Nyakambugo, Mbogwe, Buhanika and Kihule from Buhanika sub-county in Hoima District) be upgraded to a Municipality to meet the requirement of Article 178 (4) of the Constitution.
    2.  That Mukono Municipality (to cover the existing Mukono Town Council and Goma sub-county in Mukono District) be created;
    3.  That Kasese Municipality (to cover the existing Kasese Town Council and Kilembe Mines in Kasese District) be created;
    4.  That Iganga Municipality (to cover the existing Iganga Town Council in Iganga District) be created;
    5.  That Masindi Municipality (to cover the existing Masindi Town Council and Karujubu and Nyangahya sub-counties and 14 villages of Miirys, Kyeema, Kyakoto, Bigando, Kyamwiti, Nyabinyira, Kikonya, Kigulya-Kyetegya, Nyakalogi, Kisanja, Isimba, Kyakasozi, Kyamujwara and Goroora villages from Miirya sub-county in Masindi District) be created;
    6.  That Bushenyi–Ishaka Municipality (to cover the existing Bushenyi-Ishaka Town Council and Mazinga Parish from Kakanju sub-county, Kashenyi and Buramba parishes from Nyabubare sub-county, Rwenjeru parish, from Kyabugyimbi sub-county, the villages of Kayoyo, Rwandaro Kikuba Central, Masya, Nombe, Kichwamba, Mabare, Kamira, Ruharo Central and Kyabumbaire all from Ruharo parish in Bumbaire sub-county and villages of Ruyaayo, Rwengoma. Rweibare, Bunyarigi, Kashekye Central and Rwakagina from Bunyarigi parish in Ibaare sub-county in Bushenyi District) be created;
    7.  That Ntungamo Municipality (to cover the exiting Ntungamo Town Council in Ntungamo District) be created; and 
    8.  That Busia Municipality (to cover the existing Busia Town Council in Busia District) be created.
    9.  That the effective date of the seven Municipalities be 01 July 2010.”

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move and be supported. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the chair?

4.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Anthony Yiga): I would like to say that as far as the committee is concerned, we earlier on got the motion that was moved by the Minister – the motion that was originally moved by the minister was for creation of four municipalities: Mengo, Kasese, Mukono and Hoima municipalities. We were made to understand that the committee should not present its report to Parliament because the Minister had wanted to amend the earlier motion and we thought that after moving the amended motion, it will go back to the committee so that we produce one report. That is what we had been made to believe -(Interjections)- as of now, as the chairperson, I cannot proceed to make any report. 

But we are also observing that in this motion moved by the Minister, he is removing the creation of Mengo Municipality yet this is a constitutional directive. It is a constitutional directive when we look at Article 178 of the Constitution and when you go to Article 178(3), which says that, “Subject to clause (1) and of the provision of this Constitution, the regions of Buganda, Bunyoro, Busoga, Acholi and Lango specified in the First Schedule to this Constitution, shall be deemed to have agreed to form regional governments for the purpose of this article.” 

Then 178(4) “The headquarters of the regional governments deemed to have been established in clause (3) of this article shall be as follows – 

    a) In Buganda, Mengo Municipality, which shall be created by Parliament;
    b) In Bunyoro, Hoima Municipality, which shall be created by Parliament; 
    c) In Busoga, Jinja Municipality;
    d) In Acholi, Gulu Municipality; and 
    e) In Lango, Lira Municipality

So, Madam Speaker, I am concerned. It appears we are not even following the Constitution. I was expecting that we are going to add on but now we are subtracting what we had presented. When you look at the Kampala Capital City Bill, which we have; actually, the boundaries of Kampala are excluding Mengo Municipality. Now I do not know why the Minister is actually moving this way. Maybe we – but for us we are waiting for that. After moving, we shall go to the committee and harmonise then report to Parliament. Thank you.

4.57
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): The chairman has actually raised some of the concerns that I was going to express. He has expressed them so clearly that I have nothing useful to add in that regard. 

I only want to add that if the Minister expected us to pass this resolution now, he is already creating another nine constituencies, because municipalities are constituencies; so we are expanding Parliament again in that regard. 

Of course the other aspect was: having created these new municipalities, I would have wanted to hear from him the steps going to be taken to ensure that these municipalities actually run. We already have enough problems running the municipalities that are in place, particularly regarding manpower aspects. Town clerks to run municipalities are not easy to get; recruiting them is a problem; finding competent people to act as competent town clerks and assistant town clerks is a problem. 

But that alone, there is a problem of physical planners; municipalities are supposed to be planning areas. You need people who can actually help in planning, but virtually, all these municipalities do not have physical planners. They do not even have facilities for doing real physical planning. Consequently, developments are taking place in municipalities, which are not planned and there is no projection of what these municipalities will look like in future. 

So my concern is: thank you for creating all these, but what are you doing to ensure that these important urban centres will be run in a manner commensurate with their dignity? 

Finally, the physical infrastructure; the roads, the offices, the facilities within which these municipalities operate, are a problem. Many of them do not have offices worth mentioning to be offices of municipalities or which provide facilities, which are good enough for the municipalities to be run well. So really, I wanted to hear the minister stating something about all this in addition to assuring us that the municipalities will be able to run as they should. I thank you.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural point and this relates to what my friend hon. Yiga, the Chairperson of the Public Service and Local Government Committee of Parliament, raised. It appears that whereas Government would like to create new municipalities; the procedure was not followed. I expected the merits or demerits of creating these new eight municipalities to have gone through the appropriate committee of the House. And as it were, hon. Yiga raises real serious concerns, which I think this House should not ignore. 

My point of procedure is: considering that there are constitutional issues and also that there is a serious concern raised by the chairperson of the relevant committee and also cognisant of the fact that the information given by the Minister through his motion is insufficient for us to take a decision - at least for me – because when you talk about all these villages here, I do not have an idea of where they are located. So, as a Member of this House, I needed to be persuaded and I think these two pieces of paper are not sufficient, whatever material in it notwithstanding. So I would like some guidance on this matter so that as we proceed, we proceed constitutionally; we should also proceed armed with knowledge and not just pass municipalities out of excitement.

5.01
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to say that the Constitution, in that Article, which talks about deeming of regions, also says that for the regions deemed, Buganda, Bunyoro and so forth, the headquarters of those regions namely Mengo in the case of Buganda; Hoima in the case of Bunyoro and so forth, shall be created by Parliament. This was a formulation that was deliberate. 

We could have said in this Constitution that, “Mengo shall be the municipality; Hoima shall be the municipality,” but the Constitution leaves it to Parliament to create them.  And as you notice, in all these, the Minister has been as precise and specific as he could be about the boundaries he is talking about. We may not know the places but they are specific. In the case of Mengo, the agreement we had with Mengo during the negotiations was that Mengo Municipality be created. Mengo Municipality would be curved out of Kampala City and it would consist of Lubaga Division and parts of the Central Division that have cultural sites. A committee was established to try and do the delineation.

Secondly, it was also agreed, as the Bill will show, when it comes to Kampala as the capital territory of Uganda, the Bill will show that the agreement was that for those parts of the city which were taken out of the city to be part of the regional governments, there would be adequate compensation from the region to be part of Kampala. So this is a process that has not been completed and as soon as it is complete, Mengo Municipality will be created, but now the minister was not ready because we did not have the boundaries. Thank you, MPs.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, what is becoming clear is that a motion was referred to our committee and a report on that is still pending. Part of the content of that motion I think is here and part of it is not. So if we proceed we will usurp the powers of our committee and it will be setting a dangerous precedent. So, this motion, which should have been termed an amended motion or something, should also go to the committee, they look at it and then report back to the House. Otherwise, I do not want to set a precedent where we usurp their powers. I do not know what is in your docket, hon. Chairperson!

MR YIGA: Madam Speaker, we shall report on Tuesday next week. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, the matters are referred to the committee. 

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I want to raise some small issue to attach to what you have just concluded. Hon. Amama Mbabazi raised a very important issue that there was a discussion and that the matter involving Mengo Municipality and the question of Kampala City will be coming up. 

You may also be aware that there is talk of creation of new cities in Uganda. My opinion would be that the Ministry of Local Government goes back and consolidates all these new cities they want to form: Mengo Municipality, the Greater Kampala and they bring them to the committee so that we can comprehensively handle the issue of municipalities and cities once and for all without going backwards. 

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like clarification as to whether the eight municipalities created will be represented as constituencies? And if so, can the Minister of Finance confirm to us whether they are among those which have been catered for; because creating fifteen districts is already a lot of expenditure on our part. And then we have created another nine counties that will also be represented in Parliament; and another eight municipalities. I want to be clarified on whether there will be enough money to run all these constituencies?   

Secondly, my concern is that these moves excite us when the elections are near. When I look at this thing, it is nothing but gerrymandering for the purpose of elections. If you ask me, I can tell you why these counties and districts are being created, it is all for the purposes of elections. So I want clarification whether there will be money for managing these constituencies yet we do not have money for rehabilitation of Northern Uganda. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, my understanding is that these constituencies and counties do not become effective before the end of the Fifth Session. I do not expect these MPs here before the end of this Parliament; they would be in the Ninth Parliament, not in the Eight Parliament. 

5.10
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. If these new municipalities are going to get representatives in the current budget, then I have no money for them. But according to the Certificate of Financial Implications which I issued, we have made provisions under the MTEF for them in the Ninth Parliament. 

And I want to add on that I do not believe what my sister hon. Cecilia Ogwal said that this is gerrymandering. Municipalities are part of planning. According to our National Development Plan, we what this country to become a middle income country in the next 15 to 20 years; and there is no way it is going to become a middle income country without urbanisation. And we do not want to repeat the mistakes of the past –(Interruption) 

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the Minister for giving way. I am extremely happy that we are going to have many municipalities so that we can catch up with development. But I would like to inform the minister that out of all these municipalities, there is none for West Nile. When shall we have one so that we can also develop? When considering these municipalities, please ensure that you give us at least one, Koboko inclusive. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let the Minister conclude. We have sent this matter to the committee and as far as the commission is concerned, we do not expect new Members of Parliament in the Fifth Session. 

MRS BUMBA: Madam Speaker, in support of the motion, we need to urbanise in a planned manner. We do not want to repeat the first mess where big towns have grown by accident without planning –(Interjections)– I will present my reasons for supporting the motion when the report comes from the committee. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay; hon. Members, this matter is referred to the committee for perusal and report back. 

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL YOUTH COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008

5.13
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that that Bill entitled, “National Council (Amendment) Bill, 2008” be read for the second time.  

The object of the Bill is to:
    a)  amend the National Youth Act to remove the compulsory membership of every village youth resident aged between 18 and 30 years of a village youth council;
    b) make the decisions of the village youth council binding on all youths in the village;
    c) exclude non-citizens from membership of a youth council;
    d) provide for the Electoral Commission to compile, maintain, revise and update the voters registers at the village and parish levels;
    e) provide for the Electoral Commission to designate a period for the registration of Ugandan citizens who would like to participate in 	elections of the youth council at the village level;
    f) reflect the multiparty election system in the youth council elections; and lastly 
    g) give the Minister power to make regulations regarding the 	election of members of the council. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

5.16
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Beatrice Lagada): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. The Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development did look at the amendment Bill and considered it and reports thus.

The object of the Bill is 2.0, which has already been mentioned by the Minister.

The committee received written memoranda from different stakeholders including:
1. 	The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development
2. 	The Electoral Commission
3. 	Opposition Parties in Parliament and 
4. 	Youth Members of Parliament 

The Committee also made reference to the Constitutional Court Petition No. 21 of 2006 that is Rubaramira Ruranga v. the Electoral Commission. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the ruling on the Table.

The committee observed that the Bill once enacted into law, shall rhyme with constitutional provisions and related legislations, formally legalise youth councils and address the concerns as raised in that Constitutional Court. 

Secondly, critical Government institutions, particularly the Electoral Commission indicate readiness to manage the electoral process at village and parish levels. Both the ministry and the Electoral Commission emphasised the need to have village youth councils in place for the country to have complete legal administrative units at parish and village levels.  

And thirdly, whereas youth elections have for a long time been conducted based on individual merit, subsequent elections shall be a reflection of competitive politics.  This shall reinforce the Constitutional Court ruling, which states that public elections conducted by the Electoral Commission and having a command on public resources should be on party basis.

The committee also noted that the proposed introduction of multi-party politics into village youth council elections and the party sponsorship of candidates contravenes section 3(1)(c) of the National Youth Council Act and compromises the objects of the youth councils as a whole. 

And whereas party sponsorship compromises objects of the National Youth Council Act, the committee agrees that sponsorship of candidates by political parties or political organisations is necessary in the strengthening of democracy. The proposed legislation helps recognize, reinforce and value the role of village youth councils in the mobilization of youths for national development and to address their unique concerns and needs.

The Bill introduces the alternative method of secret ballot at the village youth elections and finally this law is significant in the formation of electoral colleges to facilitate the election of Youth Members of Parliament.

Therefore, the committee recommends that the National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill, 2008 be passed into law, subject to the proposed amendments. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

5.20
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity to contribute to the motion and I would like to straight away thank the chairperson and the committee for this report that has been read to this House. 

I have a few concerns and my first concern emanates from the object of the Bill. Whereas the Bill seeks to remove compulsory membership of every village youth aged between 18 years and 30 years, it also binds whoever does not belong to the council to the decisions by the council. I see this as ridiculous. Youths these days, especially in the villages, may not see the use of joining these councils. The perception that they have is that councils should bring something fruitful to them. More often than not, it does not happen because of budgetary problems. The issues relating to youths are not sufficiently addressed in our national budget and so this has tended to repel the youths from the core values of having these youth councils in the villages.

Practically, there are only a few enthusiastic youth who voluntarily join these councils and yet this Bill is saying these few should take decisions and the decisions should be binding on the majority? I think we need to rethink this and try as much as possible, in the next stage of consideration of this Bill, to address that concern. If this is not addressed, it will not be possible to implement the resolutions of these councils especially at village level especially where only a handful of youths are involved in the passing of these resolutions.

Secondly, I would like to call the attention of the House to the observations made by the committee and on observation No. 7 they say the Bill introduces alternative, modern means, that is, secret ballot as opposed to conducting village elections by lining up behind candidates, which in their own words is old fashioned. I think as a country we should not be in a rush to spend our little resources where even we could avoid spending these resources.

The elections, at the level that the Bill tries to address, do not cause conflict, at least the way I understand it, in my own village. These are people who live in one community. These are people who fall within the same age bracket and who have common interests. But you are afraid of them lining up behind their preferred candidates? What mischief, Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MRS BEATRICE LAGADA: Madam Speaker, I want to inform the honourable member that the ruling, which I have laid on the Table, enjoins Government to hold elections using secret ballot even at village level. 

MR AMURIAT: Well, this is the trouble with not providing Parliament with documents that will inform our debate. But even with that said, I know the chairperson of the committee has referred to the ruling of the courts and well, I agree that this is probably the way to go because we have been advised by court. But next time I would suggest that we have all these documents as part of the committee report, especially the relevant parts of court decisions so that we are informed as we go ahead with our debate.

Finally, I do think that this law, if we pass it in this present form, seeks to exclude members who, by persuasion, would be brought to the fold and I would like to see some amendments to the folds. It is exclusive in other words and -(Interjections)- exclusive. It does not include - you know the very fact that you are saying you have a choice either to belong or not to belong to these councils is exclusive in nature. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.26
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chair of this committee for a good report presented. I do take note of the serious concerns, which were expressed by hon. Amuriat, especially when he tackled objectives (a) and (b) and I have nothing more useful to add to that. But my concern will be on objective (g), which seeks to give the minister power to make regulations regarding the elections of members of the council. 

We are in a multi-party dispensation. Not all ministers may be as good intentioned as my friend hon. Gabriel Opio -(Interjections)- yes, yes! The fact that we are in a multi-party dispensation means that the minister whom we are assigning this important role to belongs to a political party of some sort. It may be NRM in power today and tomorrow it may be FDC or UPC or DP and the minister at that time will have a political affiliation that he or she professes. 

Therefore, since the elections of the National Youth Council have taken into account the ruling of the Constitutional Court of Maj. Rubaramira Ruranga v. Electoral Commission and Attorney-General, and this court in its own wisdom agrees that we are in a multi-party dispensation and all efforts must be made to make sure that there is impartiality in terms of those who are to take decisions; I will not be comfortable that in a multi-party dispensation we give this enormous power to a minister who belongs to a political party to take decisions of other stakeholders who do not profess the same political belief as he does. 

I would rather suggest that this power is vested into the Electoral Commission, which is seen as a neutral body so that if there is anything -(Interjections)- yes, so that if there is anything you can be able to – I am not in any way qualifying that the present Electoral Commission is neutral -(Interjections)- yes. I am not qualifying but the Electoral Commission per se is supposed to be neutral. Whether the present Electoral Commission is neutral or not is a mater of debate for another day. 

The point I am making is that if this responsibility is given to the Electoral Commission, which is adjudged to be impartial, then every stakeholder will go home happy that yes, a decision is going to be taken by an impartial body. But a minister who is already serving the interests of a political party and making sure that his political party wins will certainly, as a human being, and more so if he is not principled, use that excessive power to the disadvantage of the councils that may not subscribe to his or her own political beliefs. So, I strongly propose that this recommendation I am making goes a long way into helping Parliament in making a decision.

Most importantly, the present National Youth Council, just like the National Women Council, which will also be considered in its own right at an appropriate time, is obsolete -(Interjections)- yes, it is obsolete as far as its lifespan granted by the law is concerned. It is obsolete. It is obsolete because of lack of adequate legal provisions. That was the reason why Maj. Rubaramira had to go to court and since that time I know the same technocrats in the same National Youth Council whom I left when I was a commissioner are still holding the office, nine years down the road, without any elections -(Interjections)- yeah, without an election -(Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would just like to give this information that we consider youths from the age of 30 downwards to 18 and 18 to 30. But as of now, there are some chairpersons of youths who are 33, 34, 35 or even 36 still holding that office. There are some people who are holding even two offices because elections were not conducted at the right time due to some implications. So, I just wanted to give that information that it is true the youths now are expired.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much my sister hon. Betty Aol for that informative message you have given me. It goes further to underscore the point that I had raised that the present National Youth Council is obsolete -(Interjections)- it is obsolete. My honourable grand daughter, Princess Kabakumba, should wait for her time and then take me on, on the Floor, rather than talking from the bench without authority.

I wish to disagree a little bit with my brother hon. Amuriat. Democracy is very expensive. Since we decided to take that path, so be it. What is good for the goose is good for the gander. The way we Members of Parliament agree that we shall not follow the NRC method of voting where people are going to line up behind candidates and that we are going to resort to open ballot – (Member timed out.)

5.37
MR ZAAKE KIBEDI (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In 1962, Uganda was at the same level with Malaysia in economic development. The reason why Malaysia has left Uganda behind is because it limits itself in the application of politics in every institution. By the honourable Minister saying, “Reflect the multiparty election system in the youth council elections,” is manifestation enough that these councils are going to become political institutions.

He again said that these are administrative units. As a person who has been groomed by the youth council, I testify that it has helped very many people to come together and benefit as per the object of the National Youth Statute. 

The National Youth Statute has three objects:  
1. 	To organise the youth of Uganda into a unified body. 
2. 	To engage the youth in activity that is of benefit to them and the nation; and
3. 	To protect the youth against any kind of manipulation.

For the time I have been in these councils since 1998, because I am still the District Chairman of Jinja, these councils have been bringing together the youth of different categories - youth who are politicians and youth who are not politicians - to discuss matters that help them to develop, and matters that concern their lives. But when we say that we are now going to bring politics into these councils, then we are not going to help the young people to benefit from the different programmes that they can share and out of which help themselves.

When we talk about the challenges of the youth like unemployment and lack of school fees, and then you say that when we are electing the youth, somebody should come and say, “I am Zaake Kibedi standing as the youth chairman on the NRM ticket; I am so and so standing as the youth chairman on the ticket of FDC” -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There are some clarifications; first from hon. Alaso and then hon. Najjemba.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much. I thought I was following my honourable colleague who also happens to be our MP for Eastern Youth. And I thought I heard him say that we should not politicise the councils, and that he is the district chairperson of the youth council, and he is in this Parliament – I suppose on the NRM ticket. I hope I got it right. So, aren’t you already a politicised chairperson of the youth council and the Eastern youth of Uganda?

MS NAJJEMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Zaake, I think we are getting it wrong. We were taken to court because we are in a multiparty dispensation and yet we still continue like we are in a Movement system. That is one of the reasons why we were taken to court.  And so, if we want to continue living as youth councils, as women councils, we have to be part of the multiparty system. 

So, if you say that we should not politicise it, then we are defeating the whole purpose. You cannot have your cake and eat it at the same time. You would rather have the councils within a multiparty dispensation or not have them at all. You get me? You cannot eat your cake and have it. We are in a multiparty dispensation and that is why we were taken to court so that we can confine ourselves within the multiparty dispensation and, therefore, we have to move in the same direction. 

So, actually, when you look at the report of the committee –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you are contributing.

MS NAJJEMBA: Yes, observation No.4; but it is the clarification. (Laughter) Thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee is also confusing us because on page 4, when you say that the committee noted that the proposed introduction of a multiparty system in the village youth council elections will compromise the object of the youth council, what are you talking about? We were taken to court because we were working as if we were in the Movement system and yet we are under a multiparty system. So, you cannot eat your cake and have it. We have to go by the multiparty system that we decided to go by. 

MR KIBEDI: Madam Speaker, maybe to answer my colleague, hon. Alice Alaso, I was elected as youth chairman for Jinja District in 2000 and I was elected as a Member of Parliament for the Youth in 2006. So, there is a difference. My Secretary General in the Jinja District Youth Council, Mwiru Paul, belongs to FDC; but when we are in this council discussing issues concerning the youth, we do not discuss politics there. That is why I am saying that we want that kind of arrangement to continue because when we are in those councils, we do not talk FDC, we do not talk NRM; we talk about the challenges facing the young people. And the challenges facing young people cut across all the youth of this country. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Zaake, you know the chairperson reported that we are responding to the command of the court; we were directed to proceed under the multiparty system throughout all the structures. That is the directive of the court. We cannot move out of it. We did not appeal.

MR KIBEDI: Madam Speaker, it is true that the ministry is working under the command of the court. And it is also true that I have tested the benefit of being in youth councils that are not discriminative. What I am praying for here is that – I am putting in a petition because I see that the youth are going to become disadvantaged if we leave this thing to go on without putting it in order. (Interruption)

MRS MAGOOLA: Madam Speaker, I do not want us to leave here without understanding the difference between the leagues - let us say in NRM we have youth leagues; those are political. Now the youth councils we are talking about are not supposed to be political. May I be clarified on that, please?

MR KIBEDI: Madam Speaker, the information by hon. Magoola shows that she is totally in agreement with what I am saying. Therefore, what I am praying this august House to help us with, is that we delay this process. We put in our petition and give the Constitutional Court more information. I think that they will have to revisit this decision so as to see that the young people who are not political and have benefited from these councils – we even have people who are civil servants who are products of these youth councils like Shaft Mukwaya is there; is that political? We have CAOs; we have youth in different institutions, because they have been well groomed by these institutions which are not political but administrative –(Member timed out.) 

5.43
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Female Youth): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister and the chairperson of the committee for tabling this Bill. It is a Bill that is long awaited by the young people in this country. 

I do concur with my colleague, hon. Zaake that the young people who belong to the National Youth Council would not wish to be governed under the multiparty system. And I believe that this Parliament is mandated, under Article 79, to make laws that can prescribe the governance of this country for peace and order in the country.

Having the ruling of the court may not really dictate upon Parliament to go by the court ruling. There have always been rulings by court which have not been answered by this Parliament. And as we are now moving towards the integration of East Africa - in the last weeks in Rwanda, all the countries sat to consider the formation of the East African Youth Council and the membership is going to be drawn from the youth councils of various countries, and the councils in Rwanda and Tanzania are just a copy and paste of the Ugandan structures, which are not multiparty. How are we going to fit into that? I really want the young people to have structures; to be elected because we have over served. Some of us in the youth councils are aging and I would like to have new people take up the leadership. But, Madam Speaker, we want to conform to the democratic governance of the integration of the East Africa. We don’t want to be in the youth council of East Africa and we are not members. 

Madam Speaker, I want to request the minister that if there is anything we can do to avoid having the youth mixed up - because as the committee has stated 3.1 in this proposed amendment contravenes 3(1) of the principal Act - because we do not want manipulation. We would not like whereby young people cannot share one common goal because they are going to be manipulated politically. We have the youth league; we have youth councils; let us have separate operations –(Ms Alaso rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let the young people speak. It is their matter. Let us listen to their views.

MS NALUBEGA: Madam Speaker, we do want this law in place. (Interruptions) Madam Speaker, how can I be ambushed by Members when I have not allowed the information? I am on the Floor and it is up to me to allow the information. 

We had consultations in all regions in this country, and I attended all of them, and the majority of the youth who participated did not concur with having the multiparty system under the youth council structures. Therefore, as a representative of the young people, I do not want to tell a lie in this House that the youth are ready for a multiparty system in the youth councils. They feel that the youth councils are the only institutions where they can share a common goal. I can give an example. I am here as an independent Member of Parliament, duly elected by the national youth council, which is comprised of all leaders from the different political parties, but they did not side with either a DP, UPC etc. They looked at the object of the youth council and they voted for someone who can stand for their common good. The multiparty system in the villages - in the young people’s administration of politics, governance and development - will tear us apart. I want the law in place, but I want a good law for the young people. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, please I will allow you to speak. Let us hear from that constituency first and then you will also respond. Let them speak their views. Let us hear from the young people of this House.

5.48
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to first of all thank the committee for the report and more so assure the Members that I am one of those that are expiring, but I am still a youth. I also want to inform Members that I am still the youth chairman of Kigulu County in the youth councils. Therefore, we need this law in place because our successors have not benefited since there was no enabling law.

I wish to disagree with my colleagues, hon. Mariam Nalubega and hon. Zaake Kibedi, that we should discourage the youth from practising multiparty politics. Right from the word go, youth councils have been a training ground for youth leaders. They have been preparing us to take up future offices. Therefore, if we scare them to get involved or to get interested in multiparty politics, we may be blocking them. So, I want to appeal to them that we should encourage our youth to join multiparty politics because even if we went to all our constituencies, our youths have parties already; you find there is an FDC, NRM, DP or UPC youth and they are all over. So, in essence, they already have sides. So, we have no reason as to why we should bar them from taking part in multiparty politics. 

I also want to agree with the committee’s position that this law will help to solve the problems of lining up when voting. Unlike hon. Amuriat who was posing a stumbling block in as far as this section is concerned - you know that politics of voting where you queue creates a lot of divisions and enmity. We do not want to have enmity within the youth. When they vote through the ballot paper - let us not look at the cost because we are not saying they take up ballot papers having their photos - they may devise means that you just write on a ballot paper that, “This is hon. Gabriel Opio and hon. Jessica Alupo as the ministers contesting for this and that.” We should encourage this so that we help our youth to have clean and smart politics instead of being divided by a who-has-given-who his or her vote. 

There are people who are planning to replace our colleagues, hon. Mariam Nalubega and hon. Zaake Kibedi. People are already on the ground looking for votes, but they do not know which people to approach because primaries are not yet in place and there is no law. But when the law is passed, we feel they will begin directing their resources to the right people who are genuine voters. We better support this law under a multiparty setting. I thank you. 

5.51
MR STEVEN BAKKA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and thank the government for finally bringing this law to Parliament. When Rubaramira went to court to block the elections of the youth councils, I was saddened because the youth councils are very important to some of us – that is where we came from. To keep the councils redundant for all these years since 2000, left me very saddened and I am very happy that today, this law is coming up and I pray that we pass it very quickly so that the youth can once again enjoy their nursery bed - this is where most of us have come from. All Members who have spoken here, including those who have not yet spoken like hon. Rose Najjemba, are products of these councils. I am, therefore, extremely happy that this law has finally come. 

I want to comment on the objects of this law. This law seeks to outlaw or remove compulsory membership of all youth resident in a village; it will now be optional to be a member of the youth council, meaning you can either be a member or not, which is very strange. Under our youth councils where I was – I am a past leader and I was the chairperson of Bugiri - it was compulsory, and this was fostering unity, because the most important factor or biggest reason why we have this council is unity. So, how does it become optional for the youth to either belong or not belong? I find this –(Interruption)

MS LAGADA: Madam Speaker, the compulsory belonging to the village youth council is contained in the ruling of the court case we have just laid on the Table. The court removed compulsory belonging.

MR MALINGA: Even our Constitution, under Article 29, guarantees freedom of association. Why should we conscript our youth to councils which they may not want to belong to?

MR BAKKA: Well, this is the rule of law. If that was the ruling, then so be it. But we should know that we are dividing the youth by asking others to belong and others not to belong. 

I am in total agreement with the ruling and the proposal of the law for us to go multiparty in the election of the youth councils. We must nurture democracy at that age. The youth must start behaving as if they are in Government at that age. For the information of this House, the NRM has started registering 16-year-olds in our registers as party members. There is absolutely no problem with the young people at that age starting to associate in parties and in being acquainted with competitive politics. This is perfectly fine for me and I find it okay because it will help our young people so that by the time they are of age to participate in national politics, they know how to behave and compete at that level. In the universities, it is already taking place with guild presidents contesting on multiparty tickets and the situation is okay. So, this is okay for me and I disagree with my colleagues who are having – (Interruption)  

MR KIBEDI: I thank my old boy in the youth councils for giving way. Hon. Bakka, we have youth leagues in the political dispensation we are in and if you want, I can give you an example that I am the chairman of the district NRM Youth League in Jinja. When I am transacting NRM matters, I sit with my league. When I am transacting youth issues that cut across, I sit as the chairman of Jinja District Youth Council. Do you know Shaft Mukwaya, the Executive Secretary of the National Youth Council? He is a product of these councils and he is not political. He has grown up here. There is also Juma Nyende, the CAO of Kabarole District, who came through these councils and he is not political. So, these councils are grooming people in different areas - politicians, civil servants and other categories of people -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Bakka, please wind up.

MR BAKKA: What our colleague seems to suggest is that once you are elected on the NRM ticket – like I am the MP of Bukooli County North on the NRM ticket - you stop serving FDC, UPC and JEEMA members of your constituency. No; you become an MP, a leader and you serve all members. When we are sworn in here, we are told, “Now you have become a Member of Parliament for all the people in your constituency.” So, when a chairperson of a village council is FDC, he represents and takes interest of all the other people in the village including the NRM, and even those who do not belong to parties. That is what it is. 

Finally, observation six re-echoes the importance of these councils in mobilising the youth and in steering them towards development activities. I want to notify the government that these councils have been poorly funded. We are passing this law and we are going to have elections and yet the youth councils have been poorly funded. We are going to initiate a vigorous fight to increase their budget. We have a youth forum here in Parliament that advocates for the interests of the youth. We need more money for these youth councils to be viable because they are very important in helping us to mobilise the communities. I thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before hon. Sauda Mugerwa comes on the Floor, I want you to join me in welcoming the clerks of the national assemblies of Burundi and Kenya who are here for the East African Community Speakers’ Conference. Please stand up – where are they? There they are. You are welcome. (Applause)

5.59
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): I thank you - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Five minutes.

MS MUGERWA: I would like to thank the minister and the committee for the report. First of all, let me talk about objective 2(a), and I would like to say that I actually find it a little bit strange in our society, because it is going to exclude some youth members of the village. Because of this, I am wondering and also seeking guidance from Government on how Government is going to cater for non council members in the villages because these councils are set up to help with budgeting for the youth. Now, is Government going to have a budget line for non members to be catered for financially every year? I want to get clearance on that. 

Secondly, I would like to say that 2(b) contradicts objective (a) because you are saying that the Bill intends to make the decisions of the village youth council binding for all the youth in the village. If people are not associated with the council, I am wondering how they are going to be under those decisions because I find a contradiction in that and I may need clarification. 

As far as registering is concerned, I think the Electoral Commission might need to register afresh and not to update. They need to take a new register for the youth because it is going to eliminate a number of those who are not interested in the youth councils. I am trying to find out from Government whether there is going to be fresh registration rather than updating.

Lastly, I want to find out whether the Labour Minister has got the capacity to set out regulations – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information from the minister.

MR OPIO: Regulations are part of the law. The ministry suggested and sent these suggestions to the Attorney-General and it is from there that they become regulations. So, the capacity of the Ministry of Labour is to look at what is needed and then present them to the Attorney-General’s Chambers, which designs the regulations. So, we may have no –(Interruptions)

MS MUGERWA: I thank you, because you have actually answered that. I had proposed that if not the Attorney-General, then maybe the Electoral Commission should help. Otherwise, it will not be acceptable to have the minister set up the regulations for presentation to us. 

I also agree with that the Bill has actually been long overdue and the sooner it gets into effect the better. A number of things with regard to my presentation, still need to be clarified so that we have a smooth election for the youth. I thank you.     

6.03
MR ROBERT KASHAIJA (NRM, Youth Representative, Western): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I have three points to make pertaining to this Bill.

The first is that the court has ordered us as Parliament to amend this Bill as per the provisions of multiparty democracy. My worry is that if we go against the order of court, what takes precedence? Parliament or court?             

Secondly, we have debated this Bill for almost the last three years and everything has stalled. I wanted to take this opportunity to allay the fears of my colleagues, the Youth Members of Parliament, that effective training of a human being starts as early as when someone is born. Therefore, to ingrain the concept of multiparty democracy into the young generation, we should allow the youth councils to go multiparty so that the young people start training in multiparty politics early enough, so that by the time they are of age, they already know and are well-versed with the concept of multiparty democracy, because I do not expect this country to ever return to the Movement system. 

Lastly, this is an observation on page 2 where objects (a) and (b)  have a bit of a contradiction because object (a) says that the object of the Bill is to, “Amend the National Youth Council Act to remove compulsory membership of every village youth resident aged between 18 and 30 years from a village youth council.”

Then (b) “To make the decisions of the village youth council binding on all youth in the village.”

Madam Speaker, if the membership of every village youth resident aged between that age should not be compulsory in the youth councils, why should the decisions of those who are in the youth councils be binding on all the youth in the village? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe just to answer hon. Kashaija about whether Parliament or the courts take precedence, we make the law and the court interprets. Now, them having interpreted and said, “This is the way it should be,” we are bound to comply. 

6.06
MRS BEATRICE MAGOOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): I want to thank the minister for the paper and express my feelings or ideas on this paper. The object of the Bill; when I look at 2(a) and (b), I get confused. What are we up to? Are we bringing all the youth together for a good purpose or we want to discriminate and say, only those who will be able to go and join the councils are the only ones who will be youth for Uganda?

Number two, when we say in 2(f), “To reflect the multiparty election system in the youth council elections,” what are we up to? Is this political, developmental or what is it? I want to compare this with other youth groups that we have had like the students’ council and UNSA in Makerere. What is the difference? They are youth and what do we want from them as youths?  Then there are youth at the grassroots, what do we want from them? What do we want to do for them?

I am a bit confused as to what we are really aiming at? Is it for political growth? Or is it for social growth? Or is it for something else? Though my English may not be as good as what is written here, I think there is something missing. What do we really want for these youth? To grow up politically so that by the time they are 18 or 20, they are good politicians? Or to grow up socially and developmental so that by the time they are 20, we will know that they are people who can really steer the country towards development? I am confused! I would like the minister to explain that to me.

But 2(c) where they say they want to exclude non-citizens, I think that is okay because what do we want from them if we are talking about people who are in our villages? We want those who are related to us by blood, colour and customs. So, that is okay.  

As I finish, I would like an explanation as to what we really want these youth to become when they are of age. Good politicians? Thank you.

6.10
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report and I want to say that it has come very timely. However, the committee should have provided us with the ruling to enrich our understanding of this Bill; but the committee merely said that this Bill is based on the ruling, but not all of us have had the opportunity to look at the ruling. However, it is a good report and it is important that we come up with this law to regulate youth councils. I have two comments to make on this report.

First; we must acknowledge that the practice of democracy is universal. When we talk about democracy, the ingredients of democracy are the same, but it’s the players of democracy who always tend to bend the rules to justify their models. But the general motto is that democracy flourishes best where there is competitiveness; where there are institutions competing on the basis of policy and not on individual merit. So, I think departure from the old fashion of individual merit is the best as far as we are concerned in terms of the growth of democracy in our country. So, we need to congratulate ourselves on this so that we can make the whole world know that Uganda is actually practising democracy. 

Secondly, I want to say that whoever used this word “old fashioned” in the model of election must tell us from which other method because whatever method was being used is not known in democratic practice. It was devised so that people see who is going to vote wrongly. I mean that is it. But to say it is old fashioned, from where? It does not make sense. I think we have to accept that the past has been bad, the past has been marred by dictatorship and now we are moving on the right path.

Finally, I want to say that when we are talking about reflecting the spirit of multipartism in regulating the youth councils and then we give powers to the minister to make the regulation, this is wrong. We are departing from the fundamental issue. We could probably say that the minister could do that in consultation with the parties or the players; but to say that we give the powers to the minister, we are departing from the spirit of the Bill. So, I wish to recommend that either the Electoral Commission does that in consultation with the parties or the minister does that in consultation with the parties. I thank you. 

6.14
MR DAVID EBONG (Independent, Maruzi County, Apac):  Madam Speaker, I reluctantly stand on the Floor to support this Bill. Reluctantly because I would have preferred a hybrid Bill, which should warrant and promote the participation of young people in leadership. But the ruling of Rubaramira Ruranga v. the Electoral Commission and Attorney-General rapped this Parliament from strengthening the participation of young people in politics based on a framework which would now be the basis of a multiparty system. We are still trying and fidgeting around to see how the multiparty system can work in Uganda. It has worked elsewhere, but it is not necessarily a guarantee that it can work also for our young people who have had the history of divisionism and having to recover from conflict. So, the mind is totally different. 

But having said that, what is now prudent is to move ahead within the acceptable legal framework and promote the participation of the youth in the multiparty dispensation. This means that we have to invest very seriously and aggressively to guarantee our mandate and portfolio on issues of civic education. That would focus on bringing up young people with tolerant minds so that they can participate and have respect for different opinions. We need to strengthen all these meaningful processes through the political systems that exist. I would strongly recommend that aspect of civic education, not voters’ education, which is very common in Uganda - we need to fast track and develop guidelines for civic education which would entirely focus on mainstreaming participation of young people in politics. Young people have got a great responsibility in determining their contribution to this country as opposed to what this country can provide for them. 

However, we need to create that environment, for the public institutions we have established to support the participation of young people in taking meaningful political decisions and/or otherwise we need to look at options where young people have got strong principles for determining their common destiny and recognising the fact that we are one-people one-Uganda. This is going to be very important in practising the multiparty political system. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.14
MR BENSON OBUA OGWAL (UPC, Moroto County, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is no gain in saying that this Bill is long overdue and also that its import cannot be over emphasised. I am one of the beneficiaries of the youth councils, having been the first Chairman of Lira District Youth Council. I cannot enumerate the kind of benefits that these youth councils cultivate for us as a nation. This House itself is replete of people who have been youth leaders and who have ascended the ranks of the ladder to come to this House. 

Therefore, we need to do everything possible to ensure that we cultivate the leadership of this country by encouraging our youth to pursue positions of responsibility wherever they are. 

Having said that, I look at the object of the Bill and I see that it attempts to exclude young people who are not citizens of this country. Young people may find themselves anywhere without their choice, and I find it quite sad that we are trying to exclude them from learning to cultivate their leadership. Wherever they may take the lessons that they have learned – I would like to urge that we should as much as possible allow non citizens who are youths to participate. We may say that some of the positions cannot be held by non citizens, but at least let them be members of the youth councils. For those who have travelled far and wide –(Interruption)

MS LAGADA: Madam Speaker, I want to inform the honourable members that this Parliament passed a law allowing duo-citizenship. So, when the committee considered the issue of excluding non citizens we thought it was a good idea because if you are in Uganda and you would like to participate in our politics, the law allows you to become a citizen of Uganda as well as a citizen of your mother country. 

MS OTENGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to find out; nowadays we have international institutions where there are youth from different countries and others are in the villages. So, they may not want to be citizens of their country, but wouldn’t it be prudent for them to participate - but we may perhaps ask them not to vote. What do you think would happen to your own youth who go to study away from this country and yet they participate and are being developed into leaders; put yourself in their shoes.  

MR OBUA OGWAL: Well said. I think we need to broaden our minds a little and see that the world is fast becoming globalised. And one day, you will not be very happen seeing your grandchild living somewhere away from Uganda being denied an opportunity to lead. I appreciate the duo-citizenship law that we passed, but I think it would be stretching it too far if we require young people to change their citizenship for whatever time they will be staying in this country. 

Then, on page 4, No.6, I would like to urge that we do not pay lip-service to the youth. Since I became chairman of the district youth council and left, to date I see very little change in the youth councils. And as a matter of fact, as soon as elections are over, that marks the end of critical youth activities. I do not know, for instance, what budget is apportioned to the youth councils; it could be very little. So, I am asking that we do not pay lip-service to the youth councils because they play a critical role in the development of democracy in this country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.23
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would not like colleagues to go away from this House, especially the youth MPs, with an impression that either they have lost in this debate or that the House has not been very sympathetic to their constituency. That would be an unhealthy impression for the country that loves its young people. Therefore, it is important that we refresh ourselves about where we are coming from.

I think the minister would have put it to this House that the national council was conceived in the days of the Movement system and then we had a referendum in 2005. We sat in this very House and we amended our Constitution to provide for political pluralism to operate under a multiparty dispensation, and then in line with other provisions that allow us, therefore, to freely associate, to choose where to belong or to choose not to belong if you decide so.

I also want to remind our friends, the youth MPs, that while the national youth councils do a mobilisation role, which is apparently strictly developmental, you also know that the youth councils in this country constitute the electoral college for Members of Parliament who are youth. Therefore, if an electoral college can give birth to an NRM Member of Parliament, by their very nature, they have a political intonation embedded in it because there is no way a cat can produce a rat. It is only political institutions that would produce politicians, and so, our youth councils produce our youth Members of Parliament from whichever party they belong to. So, we need to be sure to follow the directive of the Constitutional Court. In any case, it is a directive.

When the youth elections were almost getting into play, we in the FDC went to court. Hon. Rubaramira then was our chief electoral commissioner. So, when we went to court, our prayer to court was that it was not proper in a multiparty dispensation to confine the activities of electing youth Members of Parliament to youth councils when we know they are going to belong to political parties. That is what we prayed to court and actually court directed that the minister comes back - first of all it stayed the election.

We do not even seem to have latitude to operate other than that directed by court; that we can now come here and say we can behave otherwise because court has already directed us that the minister brings an amendment to this House providing for streamlining of the activities of the national youth council with the multiparty dispensation and other provisions in the Constitution. It actually directed the Electoral Commission on its own guidelines for the elections of youth MPs that contravene the provisions of a multiparty dispensation. So, we cannot afford to go backwards on a Constitutional Court directive - but you wanted to give me some information.

MR KIBEDI: Thank you, hon. Alice Alaso. The information I want to give is that the youth councils that were formed in 2000 elected in Eastern Uganda hon. Kajeke of FDC. It is the same electoral college that elected me in NRM. The point I want to bring forward is that, they elect somebody depending on the capacity to deliver not on what party you belong to. Thank you.

MS ALASO: I do appreciate you for that information, but like I said, that we almost do not have latitude to behave otherwise even this morning because you do not want to go against a Constitutional Court directive. Which other court would interpret for us the Constitution? (Member timed out.)

6.28
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for bringing the law and the committee for the work done. Once again, I have looked at the object of this Bill and it definitely defines the problem, only that it is not providing the solution. Maybe, we should get another law to address that court ruling; otherwise the object of this Bill - once you make a wrong assumption you end up with a wrong conclusion. When you assume that all youths have to become politicians, then you would like to politicise whatever belongs to the youth. Here, we are choosing a wrong sample when we are pointing at the youth who have become politicians. That is a small part of the youth. The other youth will become civil servants etc. But you have made them belong to DP or UPC or NRM or FDC. Even if they want to change, you have already labelled them when they are still young.

So, again you are creating a problem and you are suggesting to remove the compulsory membership - are you sure it was compulsory? No, it was automatic membership. If it was compulsory, those who never belonged there would have been punished; but it was just automatic. It is automatic; you are a youth between 18 and 30 - and I can tell you a secret; I was one time a youth. (Laughter) Politicising the youth should be left to the political parties. It should not be under these orchestrated youth councils. That is my understanding. 

You are saying give the minister powers to make regulations regarding the elections of the members of the council and yet in the ruling it was the Electoral Commission that was directed to make regulations. What would be the law of the Electoral Commission under this case here? How are the youth going to be elected under these new councils? We should be very clear; we should not leave it to guess work. The law should tell us exactly.

When you look at Section 17 of this law here, it says: “There shall be a national youth consultative forum which shall consist of –
(a) the members of the national youth executive;
(b)at least five representatives of non governmental organisations determined by the national youth executive committee....”

Are they also going to come according to political lines “...which are involved in youth affairs and which are registered under the non governmental organisations statute”. Are NGOs going to be involved in politics?

Even 16 says, “The conference shall consist of at least....” At one time we are putting on the shoes then socks later and another time shoes first then socks later. We do not know how the regulation will come —(Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my comrade that even in schools right now and in higher institutions of learning, there is no way you are going to say those youth who campaign for positions in their institutions are non-partisan. In most cases, they are partisan; actually all. Even that youth council which we talked of, they were already partisan. I do not think, my dear comrade, that we should bury our faces in the sand like ostriches. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Members, I think hon. Mugambe raised a very important point. He is saying that we are labelling these young people, even before they start getting employed; that they have taken sides. Suppose they want to go for a job? They will have been labelled. That is what hon. Mugambe is raising; that we are labelling these young people even before they leave school. What happens to them when they go for an interview? 

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Ms Amuge rose_) My time might go; unless they will give me one more minute.

MS AMUGE: Madam Speaker, I want to inform the House that the youth are beginning to fear to put themselves at risk. And let me tell you that what we are debating now may tilt the youth. You say you are bringing multiparty democracy; but let me predict, you are going to tilt the youth to one side. Not many youth will accept to risk being on the side which puts them at a disadvantage. Thank you.

MR MUGAMBE: I think the information is reinforcing; that the youth are going to fear the youth councils which are organised along political lines. As hon. Aol said, most of the elections in tertiary institutions and most of the students are partisan. That is okay. But you know 6x7=42. You cannot say it is equal to 41 although 41 is very close to 42. Therefore, by saying “some” it does not mean all. You will realise that many will keep away and will just support maybe an individual, but not on political lines. So, we should look at those issues because definitely we shall defeat the object of this Bill -(Member timed out.)

6.35
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. This issue we are discussing is very complicated. I do not know whether we shall come up with the solution. 

First of all, this youth council was established by Government and it has its particular purpose to serve the youth of Uganda regardless of their political affiliation. Now, the time came when the youth had to be represented in politics then we looked around and said, “How can we elect these youth? Can we use adult suffrage? No. Can we use electoral colleges? Yes”, because elections are very cumbersome and we need to use electoral colleges for electing the youth. And indeed it worked very successfully under the one-party system - under the Movement.
 
But under the multiparty system, things became complicated. Now we are saying, “Why?” This organisation is set up by one particular ruling party. Therefore, if it is involved in elections, definitely it will influence all the elected members, whether they are councillors or MPs, to support the ruling party. That is why the court ruled very ably and I do not object. 

But now the question is, how can we elect these people using the same system under the multiparty system? Let me tell you the impossible. For example, we have the electoral college of the national youth and we have specific people coming - I do not know how many they are. Now, how are we going to make sure that this composition which is electing the MPs and councillors is DP, UPC, and other parties whatever they are? How are we going to form this electoral college? For example, if we say, “Let it be multiparty,” and we bring in two UPC, three DP, maybe two NRM and so on, you will find that when they are conducting elections, those who have filled in as NRM will have the same number of people who will support them and definitely no UPC person will cross over to say, “Let me support NRM so that it succeeds.” So, you will remain stuck without any election because each person comes with a fixed point saying, “My candidate must pass,” and yet the numbers are limited. 

That is why if we borrow from the persons with disability we said, “Let the electoral college be neutral.” Let us assume that definition. They should not declare their intention but a person who comes up to contest will say, “I am here for NRM,” or “I am here for UPC, elect me.” So, if they elect me as UPC I will carry my flag as UPC. Those who will elect me as NRM, I will carry - we leave the electoral college as it is without interfering. 

But if we do not accept this situation then what we must do is that we leave the youth council out of politics completely. Let them do their work. Let us use the youth leagues of NRM, UPC, etc, to elect their candidates to come and contest and then we use adult suffrage of youth to elect these people - because there are youth who are UPC or DP - so that we leave the council out of politics and we help our youth and develop their ability to participate in politics so that in future they become able leaders. I think that is the only solution. Otherwise, if we fix the youth council to be used, we shall still have that problem. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, after listening to the debate, I think this matter is not as simple as it appears and I would like us to reflect on it and take the right decision for the young people of this country. So, Minister, can we ask that the Attorney-General comes and assists us because I think we should not rush this Bill? It is long overdue but you can see that the pros and cons about how we should do it really - something must address this very soberly.

So, for now, we defer further debate on this matter and we ask the Attorney-General to look at the issues. I hope you have captured them, minister and the chair of Gender, so that they help us to make the right decision.

So, the House is adjourned to 2.00 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.41 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 6 May 2010 at 2.00 p.m.)
