PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - THIRD MEETINGTUESDAY , 9 MAY 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA8546TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. COL (RTD) CHARLES OKELLO-ENGOLATuesday, 9 May 2023problems. You do not need to have an opponent or an enemy die in cold blood. I send my condolence to the family of Jajja Ichuli  who was killed. Parliament will stand with the people of Uganda and offer all its support against this unfortunate vice in our country.As we mourn the passing of our brother, colleague, elder and friend, Hon. Col Charles Engola, I would like to express my displeasure with this unfortunate practice in this country where people celebrate the misfortune of those they do not agree with. It is inhumane, uncultured and very immoral to celebrate the death of anyone because you hold divergent views. (Applause)Beyond our different political and religious affiliations, we are all humans. First and foremost, we owe ourselves to be human to each other. It is normal to disagree and hold different views, but what binds us together is that we are all human beings. You do not need to kill me because I have disagreed with you; at one time, I will die.The late Charles was with us here, but now he has died. He did not need to be killed. I have always told people that they will waste their energy killing me because they will go to hell while I will go to heaven. I want us to stand for a moment of silence in honour of our departed people, including Hon. Charles, Jajja Ichuli  and even the bodyguard. IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - SPECIAL SITTING - THIRD MEETINGParliament met at 1.58 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House Was Called to Order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting with a heavy heart. We have had unfortunate incidents in this country where gunmen have murdered people in cold blood with the latest being one of the bloggers, Mr Ibrahim Tusubira aka Jajja Ichuli . As the leader of the House representing all people in Uganda, we strongly condemn this barbaric killing which is being practised by these people.This kind of cowardly activity is not a good one. I ask all Ugandans not to take the law into their hands. We are all human beings; we have time to be born and to die. Why would you want to kill a person? We may differ in religion, politics or whichever but I do not think that it is the best thing to do. No one has the right to take one’s life under any circumstance. It is God that creates and God that takes. There is an ultimate end - there is time to be born and time to die. We should not be killed with a gun. I think we need to call upon all Ugandans - as much as we may disagree, let us live in harmony. There are better ways of solving 8547THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 MAY 2023(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)THE SPEAKER : Thank you. As we send off  our brother and colleague, we are comforted by the biblical teaching in Ecclesiastes Chapter 3; that there is an appointed time for everything and every affair under Heaven. There is a time to be born and a time to die. Hon. Charles was born and now he has died. Hon. Charles has been a Member of the 11th Parliament and it so happened that we used to be together in the 10th Parliament. We will miss Hon. Charles dearly. He fought a good fight. To the bereaved family and the people of Oyam, I pray that the good Lord comforts you and Ugandans. We will continue praying for you. As the 11th Parliament, we need to pray a little more. Within a short time, we have had bodies lying before us here. It is not an easy thing but we leave it all to God. He brought us here for a purpose. We will continue praying for the family and as Parliament, we will continue supporting the family of the late. When you are a Member of Parliament here, we become one family. Therefore, we will take you as part of our family. I have a condolence message here from the Parliament of Uganda. This means that it is from all of you. It reads: “The Parliament of Uganda learnt with profound shock and sadness of the demise of Hon. Col (Rtd) Charles Okello Engola, the Member of Parliament for Oyam North and Minister of State for Gender, Labour and Social Development, which occurred on 2 May 2023. It is extremely unfortunate that the late Hon. Charles Macodwogo succumbed to a brutal assassination carried out by one of his guards. Hon. Charles Engola was a disciplined, hard-working, honest and kind person. He contributed immensely to the development of Uganda in his various responsibilities as a Member of Parliament and a minister. On behalf of the Parliament of Uganda and indeed on my own behalf as the Speaker, I convey my heartfelt condolences to the family at this painful time.” Be encouraged with the scripture from the Book of 2 Corinthians 1:3-4 which says: “Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of compassion, and the God of all comfort, who comforts us in our troubles, so that we can comfort those in any trouble with the comfort we ourselves receive from God.” I trust that God Almighty will grant you and the family members the comfort you deserve during this time of loss. May the good Lord comfort you and be with you. As the Parliament of Uganda, we have contributed Shs 50 million to support the family. (Applause) The letter is addressed to the widow of the late, Mrs Joyce Okello Engola. Thank you very much. (Applause)Honourable members, we would like to thank the Government for honouring our Member of Parliament and giving him an official burial. Of course, we are not saying we have not managed but we thank Government. This is a trying moment that we should all embrace irrespective of our sides in the House. Today, it is Charles that has been killed but tomorrow, it might be any of us. On that note, therefore, I ask the Prime Minister to move the motion. However, before the motion is moved, can we first have the body inside the Chambers?(Entrance of the late Col (Rt) Charles Patrick Okello Engola Macodwogo.)The National Anthem.The East African Community Anthem.Laying of wreaths.8548TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. COL (RTD) CHARLES OKELLO-ENGOLAMOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. CHARLES OKELLO-ENGOLA, FORMER MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS) AND MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT FOR OYAM COUNTY NORTH, OYAM DISTRICTTHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, before we get the motion, on the technical bench this afternoon, we have immediate family members of the late Hon. Charles Okello-Engola, the former Minister of State for Gender, Labour and Social Development as well as the Member of Parliament for Oyam County. We have: Mrs Joyce Okello Engola, the widow; she is seated right behind here; Ms Sharon Agweng Okello, the daughter, Mr Samuel Engola, Mr David Olong Grabbie, the son; Mr Frank Okaka, the son; Mr Brian Feni, the son; Hon. Sam Engola, the brother and Brig. (Rtd) Charles Wacha, family coordinator. They have come to join us in paying tribute to their beloved one. Please join me in welcoming them.  (Applause)  In the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have the following: 1. Hon. Rose Akol, EALA Member of Parliament;2. Hon. Paul Musamali, EALA Member of Parliament;3. Hon. Veronica Kadogo, EALA Member of Parliament;4. Hon. George Atim, former Member of Parliament; 5. Hon. Sarah Lanyero Ochieng, former Member of Parliament;6. Hon. Capt. Otekat Emily;7. Hon. Anthony Okello;8. Hon. Ismail Orot, former Member of Parliament;9. Hon. Agnes Nabirye, former Member of Parliament;10. Hon. Lydia Wanyoto, former Member of Parliament; 11. Hon. Samuel Ssemugaba, former Member of Parliament;12. Mr Waiswa Bageya, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Works and Transport. You are welcome. They have come to join us in paying tribute to the late Hon. Charles Okello-Engola. (Applause)In the public gallery this afternoon, we have family members and friends of the late Hon. Charles Okello-Engola. Please stand up so that we can see you. The family together with the friends are there. (Applause)  You are most welcome.We also have Hon. Ben Wacha, former Member of Parliament. You are welcome.  We have Hon. Masiko Kabakumba, you are welcome.  (Applause)In the public gallery this afternoon, we have parliamentary interns attached to the Department of Legislative and Procedural Services. They are here to observe what is happening in the House. Where are you? Stand up. You are welcome. (Applause)We have some condolence messages. There is a condolence message from the Government Chief Whip, Hon. Hamson Obua, and attached is Shs 1 million. Thank you very much. It will be forwarded to the family. We also have a condolence message from Hon. Lydia Wanyoto, a member of the Central Executive Committee representing the women. Thank you very much. We have a condolence message from the Uganda Parliamentary Co-operative Savings and Credit Society Limited (SACCO) of Shs 1 million signed by Hon. Migadde. Thank you. 8549THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 MAY 2023Allow me to read one condolence message, which is dated 9 May 2023, to the bereaved family of the late Hon. Charles Okello-Engola: “I have learnt with deep sorrow the very tragic and untimely death of Hon. Charles Okello-Engola, Minister of State for Gender, Labour and Social Development (Labour, Employment and Industrial Relations), which occurred on Tuesday, 2 May 2023. I would like to extend my deepest condolences to the entire bereaved family of the late Hon. Charles Okello-Engola, the NRM, Parliament of Uganda, the Government of Uganda and the country at large. The late Hon. Charles Okello-Engola will be remembered for his selfless service to this country. He contributed actively to the liberation of this country, specifically in the fight against the LRA war. He was the LC 5 Chairperson of Oyam and an active member of our party; the NRM. We shall miss him greatly.I pray that the good Lord grants us strength, courage and faith to endure the extremely painful moment. May God grant his soul eternal rest and comfort. Signed by the Vice President, Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo, and the Woman Representative for Katakwi District. (Applause)Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can we have the motion moved? It will be seconded by the Leader of the Opposition.2.48THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, Your Excellency the Vice President, honourable colleagues, I move under Rule 56 of our Rules of Procedure to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Hon. Col (Rtd) Okello Charles Patrick Engola Macodwogo for his dedicated and patriotic service to the Republic of Uganda.“WHEREAS, Parliament received with deep sorrow, the sad news of the demise of Col (Rtd) Okello Charles Patrick Engola Macodwogo which occurred in Kyanja-Kampala on 2 May 2023; AWARE that Col (Rtd) Charles Patrick Engola Macodwogo had a distinguished career and served in various capacities; in the military and political spheres where he greatly contributed to the political, social, and economic transformation of Uganda:NOTING that Col (Rtd) Charles Engola served Uganda in the following key positions of responsibility:a) The Minister of State for Gender, Labor and Social Development (Labour Employment and Industrial Relations) from 2021 to 2 May 2023;b) The Minister of State for Defense and Veteran Affairs from the year 2016 to 2021;c) Member of Parliament for Oyam North County, Oyam District from the year 2016 to 2021;d) The Local Council V Chairperson of Oyam District from 2006 to 2016.e) The Commander of the Uganda peoples’ Defence Forces for the 501 Brigade 2005; ACKNOWLEDGING that Col (Rtd) Engola Charles Macodwogo served his country with patriotism, commitment and a Commander of Uganda People’ s Defence Forces 501 Brigade, played a vital role in ensuring that peace and stability is realised in Northern Uganda; APPRECIATING that Col (Rtd) Engola Charles significantly contributed to the social protection and transformation of Ugandan migrant workers abroad during his tenure in the Ministry of Gender, Labour, and Social Development;NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows: 8550TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. COL (RTD) CHARLES OKELLO-ENGOLA1. That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the people of Uganda for the loss of a distinguished son of this country;2. That Parliament takes cognisance of the significant contribution the late Col (Rtd) Okello Macodwogo rendered to his country.Madam Speaker, I beg to move.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Is the motion seconded? Seconded by the Vice President, the Leader of the Opposition, the Government Chief Whip, Attorney-General; it is seconded by the whole House. Would you like to speak to your motion, Rt Hon. Prime Minister?MS NABBANJA:  Yes, Madam Speaker. On Tuesday, 2 May 2023, the country received the sad news of the passing on of Hon. Col (Rtd) Charles Patrick Okello Engola Macodwogo, the Minister of State for Labour, Employment and Industrial Relations, a Member of Parliament for Oyam North County since 2016 and a member of the Lango Parliamentary Group. Col (Rtd) Charles Patrick Engola Macodwogo was born on 12 October 1958 to the late Rwot (Jago) Nassan Engola and Ketula Engola of Awangi in Iceme, Oyam District. The late Okello Charles Engola was the grandson of Rwot Olong Adilo and great-grandson of Rwot Olwa Abelli of Iceme Village.Madam Speaker, Col (Rtd) Charles Engola attended Atura Common Primary School from 1967 to 1973. He attended Soroti Senior Secondary School from 1974 to 1978. Hon. Charles Engola, attended Kampala International University from the year 2007 to 2010 and awarded a Bachelor of Development Studies. In 2013, he acquired a Master’s Degree in Public Administration and Management from Kampala International University. Col (Rtd) Charles Patrick Okello Engola Macodwogo joined the army in 1980 at the rank of private. He was later promoted to the rank of Major and appointed the Commanding Officer-501 Brigade based in Opit, Gulu. He was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant Colonel and maintained as a Commanding Officer 501 Brigade. In 2006, he was promoted to the rank of colonel and retired from the army. Madam Speaker, Col (Rtd) Charles Engola joined politics in the year 2006 and was elected the LC V Apac District till when Oyam District was created. From the year 2011 to 2016, he was the LC V Chairperson of Oyam. While from the year 2016 to 2021, Col (Rtd) Charles Engola was elected the Member of Parliament for Oyam North County and in the same period, he served as the Minister of State for Defence and Veteran Affairs.From 2021 to the time of his demise, Hon. Col (Rtd) Charles Patrick Okello Engola Macodwogo was the Minister of State for Gender, Labour and Social Development (Labour, Employment and Industrial Relations).Madam Speaker, Hon. Col (Rtd) Charles Patrick Okello Engola Macodwogo was married to Mrs Joyce Okello Engola and they were blessed with children; Sharon Agweng Okello, Samuel Engola Jr, Daniel Olong, Frank Okaka and Feni Brian.Madam Speaker, Charles Okello Engola answered the highest call of serving his country as a professional soldier. He was a war hero and played a fundamental role in the pacification of the northern part of this country against the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) rebel insurgency and acquired the name ‘Macodwogo”, meaning “fire has returned”. (Applause)Madam Speaker, in 2019, Hon. Col (Rtd) Charles Patrick Okello Engola Macodwogo, as the Minister of State for Defence and Veteran Affairs (Defence), led a team of Ugandan Members of Parliament to Arabiska Forward Operating Base in Somalia, where they interacted with the UPDF troops and the local leadership. [The Speaker]8551THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 MAY 2023Hon. Col (Rtd) Charles Patrick Okello Engola Macodwogo served this country as a humble servant and a fearless warrior with utmost honesty. (Applause)Madam Speaker, we convey condolences to H.E. the President of the Republic of Uganda, the Government of Uganda, the people of Lango subregion, the family and friends.May the Almighty God rest his soul in perfect peace. (Applause)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you for the motion. As we condole with the Government, we also condole the Members of Parliament because that was their colleague; he was Member of Parliament. Condolences to all the Members of Parliament. (Applause)Can we have the seconder – the Leader of the Opposition?3.01THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga):  Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I join the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister in seconding the motion to pay tribute to the fallen son of the land of our ancestors and a very faithful servant of his people.Madam Speaker, we can never get used to death – and death is such a shameless event that has, again, robbed us of a prominent Ugandan, Col (Rtd) Charles Engola, the former Minister of State for Gender, Labour and Social Development (Labour, Employment and Industrial Relations).On my behalf and on behalf of the alternative government, I convey my deepest sympathies to the bereaved family, the people of Oyam North, the people of Lango subregion, the Parliament of Uganda and the people of Uganda for this unfortunate loss. Madam Speaker, this is particularly true in light of the life of the fallen colonel: a life intently lived for a service. He did not only contribute to the legislation process of this country but also served in various capacities such as an army officer, district leader and minister.It is sad that Col (Rtd) Charles Engola has passed on at a critical time when we are yet to conclusively deal with the regulation of labour externalisation that was so close to his heart. We are cognisant of his contribution when he took a decisive stance in cancelling licences of non-compliant labour agents. He was courageous and we applaud him for that. (Applause)Madam Speaker, his death brings to light a sacrifice made in the past as the Commander of the UPDF 501 Brigade in Gulu, where Col (Rtd) Charles Okello Engola played a pivotal role in containing the LRA and restoring peace in Northern Uganda. Madam Speaker, as we pay tribute to a fallen comrade, we are reminded of a similar sitting we had in the 10th Parliament – those of us who are here – following the gruesome murder of the late Hon. Ibrahim Abiriga and his bodyguard in June 2018. Today’s case might be a little different since the bodyguard who, allegedly assassinated the honourable colleague, also took his own life immediately. The invitation I am making, Madam Speaker, to this august House is that we should not have closed our minds to the various murders of ordinary and high-profile Ugandans such as the late Joan Kagezi, AIGP Andrew Felix Kaweesi and several Muslim clerics, among others, that we have witnessed since 2016. Madam Speaker, two days after Hon. Okello’s gruesome murder, another Ugandan, Ibrahim Tusubira – Jajja Iculi,  like you have mentioned and observed ably – was gunned down within the same neighbourhood of the fallen minister.Madam Speaker, allow me to draw the attention of this House back to the address of the President that he delivered on 20 June 2019, in which he outlined a nine-point strategy intended to deal with and defeat insecurity in the country. I will particularly single out his directive to install security cameras across the country – and the fingerprinting of all legal arms in the country.8552TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. COL (RTD) CHARLES OKELLO-ENGOLAMadam Speaker, the directives were followed with a supplementary budget allocation of more than Shs 376 billion. Unfortunately, the killings did not stop – and they have not stopped – nor have the cameras been effective in detecting the criminals, which explains why the State has not yet succeeded in prosecuting any of the cases in court. Madam Speaker, strangely, even cases that have happened under the cameras – like that of February 2020, when a police truck deliberately knocked dead Ritah Nabukenya – were not captured. Are these real cameras or dummies?Madam Speaker, the police have returned with another request of Shs 187 billion – for the next financial year – to buy more of these multifunctional cameras. Madam Speaker, we are only lucky that the gunman who took our honourable colleague’s life killed himself. Had he disappeared, the investigating officers would be feeding the country on a litany of explanations, like they do when asked about the extent of investigations into the previous killings and the main 2021 assassination plot against Gen. Katumba Wamala, the Minister of Works and Transport.One wonders if all guns were fingerprinted, as indicated by the security budget requests, whose gun is being used to kill Ugandans? Whose gun was used to kill Ichuli? We at least know whose gun killed our honourable colleague, which is very sad. Madam Speaker, by now, we begin to make sense of the circumstances and events surrounding the gruesome murder of the Hon. Col (Rtd) Charles Engola, with the hope that we can find answers, over time, to some of the unexplained murders in this country. First, the death of Hon. Col (Rtd) Charles Engola could have been preventable if it is held that prior to his transfer to the minister’s security detail, Pte Sabiiti was Captain Mike Mukula’s bodyguard. However, Captain Mukula raised the red flag to the deploying authorities on all his questionable behaviour, behavioural disposition and temperament, causing his withdrawal. It is quite disturbing that an officer with a questionable character was redeployed before full rehabilitation. (Applause)Madam Speaker, these are confessions from his commanders; he had a questionable and chequered disciplinary record, and what they could do is redeploy him to a very sensitive leader in this country. It is not that any Ugandan is any less important, but that deployment is questionable and probably a point of investigation. (Applause)Ironically, the death of our colleague and his bodyguard occurred in the month of May, in which we celebrate International Labour Day. The month is also internationally dedicated to mental health awareness. It is, therefore, a clarion call upon us to rise to the occasion and evoke our mandate to the two, sometimes neglected issues now at stake, by way of applying our tools of legislation.Madam Speaker, there has been talk of unpleasant remuneration on the part of the erring bodyguard. We do not seek to justify his conduct and decision in any way. We think it is time to dust the debate on the minimum wage, which has sprawled on the fence for a long time. Uganda is ranked among the top six countries in Africa with rates of depressive and anxiety disorders. According to statistics from the World Health Organisation, close to 20 per cent – that is about 6.8 million Ugandans, out of the 42 million people in Uganda – have some degree of mental illness, ranging from anxiety and depression to severe mental illness. This should be a wake-up call to the Government to scale up investment in mental health and subsequently increase access to mental health services. (Applause)  Our armed forces are extremely vulnerable. They are never at rest. If not in Somalia, they are in the Congo. If not in Congo, they are in South Sudan. If not there, they are in the Economic Community Cease-Fire Monitoring [Mr Mpuuga]8553THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 MAY 2023Group (ECOMOG). If not there, they are on the street beating voters and Ugandans. Where are the UPDF rehabilitation centres for these officers and men?Madam Speaker, as I conclude, the murder of a brother, Hon. Col (Rtd) Charles Engola calls for a candid conversation on the quality of inquest in this country, with many unanswered questions that ought to be exhaustively interrogated here. It is time we invoked the Inquest Act for this and many unsolved murders and deaths that have occurred over the years. The police should, this time around and for once, surprise the nation with a conclusive and believable report on the murder of our colleague. It is not enough to say that we know the killer; no, that is not a report. So, we need a believable report this time around, as a surprise from the police. (Applause)This unfortunate death should also remind the nation of one of the unresolved challenges of our armed forces since independence; namely, who is recruited? What is the mode of recruitment? What is the mode of training and deployment? This House has processed citizens’ complaints relating to biased recruitment in both the Police and UPDF. Probably, some of the men and women in uniform shooting people do not deserve our uniform. (Applause)  You have heard the concept of “receive and train” in the armed forces. People with questionable, uncheckered history, because they are sent with a chit of paper, are recruited. This information has been here on the Floor; we must take concern. Finally, to some of the citizens, the manner of recruitment of these men and women in uniform makes them believe that they pay allegiance to those who recommend them, not the flag. This is the time to rethink and address this serious gap that has served to undermine the quality of our armed forces.Madam Speaker, I would like to again send my sympathies to the family and encourage you; your father has not died in vain; he has played his part. (Applause)  May the soul of our departed colleague rest in eternity. I beg to move. THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, Leader of the Opposition. When we talk about mental health, Hon. Macho and Hon. Solomon Silwany have always spoken about this. We would not mind if you started with us in Parliament. Can we hear from the Dean of independents, Hon. Zijjan? 3.15MR DA VID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to second the Motion for a Resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Hon. Col (Rtd) Okello Charles Patrick Engola Macodwogo, for his dedicated and patriotic service to the Republic of Uganda. Today, we celebrate the life of a man who lived for more than just himself or his immediate family. We celebrate a man whose life was about the triumph of those who would have been triumphed over and trumped upon.Macodwogo, the fire has come back. He was given this name, which he also adopted, because it gave him joy and satisfaction to see women back into their homes, lighting fires to cook for their families after the war. (Applause)This should be the essence of living; to make the world a better place to be. If the coward had lived by the same principle, Macodwogo would still be here with us. Macodwogo would not be in a casket right now, but because the man who pulled the trigger on him did not live for making the world a better place, we are here today in this situation. The lesson we can draw from his life and dedication is that we should always aspire to live for more than just ourselves. May his soul rest in eternal peace.8554TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. COL (RTD) CHARLES OKELLO-ENGOLA3.18THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty  Amongi ): Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, on Tuesday 2 May 2023, we lost Hon Col(Rtd) Okello-Engola Macodwogo, Member of Parliament for Oyam North, who was also the Minister of State for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development (Labour, Employment and Industrial Relations). The sad news came unexpectedly, especially since the day before, he had organised and supervised the celebration of the International Labour Day held in Namutumba District. Many of you saw how active and humble he was; he even walked in the rain to go and make his speech. Prior to Labour Day, he had notified us in top management that he would be wedding in June. He had asked all of us to preserve that month for his wedding. The widow and the family - especially the widow - will not see this day that her husband had planned for her. Your sadness and sorrow are nothing compared to the pain and agony that visited you that Tuesday morning, when we arrived to see the minister lying dead in the compound. I have known Hon. Okello-Engola Macodwogo as a Member of Parliament because we share the district; I am the Member of Parliament for Oyam South and he was the Member of Parliament for Oyam North. However, I got to know him when I was the Woman Member of Parliament for Apac District in 2001. At the time, he was based in Opit Barracks. I had Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) in my constituency and required that I constantly visit the IDP camps. Opit, where he was, was a stone throw away from my subcounty, Minakulu. That is why in his statement, H.E the President, mentioned Minakulu. As a serving Member of Parliament from the area at the time, the minister in charge of disaster preparedness was Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere, who requested me to support him in closing the IDP camps. When we toured Oyam to close the IDP camps, Hon. Prof Tarsis Kabwegyere recognised the then commandant of 501 Command Post for the job well done and that was Hon. Okello-Engola, with whom we worked together with the Professor to close the IDP camps.Subsequently, he won the name Macodwogo; he had to swear an affidavit to include it in his name because it was an appreciation for the people of Oyam for the work he did to ensure that we return back from the IDP camps. He then developed interest to contest for an elective position, but because of his good work, he did not want to accept. It was his brother, Hon. Sam Engola, who is seated there, who came and negotiated for his promotion and retirement from the Army for him to contest as the LC 5 Chairman, Apac District. When he contested, he won with 93 per cent.He was then appointed after serving two terms of serving in Parliament; he was appointed the Minister of State for Defence and Veteran Affairs. In this term, he was appointed the minister of state in our ministry. During his tenure as the Minister of State in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, he was in charge of negotiations, engagements and implementation of labour issues emanating from IGAD, the East African Community, the African Union and the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation. We already have a minister from Kenya who is arriving shortly to pay tribute to him because they have been working on these matters together. He was overseeing inspections of workplaces for compliance with safety and occupational health issues. He had toured so many areas; he had inspected almost all plantations in the country and very many factories.He was coordinating ministerial involvement with the Industrial Court because it is the one that deals with labour matters. He was supervising the pursuit of compensation claims and labour disputes. Many people get complaints about labour issues and they require compensation. He was handling those disputes almost every day. Most times, the employers wanted to pay 8555THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 MAY 2023less compensation and the matters would come to the minister and he had to negotiate for a better settlement.He was also exploring and negotiating new opportunities for employment for migrant workers abroad. He had sat with the association of migrant workers and others to look at the market in Europe. His major issue was whether we could go to Turkey, Canada and Korea. He majorly insisted on how we could negotiate for a skilled workforce from Uganda to abroad. He detested the employment of housemaids abroad; he did not support it in all our top management meetings. He worked in the ministry with passion, but his passion for military service and peace did not leave him. Just recently, when the insurgence of the Karamajongs started, before his death, he came to my office and sought clearance to join Hon. Gen. David Muhoozi, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, so that they could engage in meetings in Acholi and Lango to see how to end the insurgency in Karamoja. They had made a date to tour this place. You can see that he passionately wanted peace. Honourable members, the late Okello-Engola was not a coward. Like many other fearless youths of this time, he sacrificed and joined the army in the 1980s. He was part of a bigger force that supported the Lango Members of Parliament and communities during the insurgency. When we were negotiating with Government to recruit an alternative force called “Amuka”, he came out as a UPDF soldier and supported us. He moved with us and we recruited Amuka into supporting the UPDF to fight and end the war. He was an accomplished soldier in the fullest sense of the word. He did everything to ensure that Northern Uganda regains its status as a peaceful region, but more importantly, he dedicated his entire life to public service. May his soul, memory, conviction and actions shine a light on our path. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you. (Applause)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Hon. Betty. Can we have the UPDF representative?  3.27LT GEN. JAMES MUGIRA (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, for the record, I am one of the representatives of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces which is the other family of the late Col (Rtd)  Charles Okello Patrick Engola.  I rise to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to my friend, my boss, and comrade in arms in the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and Uganda People’s Defence Forces, the late Hon. Charles Okello Patrick Engola, who lost his life in a cold-blooded murder at the hands of his supposed protector/defender and breathed his last on Tuesday, 2 May 2023.I extend our deepest condolences from the UPDF fraternity to the believed family, friends, Members of Parliament, Cabinet ministers and His Excellency the President on the untimely death of Col (Rtd) Charles Engola. As UPDF, we are mourning and paying a glowing tribute to one of us; a brave soldier who joined the military in 1979 according to the army records at the age of 21, and rose through the ranks from private to full colonel at the time of retirement in 2005, after 26 years of distinguished service to the motherland. (Applause)Madam Speaker, we are celebrating the life of a professional officer who undertook various military courses including Officer’s Basic Course in 1992, Radio Systems Course in 1998, and the Battalion Commanders Course in 2005.We are paying tribute to a courageous, decisive, committed and accomplished artillery commander who fought and won major battles against the Sudan-backed Joseph Kony leader of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). He is remembered notably, for the capture of Kaya Town in the then Sudan during an operation code-named Mwisho No.1 and the capture of 8556TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. COL (RTD) CHARLES OKELLO-ENGOLAa number of enemy strongholds in Sudan of Magwi, Tingri, Kiti Junction, Alu Camp, up to Jabulain during Operation Mwisho No.2, where he was commanding 100 Millimeter Artillery under the overall command of Gen. Katumba Wamala. (Applause)  We are paying tribute to an officer who played a big role during Operation Safe Haven in the Democratic Republic of Congo. He was the field commander of all the UPDF Artillery and Air Defence units involved in defensive-offensive operations inside Congo against the Allied Democratic Forces terrorist group which had wreaked havoc in our country, including the Kichwamba massacres and a series of improvised explosive device bombings in Kampala City. (Applause)We are paying tribute to a variant commander who played a prominent role during the counter-insurgency operations in Northern Uganda, in Minakulu area and as a brigade Commander of the Opit-based 501-Brigade, which earned him the praise name Macodwogo; meaning fire is back.The late Col (Rtd) Okello Engola contributed immensely to breaking the back of the LRA in the area which in turn created a conducive environment that enabled the Wanainchi  in the internally displaced camps to return home and resume their normal activities. Macodwogo became a household name in the Lango region and it is synonymous with the return of peace and security in the area. (Applause)Therefore, in the UPDF, we salute his efforts and invaluable contribution to ending the LRA mayhem in Northern Uganda and for contributing to the bringing of peace, security and stability currently enjoyed in the region.Madam Speaker, the late Col (Rtd) Okello Engola was a true patriot who always had his country and community at heart. In the military, we are men and women of action. We believe more in motivational actions than motivational speaking. Macodwogo was a man with few words but was extremely pragmatic and exercised hands-on leadership. (Applause) He was also a very good political mobiliser as evidenced by the massive support he received. Upon retiring from the army, he contested and was voted massively as the LC V Chairperson and later Member of Parliament for Oyam North County. He was determined to free his people from poverty and worked towards improving their standards of living.At a personal level, the late Col (Rtd) Engola and I were decorated on the same day, 18 years ago in October 2005 to the rank of colonel. When he was appointed as the Minister of State for Defence and Veteran Affairs, I used to interact with him closely in his office and during our travels abroad to attain national military and defence exhibitions, we would have close constructive discussions. In fact, less than a month before his assassination, we did share a table and a drink at a social function here in Kampala.Before I take leave, let me seize the occasion to briefly say three things. One is to join you in condemning in the strongest terms the insensitive, merciless, provocative silly jokes on social media - (Applause) - celebrating and making fun of the circumstances surrounding the tragic death, in cold blood, of our deceased comrade at the hands of his bodyguard. This callous, uncultured behaviour no doubt runs counter to our time-honoured and cherished African culture and values of humanity; the Ubuntu . (Applause)His family members, friends and the entire nation is still in grief and mourning the passing of this great son of Uganda. So, please those responsible out there, at least spare the family to first mourn their loved one.Two, the circumstances surrounding his death have been reduced by some people to salary and welfare issues of soldiers, domestic workers, maids, chefs, gatekeepers, etc., as you have seen on social media. Whereas this could be the first such assassination case in Uganda, it is certainly not the first in the world. We have heard of assassinations even of most senior people by their own guards. For example, President Laurent Kabila of Democratic [Lt Gen. Mugira]8557THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 MAY 2023Republic of Congo, Premier Indira Gandhi of India, President Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke of Somalia and President Anwar Sadat of Egypt who was assassinated by his soldiers during the victory parade among others. Speaking of the UPDF, I want to state without any fear of contradiction that the UPDF and its forerunner, the National Resistance Army (NRA), which I have now served for almost 40 years has never been a mercenary force. Our service to our motherland has always been out of patriotism and ideological conviction. Ours has been sacrifice, through and through, so that our country becomes peaceful, secure and stable. (Applause)  Madam Speaker, this is the reason Uganda is an island of peace in a volatile region. So, the assassination of the minister cannot just be reduced to an issue of low salary and allowances. This is indiscipline. Yes, there could have been issues but those issues can be addressed but, please, let us not sow seeds of anarchy, hatred, fear and animosity – where even we, Members of Parliament, would fear to go back to our homes because of our maids, askaris  and chefs. (Laughter)Finally, in the military, we do not speculate. That is why before any military operation, we carry out reconnaissance on the enemy to establish the enemy’s exact strength in terms of personnel and equipment, locations and intentions, etc. I, therefore, enjoin and beseech Ugandans to stop speculation. An official body of inquiry has been set up; let us wait for its findings. As I conclude, let me, once again, extend our deepest and heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family. The “gentle giant” has gone to sleep. Let him sleep peacefully. May the Almighty God rest his soul in eternal peace. Thank you. (Applause)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, as we open the debate to pay tribute to the fearless Ugandan, an honest person, gallant soldier of the land and peace lover who made sacrifices for our country, I would like us to be mindful, as Members of Parliament, that yesterday – or the other day – Hon.  Charles Okello Engola was seated where you are seated and was like you. Tomorrow, we are going to be like him. I would like us to debate with dignity and respect to the dead and the family. I plead with you not to say anything that may hurt the family in any way. I now open the debate as we pay tribute to our late colleague who contributed a lot to this country. Let us start with the Vice-President.3.39THE VICE-PRESIDENT (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo):  Madam Speaker, let me join colleagues to support the motion moved by the Prime Minister to pay glowing tribute to our brother, Col (Rtd) Charles Okello Engola.Madam Speaker, allow me, on my behalf, on behalf of my family, on behalf of the people of Katakwi District and the Government to extend sincere condolences and sympathies to the bereaved family of the late Hon. Okello Engola. I knew Hon. Okello Engola between 2011 and 2016 when I travelled to Lango Subregion to do some work with the then minister for northern Uganda, Hon. Rebecca Amuge Otengo, who is now Uganda’s Ambassador to Ethiopia.Madam Speaker, I can state, briefly, that Hon. Okello Engola, as a politician, strived to accomplish the set targets and tasks within the specified time-frame when he was in office. I realised that when I visited his district and we worked from nine o’clock in the morning up to 11 o’clock in the night. He was very resilient and wanted to continue with the programme, but we requested to continue the next day. So, Hon. Okello Engola served his country diligently and in a dedicated manner.Secondly, as a trained soldier or officer of the UPDF, he defended the interests of his country. In so doing, he demonstrated the true professionalism of the UPDF, earning him the 8558TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. COL (RTD) CHARLES OKELLO-ENGOLAnickname “Macodwogo”, which I also learnt about between 2011 and 2016, when I visited Lango to do some piece of work.As a Member of Parliament – you may also bear me witness, especially as an NRM Member of Parliament – he was always conscious of his responsibility to serve his constituents and, indeed, Uganda, keeping in mind that the implementation of the NRM manifesto was on track. That is what made him a great NRM mobiliser. Finally, as a member of the Cabinet, he was always on time and, during the Cabinet meetings, he would always speak frankly, though briefly, and the message which he would communicate during the discussion would add value to the subject matter under discussion. He had zeal in the fight against corruption.May the soul of the departed Col (Rtd) Okello Engola rest in eternal peace and may the Lord sustain the bereaved. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Your Excellency the Vice-President.  Hon. Mao?3.44THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CON -STITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Norbert Mao): Madam Speaker, forgive me for being too militant in drawing your attention – THE SPEAKER:  Meanwhile, we missed you; we wanted you to lay the wreath for DP. (Laughter)  MR MAO:  Madam Speaker, DP is a very big party and has very many leaders. I thank you for allowing our whip to represent all of us. Madam Speaker, in paying tribute to the late Hon. Col (Rtd) Charles Okello Engola Macodwogo, let us not lose sight of his chosen calling – that of a soldier. A soldier stands between the enemy and the people he or she has sworn to protect. A soldier stays awake in order that the people may sleep. A soldier risks death in order that the people may live. To keep the peace, a soldier goes to war. Our fallen colleague was a true soldier in the true sense of the word. Come with me to the stretch between Karuma Falls Bridge – that gateway to northern Uganda. The LRA was very active between that area and the border with Sudan. That area witnessed long lines of vehicles of all types, slowly driving north, with armoured vehicles at the front and rear of the convoy – some others in the middle, protecting –(Inaudible) - Columns of soldiers marched on foot on either side of the convoy. The professionals tell me that they were marching at a distance of at least 400 metres, which is said to be the effective range of a rifle, putting themselves between the rebels and the people.The LRA had put a ban on anyone lighting a fire; the penalty for lighting a fire was death. Our fallen colleague took it upon himself to effectively defy the cruel order of the rebels. He mounted several operations, which pushed the rebels away from that area. He then announced that the ban on fire was over and people were free to light fire again and stop eating raw food. People then gave him, what in Luo, is called “ Nyingi pac ”; a praise name, “Macodwogo” meaning, “Fire has returned.”To the family, we are not here to pity you but to comfort you. Even as we do so, we know how difficult it is for our feeble words to comfort you. This is more so because the absence of your now departed loved one, will be a constant reminder of the happiness you shared while he lived. Remember that we are not merely here to say, “Sorry for your loss.” We are here to say, “We share your loss” for Hon. Okello Engola had transcended the boundary of his family and his community. He belonged to the wider family we all call “Uganda”. He never once dishonoured his uniform. Madam Speaker, it is not only Pte Sabiiti who dishonoured his uniform. Anybody in uniform, whether police, prisons or UPDF who acts outside the law, and unleashes excessive violence on unarmed civilian, dishonours the UPDF uniform. You do not have to kill a [Maj. (Rtd) Alupo]8559THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 MAY 2023Ugandan to dishonour the uniform. That was rather extreme but let it be said that it is today that we must express our high expectations of our armed forces. In closing, Madam Speaker, I call for a national reflection on the hate-mongering that dominates public discourse, especially when a prominent public servant dies. There are those who have decided to specialise in lighting fires of discontent in the populace. It is up to us to distil the torrents of venomous outbursts and discern what lies underneath. It is our responsibility to understand that for every effect, there is a cause. Responsibility means the ability to respond. It is our collective duty as leaders to respond to the outrage being expressed whenever the reasonable expectations of the people are ignored. I call for humility like the one that Hon. Okello Engola expressed. You have heard the praise his colleagues have given him. Some of us even with little achievements climb the tallest tree to extol our own achievements. I never once heard Hon. Okello Engola praise himself but you have heard, for the first time, how he fought in Congo and Sudan making our army proud. (Applause)I call for civility; we need a new culture of civilised discourse and that must be expressed above all here; the people’s House because it is here where the sovereignty of the people is expressed. I listened to a tape recording with the voice of the late Brig. Noble Mayombo, who gave the UPDF its name in the Constituency Assembly. He said that the mission of the UPDF is to defend the people. He called it “forces” to allow for its expansion. I also call upon the UPDF and all other sister forces to reflect upon their mission. Madam Speaker, our role is state building. This is not a partisan task. It demands the joining of hands and that we talk and listen to each other. This country is hurting; we need to repent to those we have wronged and forgive those who have wronged us. Only true reconciliation can secure our collective future. We are all in the same boat as Ugandans. You may think that you have a plan B but there is no country B. There is no safe room in a burning house. Let us keep Uganda safe from any fire. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, Hon. Nobert Mao. Yes, “Arrow Boy”?3.51THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru):  Thank you, Madam Speaker –THE SPEAKER:  I call him “Arrow Boy” because whereas the late Hon. Col (Rtd) Charles Engola was busy with Amuka , Hon. Ecweru was with the “Arrow” Boys in Teso.MR ECWERU:  Madam Speaker, I am privileged to say a few positive things about my very close friend, the late Okello Engola before we finally say “bye” to him. From the onset, just to add to what Hon. Mao has said to the country, that death belongs to all of us. To celebrate the death of a person even if you do not agree with them, in our humble position, is to invite a curse unto your family and people. I am happy that, much as this callous soldier cut Hon. Macodwogo’s life short, there are no more camps in Oyam District – (Applause) – and there are no more convoys from Corner Kamdini to Gulu. There are also no more convoys from Karuma Bridge to Pakwach. Madam Speaker, the Langi, Acholi – the people of Northern Uganda – have now joined the rest of Uganda in fending for their lives as normal peaceful citizens. The role Hon. Okello Macodwogo played was very critical in making this happen. I think Hon. Mao had read my mind, but even after doing all those big things enumerated by 8560TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. COL (RTD) CHARLES OKELLO-ENGOLAcolleagues, he was very humble. Let me say this today to you, senior ministers: You are senior; we are ministers of state – (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER:  Switch on the microphone and repeat that you salute them. (Laughter)MR ECWERU:  Senior ministers, we salute you because you are our seniors. Hon. Okello knew that he had done all he had for this country. However, he knew that he was a minister of state and continued to respect those who are senior to him. This must be a lesson to all of us. May his soul rest in eternal peace.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Hon. Musa Ecweru. Honourable members, you are all going to speak; we are going to reduce the time though.3.55THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (COOPERATIVES)  (Mr Fredrick Gume):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the rest of my colleagues in paying tribute to our fallen comrade but I will limit my submission to a few areas. Madam Speaker, I first met the late Col (Rtd) Engola Okello Macodwogo 12 years ago when we were both district chairpersons. He was the district chairperson of Oyam while I was the district chairperson of Jinja. While I was elected the President of the Local Governments Association of Uganda, he was elected the vice-president representing the northern region. We served the local governments. He had a lot of passion and commitment. He had a lot of time for his people. He committed a lot of time and resources to ensure Uganda, under the local government fraternity, took over the chair and presidency of the East African Local Governments Association. We later met in the 10th Parliament and we were both appointed ministers. In the first term, he persisted and invited me to his constituency, Oyam North, to preside over the annual general meeting of the Oyam North Women Farmers’ Cooperative Society. I found him at his home, we toured his farm and we had lunch together before –(Member timed out.) THE SPEAKER:  Conclude. MR GUME:  Madam Speaker, he was a generous man and he loved his people. On that particular day, he contributed Shs 10 million to the cooperatives of his constituency.Before his demise, he had again programmed a visit together with me to his constituency to organise fish farmers into a cooperative society. Comrades, death comes for all of us. I bid thee, comrade Charles, farewell. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Kania? Ministers, I will come to all of you; do not worry. Two minutes for each Member.3.58THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, I stand to pay tribute to a friend and extend my condolences to the family.My first experience with the late Hon. Engola was around 2003, when we had gone with a team of the late George Abola, the late Kenneth Latigo Olal and Hon. Matia Kasaija from the then Movement Secretariat to try and pacify that area around Opit. We were ambushed by the Lord’s Resistance Army rebels. However, the commanding officer came with the forces and saved us very late in the evening. Later on, we learnt that it was Charles Engola. That was my first experience. I should say that I am alive today because of that man. (Applause)When I was appointed to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, I gained a lot from his experience when he was the Minister of State for Defence and Veteran Affairs. He perfected my rudimentary skills of a rebel in the Uganda National Rescue Front I and he made me perform in some of the [Mr Ecweru]8561THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 MAY 2023areas where probably I would not have been. Therefore, I really thank God for his life. My message finally to the family is that death comes to everybody. You have a great opportunity to live from the good examples of Hon. Charles; those are your assets. Use them and make sure that you use his name to the best of his fame. May his soul rest in eternal peace. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Charles Engola has left a legacy.4.01THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (BUNYORO AFFAIRS) (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to join honourable colleagues to pay tribute to a gallant son of Africa and son of Uganda.In 2007, when I served as the Minister of State for Water and Environment, as a country, we had a challenge of providing services to the returning population from the internally displaced persons’ (IDPs) camps. I went to northern Uganda and when I was in Apac District, I came across the LC V Chairman, who gave me a strategy on the most efficient and effective way of providing safe water to the returning population; that was Col Charles Engola.We used that strategy in the entire north. Col Engola was a gentleman and he was not proud at all. At that time, I did not even know that he was a soldier but he gave me the strategy and supported me. I really want to salute him.Madam Speaker, we have served with Col Engola in Cabinet and he was a very humble minister. I just want to confirm, as I conclude, that it is true that the murderers have no place in Heaven. This is clearly stated in Proverbs 6:16; murderers have no space in the Kingdom of God; so is I Corinthians 6:9-11.I salute our brother, and may God sustain the bereaved family. Thank you for the opportunity, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  I was told that you start with the Cabinet minister and then the state minister follows. That is what the “Arrow Boy” said. 4.04THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion as we mourn our friend.I was one of those who rushed to his home together with the Minister of Health and a few other ministers, when we heard the sad news of his shooting. You could not believe that Macodwogo was lying in a pool of blood just in front of his house in Kyanja.On behalf of the people of Kinkizi and Kanungu District, I convey our sympathies and condolences to the family and pray that God comforts you in this trying moment.We condemn in the highest terms possible all those who think they can put down others through a gun. We hope the investigators will get to the root of the matter - what motivated this soldier to just shoot an innocent minister. We are told that they had been together for barely a month. So, what could have motivated this? Even when we belong to different political persuasions, we should be able to engage each other and the solution should not be one thinking of killing the other. We have many things we could talk about Macodwogo; I came in touch with him for the first time when I led the Committee on HIV/AIDS of Parliament to assess the impact of the war in northern Uganda. He was the chairperson of Oyam District and he gave us a lot - he was a very amiable and receptive man. We shall dearly miss him. We pray that the good Lord receives him and gives him a comfortable seat in Heaven. May his soul rest in eternal peace. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Peace? Honourable members, I am coming to you shortly.8562TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. COL (RTD) CHARLES OKELLO-ENGOLA4.06THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Peace Mutuuzo): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion in paying tribute to our fallen brother.As a colleague, whom he worked with in the same ministry, on his first appointment and deployment in the Ministry of Gender, for about two months, he would refer to me everything that was unstable. I asked his people why he sent me everything, when he was in office. So I went and visited him but when I reached to his office, he told me; “I must first understand what I want to do.” I said, “In the Ministry of Gender, you hit the ground running because it is an empire; it touches everybody’s life. So, you have to be everywhere”. He said, “I insist, I am a trained soldier; I must understand my docket before I do anything.” Secondly, he had a very strong passion about the young girls who work in the Arab states. He wanted to ensure it was done within his time. Truly, at least in the last two years - there could be some girls in distress - but at least the numbers and complaints have reduced because of the commitment he put up to ensure some of the regulations - and he moved there several times to work on the bilateral agreements with the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Thirdly, through his profile, you could read that he tried to improve himself. He went to school at a later age to do his degree and masters. Madam Speaker, this is a very strong attribute of people who attach more importance to education. In the last six months of his life, he did everything for his family. He invited us for a wedding of his daughter. He attended almost all the birthdays of his grandchildren. Therefore, I would like to request the family to live the legacy he left. Please keep together, keep united, keep strong and firm. May God rest his soul in eternal peace. 4.09THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Victoria Rusoke):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I first knew the family through the brother seated here, when I invited him to Kabarole in the Ninth Parliament. Unfortunately, on that very day, they lost their mother, so he could not come. When we met in Cabinet, I asked him: “Could you be the brother to Sam Engola?” He said, “Yes.” I said, “From today, you are my brother, because your brother is so close to me.” It was very unfortunate that when I invited him, he lost his dear mother. The lessons I have learnt from the character of the late is that it costs nothing to be polite, humble and mix with people. I would like to thank the wife of the late. When I went to mourn with them, she was very passionate and said, “I will hold the candle of my husband and keep it burning.” I think that is a very strong statement; so practically make it happen. I would like to thank the children - at least I communicated to two of them. One of them told me that the late was not his biological father but he was he was still a father, because he played all the roles his biological father could have done. I think it is very rare to get such a testimony. He did everything he could do within his ability. He served the nation, his people and colleagues; so there is nothing more to do than to pray for him. To the family, please keep his candle burning. On behalf of the people of Kabarole where the victim comes from, I would like to tell you those people are mourning with us. It is unfortunate that only one person did something wrong, but the whole district and kingdom is mourning with us all. May the soul of our brother rest in eternal peace.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Just as what was said, we need to know the cause. There should be a reason as to why Sabiiti did that. We need to go in depth and understand why he did it. Since he also died while still a serving officer, the army must take care of his family.8563THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 MAY 20234.12THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I second the motion to pay tribute to the gallant son of Uganda, Col (Rtd) Okello Engola. We condole with the family and with you, Madam Speaker and the Government, for this great loss. Hon. Engola has been spoken of as a humble man, a fearless man and a very committed man in whatever he did. In the Cabinet, I sat just next to him and he was very critical about his submission. We are all in shock because his death is not a normal occurrence. Honourable members, naturally, we are all scared in one way or another because it is not a normal occurrence. Madam Speaker, as you said, this should be a lesson to all of us. Today, it could be him seated here, tomorrow it could be any of us. This is why we are speaking with one voice that = we should get to the root cause. What motivated this young officer? A bodyguard is friend; a person who swears to die on your behalf. Yet, for him, he turned the trigger - at least in our time in Uganda, it has not been very common. Maybe this should draw our attention, as Government, to intensify the recruitment process, the training and improve the relationship and manage the expectations.Sometimes, you apply for a job but the expectations and demands go beyond what you had originally envisaged and this ends up drawing mixed feelings. Therefore, we need to come up with a more specialised training. There could be doctors trained for surgery but they should not undertake the same training like others who would do other undertakings.Lastly, I want to speak about the welfare of the children of the late and the family. We should look very critically at it. As Government, we shall do our part. I would like to draw the attention of the House to our motto which is “For God and my Country”. We must learn to forgive. Charles has rested but the family is in pain. Private Sabiiti did the unthinkable, but his children are not part of this. Therefore, for the sake of harmony in this country, we should consider the children of Private Sabiiti so that their future is not doomed.As we look towards our brother Charles’ family, for the sake of reconciliation, I pray Joyce and the children forgive that young man so the soul of Charles rests in eternal peace.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, in the Public Gallery, we have;• Hon. Francis Mukula, a former Member of Parliament. (Applause)• Hon. Jacqueline Amongin, Member of EALA. (Applause)• Hon. Gerald Siranda, Member of EALA. (Applause)They are here to witness the proceedings. Let us hear from the ministers in charge of internal affairs, agriculture, foreign affairs, Hon. Hellen, Hon. Grace – Honourable members, I am going to give you time to speak.4.17THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi):  Madam Speaker, I support the motion by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and also extend my sympathies and condolences to the family, the people of Oyam and the Government for the loss of our dear friend at the hands of a rogue guard.I was privileged to serve with Hon. Charles as a soldier and comrade in the UPDF, as a state minister at my last duty station in defence and as a colleague minister in the Government. So, it is a personal loss. I think his service in the UPDF has been well spoken to by Gen. Mugira – as a frontline commander, artillery officer and other assignments, both here and abroad. I will speak mostly to his lighter side, the recent one being work-related, where I was tasked with him and Hon. Bright to go and 8564TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. COL (RTD) CHARLES OKELLO-ENGOLAhandle the Balaalo  issue in the north. In one of the engagements with the population – he was always our bridgehead. We had the Balaalo  and the people of the area. They looked at the Balaalo, looked and at us and started grumbling. (Laughter)  We asked him: “What is it?” He said: “They think you are like those people.” (Laughter)  Thanks to his diplomatic credentials, he calmed them down and we had a very good interaction. So, that was his other side of being a peacemaker and I salute him for that. I also had the privilege, later, of being hosted by him and his wife at his home in Oyam, where he told me about his childhood; how he survived Idi Amin with his father. It was quite a telling and deep engagement.On the comments by the honourable colleague and my dear friend, the Leader of the Opposition, I want to share the sentiments of Gen. Mugira: Can we, for now, avoid speculations until we conclude the investigations. (Applause)I want also to allay the fears of the House about the measures outlined by the President, including the installation of the CCTV cameras and the fingerprinting of the guns. There has been impact and we shall account to this House. Do not despair; we actually want more support to do phase three of the CCTV cameras to cover the gaps in phase one and phase two.Lastly, life is invaluable, more so the life of such an exceptional human being as Hon. Charles, and there is no excuse whatsoever for taking life unlawfully. That is the reason why – I think Sabiiti knew what would befall him and had to take his own life. The discipline of the UPDF is known and tested. May the soul of Hon. Charles rest in eternal peace. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Minister of State for Internal Affairs. I wonder whether Sabiiti was still in his normal senses at that time. Based on what has been said, we will need an account of the cameras before we give more money because the cameras will help us in investigations. (Applause)Minister in charge of agriculture?4.21THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I send condolences to the Commander-in-Chief, you, Madam Speaker, the family, the people of northern Uganda and the entire country. I knew the late Hon. Okello Engola during my time in the UPDF. I also interacted with him when he was the chairman LC V and we also had a social relationship. My daughter was getting married to Oyam – in Acaba – and I had to find out where my daughter was going. Hon. Charles Okello Engola showed me the way. I went with Hon. Santa – and his wife prepared a meal for us. At that time, I said: “But, we are going to eat and we are eating here.” He said: “We, soldiers, first eat what we find. There, you never know.” All I want to confirm is that Hon. Engola was a nationalist. He served his country and his contribution to the community is documented as perfectly made clear in the speech by Gen. Mugira, the Prime Minister and the people of Oyam.Hon. Charles Engola was a very simple person, but very purposeful. I worked with him in the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs as my colleague minister and our offices were very close to each other’s.I want to say a few things and one is that Hon. Charles Engola put his life between the enemy and the community. Unfortunately, he has died a very criminal and brutal death at the hands of a rogue bodyguard. I join the others who condemned some of the utterances, especially celebrating criminal acts. As citizens of this country, we should condemn [Gen. Muhoozi]8565THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 MAY 2023criminal acts across the board. We should put sanity in our politics, social media and print media. I would like to use this opportunity to implore the honourable colleagues that in the UPDF – especially in the history of NRM – we actually select people to join the army based on discipline from the villages. I would like to encourage you to not interfere with the recruitment of the army; let the army do its own thing. The army is not a rehabilitation centre. When we go to LCs in the village, recommend people who are upright so that we avoid scenarios of ruthless characters. To me, this is the first case in our history and it should be condemned. Lastly, I thank you, Madam Speaker, for providing the opportunity. I also thank the Prime Minister for moving the motion. I send my sympathies to the family –  (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER:  Switch it on.LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA:  … honour -able colleague Members of Parliament and the bereaved family. May the soul of our fallen comrade rest in perfect peace.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. We are aware that we recruit disciplined officers, but we need to continuously train them, continuously counsel them and continuously do due diligence on them. Yes, Minister of Foreign Affairs?4.26THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Henry Okello):  Madam Speaker, I stand here to support the motion that was presented here by our Prime Minister. I stand here in sadness for the loss of my brother, Col (Rtd) Charles Okello Engola.   I met Col (Rtd) Engola Macodwogo in 2001 when the rebel situation in northern Uganda was very bad, that each time one would try to go to Gulu or farther north, they had to wait at Karuma Bridge in order to be escorted across to wherever destination they were going. At that time, I paid no attention to who he was; just regarded him as any other UPDF officer. Much later, when he became the LC V Chairperson of Oyam District and I was in Government, we came to know each other better.A lot has been spoken about this man but when he came into Government, we came to realise that there are some similarities between us in terms of character. This was a very noble, humble, down-to-earth gentleman that you would never even imagine could quarrel or even kill a fly; he was a wonderful person.On many occasions – I say many occasions - people mistook him to be me and me to be him; Sam Engola to be me. All the time, there was confusion. (Laughter)  I do not know why. Order, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, of course, they would mistake you because of the size. (Laughter)MR ORYEM: Madam Speaker, one time we had a meeting at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs with diplomats to brief them on the situation in the DRC, when he was the Minister of State for Defence. While all the diplomats were congregated in the room, Minister Sam Engola walked in. They all stood up and started shaking his hands and welcoming him, thinking it was I. (Laughter)  To their surprise, he went and sat aside. When I came in five minutes later, all the diplomats were confused. (Laughter)  They all stood up again, looked at me and then looked at Charles Engola - I told them that I was the minister; he was just an imposter. (Laughter)  We became very close friends. I never called him “Charles”; I never called him “Okello”. I always referred to him as “Lango” and he called me “Acholi”. Sam Engola here; I never called him “Sam Engola”; he called me “Acholi” and I referred to him as “Lango”. We 8566TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. COL (RTD) CHARLES OKELLO-ENGOLAjust wanted to enjoy life; we just wanted life to be simple.We always, amongst ourselves, said; “Life is short; let us enjoy it and not make life complicated. We come from two different regions. There is no harm in calling me ‘Acholi’ and there is no harm in calling me ‘Lango’.” That is how we knew each other – “Lango, Acholi, Lango, Acholi.” He was a wonderful man. We have lost him; it is a shame. It is very sad for such a hero to die in the silliest and most stupid way. What a shame for him to have died this way. I wish the late Col Charles Engola had been killed and died at the battlefield; that would have been very noble. The manner in which he died and in which all our army generals seem to be dying is very sad. (Applause)   Army generals should be dying at the battlefield. Army generals should be fighting and dying there; then they are called “generals who fought battles”. However, if you see the history of our recent gallant sons who have died in Uganda, they have died in very strange situations; petty, unusual and very strange situations. Even the late Pierino Okoya, an Acholi Brigadier, was killed in 1971. I remember the death of Brig. Okoya very well. His wife was first shot. He came to see what was happening and was also shot dead. Brig. Okoya was an outstanding, brilliant World War II officer but he died in very difficult circumstances.Let us pray for our country. Whenever I meet the bishops and clergymen, I always say, “Let us pray for this country.” Let us also, as individuals, pray for this country. If you travel as much as I do, you will know that Uganda is the best country in the world. There is no other country like Uganda. (Applause ). Let us unite, love our country and pray for peace, and tranquility in this country. May his soul rest in eternal peace.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, he has said, “Enjoy your life for as long as you still live.” There is no room for hatred; no room for fights. Enjoy!4.32THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (DISABILITY AFFAIRS) (Ms Hellen Asamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I send my sincere condolences to the family upon the loss of a man who was great in this nation. I also send condolences to His Excellency, the President of Uganda, who used to send Hon. Engola on special assignments, which he executed in a very reasonable manner. Further, I send condolences to you, Madam Speaker and appreciate you, for supporting this family from the time this incident occurred.I got to know the late Engola in 2016, when I was a member of the Committee on Appointments. When he appeared after the interview, we got in touch and I told him, “Do you know that Sam Engola was my very good friend? I do not know whether you will also become my very good friend.” He asked me, “What type of friendship do you have?” (Laughter)  I told him whatever friendship you want to talk about but it is because Sam Engola studied at Madera Boys Primary School. Charles Engola told me that he had also studied in Soroti. So, I clicked with the family. Whenever he called on my phone - just two weeks ago - I think Sam Engola is a witness - they were together calling me. He then said, “This Sam Engola wants to talk to you when I am also here.” I asked, “What is happening to you brothers? You are fighting over a lame woman.” (Laughter)  These are the jokes we used to have. His brother is there. Anyhow, there was an appointment we wanted to make to clear something. Unfortunately, I have not even finished that assignment; we shall only conclude the issues with the people he brought to me. Madam Speaker, the late Charles Engola was a good friend. He was a brother –THE SPEAKER: Switch on the microphone.MS ASAMO: The late Engola was a very good advisor. Some of us were civilians, but [Mr Oryem]8567THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 MAY 2023he gave us a lot of tips on security. It is very unfortunate that he died by a gun. He would tell us that that even when we travel out, we needed to be careful which room they have booked for us. I would then tell him that I am a civilian. He would then say, “Do not joke with the position you have; it is a position that everybody envies.” I then told him, “Now, as you teach me security I will teach you issues of gender.” I told him, “Now, you are a soldier and have come to gender, allow us to teach you gender issues.”When his daughter was getting married, he said, “You know, I have one daughter. I feel pain for her to get married and I want you people to come home.” I told him, “My brother, I will not be able to attend the marriage ceremony but I will give you support.” He then said, “You people of the gender ministry, you must come for my wedding” and we had made that promise. Unfortunately, we shall be going to send him off. The wedding has not come to be. I even asked him what type of good soldier this is with one woman because we know soldiers – with due respect to the ones in the House - are usually – (Laughter) - this man was a Christian, Madam Speaker.  The late Hon. Engola liked jokes and whenever we were at the ministry, he would tell me, “You ‘Muteso’  look at the way you are moving.”  I would then respond, “You Langi man, look at the way you are looking at me” before we would start a meeting, and you would find us laughing.   Before he went for Labour Day, the Office of the Government Chief Whip called me and said that they were looking for somebody to present the statement. I called him -  he said he was supposed to go to Moroto. I think he had another assignment from His Excellency. He told me he was at the Uganda Media Centre and I told him to finish with the media centre and rush to Parliament. That day, we had an issue here and he was not able to come and present this statement. However, he came here and said, “My sister, I have to leave for Moroto.” I said, “No, go to the House and then travel to Moroto. After all, you have your ‘wiwi’,” and we laughed. He then told me that from Moroto, he was going to attend prayers in Ntungamo. From Ntungamo on a Sunday, he was going to Namutumba. This was a very hardworking man. Madam Speaker, whenever we used to have a caucus meeting in Entebbe, he would call me and tell me to take advantage of his lead car and we used to move together. This was a friend. We have missed a great man; a man who loved this country, his family and his constituency. Every time he was free, he was in Oyam. I remember when he was an LC V Chairman, one of our councillors was given the position of secretary for finance - Hon. Odongo Ali. This man loved everybody despite their status. May God rest your soul in peace until we meet, my brother. Thank you.4.37THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (NORTHERN  UGANDA) (Ms Grace Kwiyucwiny): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you for this opportunity. I send my condolences to His Excellency the President, the country, Parliament, northern Uganda and to the family. I recall that Hon. Macodwogo was a happy man, a gentleman, a calm person and took decisions in a cool manner.In 2000, when some rebel activity took place in Zombo, he asked me, “Why have you not told me? Why did you not let me know? I would have come to support and teach those people a lesson.” I did not know the origin of his name at that moment and that is when he told me how he earned it; how now we are free to move without convoys, like the Members before have already spoken. On a social level, he presided over my daughter’s wedding and I attended his introduction to his wife in Arua; he landed in a helicopter. I told him that Arua would never forget him and his wife would never leave him because of that. He laughed, but he was very happy all the time. 8568TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. COL (RTD) CHARLES OKELLO-ENGOLAI attended many social and official functions with him and we always joked because he would always dance to Lingala when he was happy. He would also dance to the Lango traditional dance. I would always tease him about the Lango dance because they would first sing and then dance to the beat of the drum, which now ignites your dancing. He would simply laugh; you would think he was too heavy to jump but he would jump high up to the excitement of the crowd and to the amusement of the public.I consulted him many times on the issues of northern Uganda, cattle compensation and the Balaalo  issue. At one moment, he said “There are people who are liars and you should not believe them.” He brought me a file of photographs and letters and he would show me the people. He would tell me of the people who had already been paid. After the sitting, I asked him for the file and he told me it was a secret, but if I had anything to consult on, he would be there for me.  At one of the first functions I had in Oyam, when he became a minister, we went together for his thanksgiving. At another time, I went for my own work and he had lunch for us in his home. That is when he told me that he was also a medicine man. I asked him what he cured, to which he responded, “kidneys, lungs, and other diseases that people fear to talk about.” He took us around his gardens and showed me one of the plants because I had a cough. I took a leaf and coughed; it was bitter. I took another leaf and came back with it to Kampala. The next morning, I took it again and my cough went away. So, I know him as a medicine man as well but I did not discover the other diseases. He told me that I could only get those plants with his permission because if I did not, the medicine would not work. (Laughter)To the family, God has given and God has taken. May the Lord protect you and give you peace. May the soul of Hon. Charles Macodwogo rest in perfect peace. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us reduce the time so that we give other Members an opportunity to speak. Cabinet, we need to mourn with you. 4.43THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Sarah Mateke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand here to pay my tribute to the family, His Excellency the President and to you, Madam Speaker, for the loss of a man who was patriotic, hardworking and humble. He was a man of himself.I came to know Hon. Engola when we were deployed in the same Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. When I introduced myself as Hon. Sarah Mateke, he said “Mateke and Lango have a very serious relationship.” Each time, he would tell me, “Do you know that Mateke should have donated all the daughters to Lango?” To which I responded that we donated one. He then told me that he wanted me in Oyam. That is how our relationship was. He was a parent to some of us; so he listened and guided us. Whenever he would hear the youths say something, he would say, “Calm down. You are the minister for the youths; so first listen, before you talk.” I personally learnt a lot from him; one of the things I learnt from him is that you should not go for any trip and not document what you have seen there.Secondly, I learnt to always listen and first internalise what I have been told before I respond. If you feel you cannot respond, keep quiet and be patient before responding. I want to encourage the family that Col Engola had already made his legacy; please keep it up. Some of us who carry our parents’ names - Those who carry Col (Rtd) Engola’s name, please do not shame him; instead, make his name move farther. For the Christians, we believe God had a reason why all these things happened. May his soul rest in peace. (Applause)  Thank you. [Ms Kwiyucwiny]8569THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 MAY 20234.46THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Ms Esther Anyakun): Thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Nandutu, do not stand like that. (Laughter)  MS ANYAKUN: Madam Speaker, I would like to join and support the motion presented by the Prime Minister. I bring greetings from the people of Nakapiripirit, especially from Namalu where the daughter, Sharon worked as our Officer in Charge (OC) station. I came very close to the late Charles because of the daughter. He kept telling me: “How is she? Are you taking good care of her?” When she was getting married, he told me: “Sharon wants you to be there.” I told that to my mum because she was very close to my mum. Col Charles was very proud of his daughter. Sharon, your father was very proud of you.Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal that we elevate Sharon because her father wished her a better position in the Uganda Police Force. Can we follow up with that? Otherwise, her father would have been happier if Sharon was elevated in her position. (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER:  Switch on. Have you concluded? MS ANYAKUN: I have a relationship with the Engolas; Engola’s daughter is married to my cousin. Today, he came to me and he said: “Do you know that we must go for that burial?” He reminded me that we have lost a father in-law; we are going to bury our in-law. The people of Lango have attachment with the people of Karamoja because they are connected. My brother comes from Otikokin clan. The same Otikokin family is where I come from, and where you come from, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. I come from the same clan with the Hon. Esther Anyakun, Hon. Obua Hamson; so we are from the same clan including the late Hon. Engola.Honourable members, on the issue of Sharon, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we need to jointly handle it. (Applause)  Sharon, after the burial, come back so we see what we can do for you. Let us have Hon. Judith, Hon. Nandutu, the chairperson Lango Parliamentary Group, the Woman Member of Parliament and then we go to the Opposition. 4.49THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Judith Nabakooba):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you for allowing me to extend condolences to the Parliament of Uganda, the family and also Government as a whole. The Bible, in Ecclesiastics Chapter 3 says there is time for everything: Time to be born and time to die. Our colleague, Hon. Engola has gone too early when the country needed his services more.Madam Speaker, I met Hon. Engola when I was the chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. During my first time in Parliament, I had an encounter and I was welcomed with a baptism of fire from some Members. Hon. Engola was then the Minister of State for Defence. He called me and said, “Hon. Nabakooba, welcome to politics, but you need to be firm and develop a thick skin.” This is because he knew I was heading for tough times as I headed that committee. I remember he was a very dedicated man, a timekeeper and he loved his work. He mobilised his colleagues from the Ministry of Defence to be with him in the committee and was always prepared with answers to issues that were raised by Parliament and members of the committee. We must all learn a lesson from the colleague lying before us - that he took his work seriously. 8570TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. COL (RTD) CHARLES OKELLO-ENGOLAEven at the time of his death, he had come back from Namutumba but very early in the morning, he had already prepared himself to go to Cabinet. It is unfortunate that he did not make it to Cabinet but he showed commitment to his work. He loved his country and we should do the same as Members of Parliament and ministers to serve our people and the country with all our energies. We are going to miss you, colonel. You have gone sooner but we are also on the way. May God rest your soul in eternal peace. Thank you. 4.53THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (TESO AFFAIRS) (Mr Clement Ongalo-Obote): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I convey condolences from the people of Teso to the people of Lango. I also convey condolences of the people of Kalaki to the people of Oyam North County. I convey my condolences to the family of my fallen friend. As painful as his death is, what I find more upsetting is the manner in which he died. You would think a soldier who exposed himself to such dangers, who risked his life for his people to be killed in such an upsetting and senseless manner is almost biblical, like the killing of Abner in the Book of Samuel - who after fighting many battles and then the moment he made peace with David, he was killed in cold blood.As we say in Kumam, when the fire goes out – (Inaudible) -  May the soul of my brother rest in eternal peace.4.54THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (KARAMOJA AFFAIRS) (Ms Agness Nandutu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the rest to support the motion and register condolences to the family and the entire country. I knew Col (Rtd) Charles Engola as Macodwogo. THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Sam, you are still alive. In our culture when they say you have died, that is when you live longer.MS NANDUTU:  I knew him as Macodwogo but I did not know the meaning. Even the President in Cabinet called him Macodwogo. When I learned the meaning, I remembered the time I went to Oyam with the Hon. Ben Wacha, when I was still on the other side - of the media fraternity. We moved in the villages of Oyam and indeed the saucepans and the kitchen had gone silent. People deserted their homes and were staying in the IDP camps. When I went back to do the post-war recovery series, I found that the people had come back to their homes and they were indeed cooking. Therefore, I learnt that the reason why they gave him that name was because the fire had returned to the kitchens in that subregion. He defended his people. When I became a Member of Parliament, Hon. Macodwogo looked for me. As you are aware, Madam Speaker, many Ugandans fell in love with me from their TV screens in their sitting rooms. I came to learn that Hon. Macodwogo was one of those who fell in love with me from his TV set. When he met me – when I became a Member of Parliament – he declared his love for me. (Laughter)  Do not misquote the love. He said: “Agness Nandutu, my family and I loved you when you were on TV . From today, you are my friend.” Indeed, we became friends. The soldier who is lying before us here was, really, a “loverman”. (Laughter)  He was a good man. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, listen to the “loverwoman”.  (Laughter) MS NANDUTU:  Madam Speaker, I did not know that Hon. Engola watched me while in Cabinet. One time, he called me when he was in Parliament here and said: “Nandutu, I want to see you.” We met at the stairs in Parliament and he gave me a watch –(Interjection) -  Listen. When I asked him, he told me: “I am giving you a watch because I have seen you, on several occasions in Cabinet, asking honourable colleagues what time it is. So, I have given you this watch for you to keep time.” (Laughter)  [Ms Nabakooba]8571THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 MAY 2023The soldier who is lying before us here was a giver. When I shared with one of the honourable colleagues, he told me: “Hon. Engola also bought for me a watch.” So, he was a giver. It is rare to find a soldier gifting, but he was a gift-giver. (Laughter)  THE SPEAKER:  No, most soldiers gift. Soldiers are very calm people and they gift. Hon. Brig. Gen. Charity brought a perfume for me. (Laughter)MS NANDUTU:  I withdraw that statement, Madam Speaker. So, we really condole with the family. Like others have said, he was a person who fought wars, but never went on TV and radio stations to declare how he had fought; he was a really humble soldier. We encourage the family to be firm and we pray to God that he is granted eternal peace. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hajat , Hon. Oboth and Hon. Judith.4.59THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (VETERAN AFFAIRS) (Ms Huda Oleru):  Madam Speaker, I join the honourable colleagues in supporting the motion to pay tribute to our gallant son who is lying before us here. If you experienced what we went through because of the war in northern Uganda – when we talk about what this gentleman did to pacify northern Uganda, you cannot just share it lightly. Maybe you can share it lightly if you heard about it as history or read about it in a book. However, if you were there when we were being killed, when our ears were being cut, when the roads were being blocked, when we could take an entire week to come from West Nile to Kampala… It saddens that we have lost one of those who sacrificed to create peace in that region. Madam Speaker, when I saw my name on TV that I had been appointed state minister in charge of veteran affairs, I was so anxious that I had to look around because I did not have any background of being in the military. My first thought was about the ministers who were in that office that I could look out for. Madam Speaker, I looked for Hon. Charles; I looked for the minister whom I replaced and also looked for our former Clerk. I wanted them to take me through and tell me how things were handled there. Hon. Charles told me: “Where you are, it is formalised; it is the best place that you are going to enjoy. Just respect yourself, follow the rules and you will not get into any trouble.” Two weeks ago, because of the challenges of the raiders we were facing in Karamoja Subregion, one of the MPs of Otuke stood up here and told us that: “I wish Hon. Charles was still the minister for defence.” That is because when he was there, they did not suffer the way they are suffering with these Karamojong raiders. So, I stood here and said: “My sister, we shall do exactly what Hon. Charles did.” However, after committing myself that we were going to go to Otuke with the Member, I had to look for Hon. Charles. I said: “Hon. Charles, you created shoes that our feet are failing to fit in. I have promised my colleagues that I am going to Otuke, but I will not go there alone. I am waiting for you. Give me a day and we go together so that I can learn from you.” He promised me that: “My sister, we are going to go together; that is my profession.” However, before we could do that, he is here today. It is very unfortunate and saddening. I felt very bad and asked many questions. For a senior soldier, why did he decide to open the car door in the direction where the gun was being shot from? Why didn’t he use the other door, hide himself first and then plan to see who the enemy was? I have many questions that I cannot answer. He is not there to answer any of them. May his soul rest in peace.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. God’s timing is never ours. Let us have Hon. Oboth and then Hon. Judith, the chairperson Lango 8572TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. COL (RTD) CHARLES OKELLO-ENGOLAParliamentary Group. Next, we shall have the Woman MP of Oyam, the Shadow Minister for Gender and Shadow Minister for Internal Affairs.5.03THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the rest of my honourable colleagues to convey my sincere condolences to the family, the President, Parliament and the people of Oyam North. A giant is lying before us motionless without - he cannot hear us, definitely. If he had a way, I am sure he would have told us about the words to say here. However, I thank Lt Gen. Mugira for speaking on behalf of the UPDF and, actually, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs; that was very brilliant. (Applause) I want to speak as a person who –(Inaudible) -  in the ministry. Just like my sister, Hajat  Huda, said, he was very helpful in our settling in. At a personal level, he took me to his home – with his wife there. I thought I was the only special minister who had gone to eat from his home. It is not until today that I got to know that everyone who went there, ate a lot of food. I promised to “revenge” if he came to my place. We were building some churches together as a legacy to our parents and the community. He was doing that because he wanted to wed in that place; it is painful. He loved his people there but more so, his family and Uganda. You and I, where are our passions? People who take the prevailing peace lightly to celebrate evil, where is your passion? The name “Macodwogo” that people have spoken about; nobody has spoken about the bees in some camp in Zambia, where Kony was hiding; he chose to start a fire on some beehives, which made the bees get other people running. Kony rebels thought that it was a witch who had sent the bees; he was quite a commander and above all, a nationalist. Are we tribal? Are we regional? Can we measure up to Hon. Macodwogo? What is your scale out of 10? Macodwogo, you played your part. You loved this country when you became a soldier. I know that on the 1st of May when one minister lowered your rank by referring to you as a “Lt Colonel”, you were disturbed and said; “How can she say that before my Commander-in-Chief when I want to be elevated?” He wished he could be a Brigadier General; I wish I had the powers. May your soul rest in peace. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. Let us hear from Hon. Judith Alyek, but only for two minutes. Hon Judith Alyek is the chairperson of the Lango Parliamentary Group. 5.08MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole):  Madam Speaker, I take this chance to thank you for being a strong woman in this Parliament. On behalf of the people of the Lango Subregion, and on behalf of the members of the Lango Parliamentary Group, we are not taking this debate for granted. Thank you very much the various caucuses that are in this Parliament, for standing with us, the Lango people.We are blowing the trumpet of the late Macodwogo. Actually, he had been a very powerful person in Lango Subregion. He is remembered for the experiences that we are discussing here. He could not blow his own trumpet. Now we are talking about him because of the experiences and the encounters we had with him when he was still alive. Madam Speaker, the late Hon. Macodwogo died at a time when we needed him most. Being a great hero in Lango and given the name “Macodwogo” – (Interjections) – yes, meaning, “The fire is back.” When insurgency was at its peak, I remember very well – although I was a young girl – that we were sleeping in the bush – I want to give this brief experience in 30 seconds. [The Speaker8573THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 MAY 2023Women suffered with the children and the public; they were not able to cook. They were not able to light a fire. If one lit fire, the rebels would see the smoke. The women were going hungry together with their children and others. When Macodwogo jumped up and said, “I must die for my people,” he fought the war and chased the Lord’s Resistance Army from Lango and peace prevailed in Lango. (Applause)  Up to now, we are enjoying peace that the late brought in Lango. He was given the name, “Macodwogo” because we are now cooking and the children can eat cooked food. I want to briefly say that the late Macodwogo was development- and action-oriented. He loved education. He gave out his land for the construction of a technical school, which he did not do. He had already acquired the land. He was promoting agriculture. He made sure he put very many demonstration gardens in Lango including the one on coffee growing.Madam Speaker, let me say this: Having listened to the entire debate, let Government come in to construct a technical school in Oyam in his name because the land is already there; it is a matter of talking to the people there – let the technical school be constructed on the land that he had acquired, in his remembrance. Secondly, on the issues of agriculture, he promoted the growing of Hass Avocado and coffee, among others. Right now, Lango Subregion and the entire northern Uganda have not yet received coffee seedlings from Government yet the season is running out. To remember him as a great farmer and as somebody who has been promoting farming in the region; at the earliest opportunity that we are experiencing rain – you know very well that we only experience much rain in the first season – let us be availed with coffee seedlings; our farmers are ready.The Government needs about 20 billion bags of coffee for export, but it is able to raise only 8 million bags right now. We have vast land upon which we can promote coffee growing and remember him for that. Madam Speaker, I would like to mention that the late Col (Rtd) Macodwogo served this country selflessly. It is my wish that much as he has died, His Excellency, the President, promotes him posthumously. Let his family be supported with the benefits that they really deserve. That is my humble request. While I conclude, we are grieving. Everybody is touched. Everyone is asking questions. We are all asking many questions. Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Lango, I request Government to avail us with a substantial report on the death of the late Macodwogo, who has been a minister, Member of Parliament and served this country tirelessly. We need that report for our hearts to be at rest because we will have known what caused the shooting by the bodyguard. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Alum Santa, is the Woman Member of Parliament for Oyam District, where the late –5.15MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam):  Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Oyam and on my own behalf, I stand here with deep sorrows to pay tribute to our gallant son, the late Col(Rtd) Hon. Charles Okello-Engola Macodwogo, who happens to be my very good colleague; my area Member of Parliament for Oyam County North, my defender and my signaller.I met the late when I was a student at Bombo Senior Secondary School and we used to cross the barracks together when going to school. One thing that he taught us was discipline; that when you are crossing the barracks, you have to be disciplined and greet people “ habari .” When the flag is being pulled down, you have to stand still and not walk and look straight. That was his mentorship right from my student days. 8574TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. COL (RTD) CHARLES OKELLO-ENGOLAIt was a big shock and surprise to us to hear of the brutal murder of Hon. Charles Okello-Engola; something which is difficult for us to comprehend and it is really terrifying. The people of Oyam are so scared and worried. They are asking the big question that “what will happen to us now that Hon. Okello-Engola is not there?” Who will be our defender now that Hon. Okello-Engola is – Because of that Madam Speaker, Hon. Okello-Engola was a very brave man to many people. He was highly courageous; a man who would do anything for the sake of his people and a man who would sacrifice his life for the sake of others. The name “Macodwogo” was given to him by the women of Oyam. I got married at that time when the insurgency was at its highest. The women and the children as we all know bear the greater burden of wars. Women would not cook or fetch firewood but whenever he was around, all those would happen and the women gave him the name “Macodwogo”. I would like to salute him for that. The late Hon. Charles Okello-Engola was really a gallant son. He was a Member of Parliament for Oyam County North. I want to mention this because there is a lesson that we can learn. We had a very good working relationship with the honourable minister. I am from the UPC party and he was from the NRM party, but he was very developmental; never at any one time did he interfere with any of my programmes to the extent that all my Women’s Day celebrations were never interrupted and people used to wonder.Hon. Sam Engola was here and he used to tease us that “for me, I am aluc”,  which means somebody who does something on the opposite or upside down. He would say why do you support that aluc?  Then he would – However, this is a lesson that we can learn; the constituency is big enough for all of us, if we choose to follow that example that he gave us. He was a family man and I would like to thank the wife and the children for the legacy that he has left; whenever anybody would go to his home, we would eat together even with the soldiers. As we were eating this side, the soldiers and bodyguards would also be eating the other side. I feel so bad to hear people say his death was because of pay. This record must be corrected. Allow me to mention something very briefly. He was a farmer and many honourable colleagues have mentioned that. In Lango, we only have apples in his farm and many other farming activities.  My sister, the chairperson, has mentioned this and I would like to add my voice to ask the Government to support us.There were many other developmental initiatives and we were following the issue of tarmacking the road from Aboke to Bobi Road in addition to the district hospital that he was following together with us. I would like to request that all these plus paying school fees for orphans that he was taking care of - in remembrance of the great work that he did - may we grant his wish.Finally, he was a retired Colonel; I want to join and add my voice that his wish of becoming a brigadier general should be granted. Madam Speaker, allow me to thank first of all, the Government together with you our Speaker of Parliament, the Rt Hon. Anita Among and Hon. Thomas Tayebwa, for standing with us. Honourable colleagues, I want to thank you very much for standing with the family and being with us. In the interest of time and to allow my honourable colleagues also to pay tribute, I want to say, may his soul rest in eternal peace.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. Reduce the time. Hon. Fortunate? 5.22MS FORTUNATE NANTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera):   Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my honourable colleagues in paying tribute to our fallen colleague. As the Shadow Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development, for the little [Ms Alum]8575THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 MAY 2023time I interacted with him, I knew him as a man who was passionate about the rights of workers, especially the migrant workers. There is no better way to pay tribute to our fallen honourable colleague than to push on the causes he fought for so dearly. That is the only way we can pay him back because he has fought the rest and done his part. It is now upon us, as leaders, to take on what he would have done if he were still on this earth. May his soul rest in eternal peace.5.23MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA (NUP, Mukono County North, Mukono):   Thank you, Madam Speaker. I condole with the bereaved family of the late honourable minister.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, do not go out. Let us see our honourable colleague off.MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA: A lot has been said but we must learn, reflect and pick a leaf from what has been said about the deceased. As a shadow minister, assassination of key figures in the Government has taken a different trend. Before the shooting of Hon. Engola, there was an attempt on Gen. Katumba’s life, as all of you remember and 37 others who have been killed using the gun.As we condole right now, I call upon you to reflect on what he has done for this great nation and we leave what has been committed towards good governance, as far as our country is concerned. The issue of CCTV cameras and security, like the Rt Hon. Speaker has said, as Members of Parliament, we must call upon police to account for the operations and the funds, which have been allocated in that area. May his soul rest in eternal peace.5.25DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, KIMAANYA-KABONERA DIVISION, MASAKA CITY):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had an opportunity to listen to the neighbours of the late colonel when I visited his home on the day he passed on. Their testimonies were clear that the colonel was a good neighbour, a humble man, an honest man and provided to them extra security by his presence. Madam Speaker, I have listened to the tribute of one of the most brilliant generals in this country, that is, Lt Gen. Mugira. (Applause)  I would like to ask-THE SPEAKER:  That is not enough clapping. Can you clap for the general? DR BWANIKA: I know him and he is at that level. I want to ask UPDF and all security operatives to use this opportunity to profile people who provide VVIP protection to our very important people. When you look at that Sabiiti, there are issues of profile-THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Charity, have you heard? Profile the VVIP protection security.DR BWANIKA: Yes. We need to take care of these very important people. One of the standards of a bodyguard is to stay calm in times of stress. I want to request that while we mourn, security should go in that area so the right people protect the VVIPs of this country. I submit.5.27MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru):  Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people Acholi Sub region, the people of Amuru District and the people of Kilak North County, I stand here to pay tribute to a gallant son of Uganda, a gallant son of Northern Uganda and a gallant son of Lango Sub region, Col (Rtd) Charles Okello Macodwogo. Madam Speaker, I used to call this gallon son, lut odwogo . This was because during his time as LC V chairperson, he caned unserious youth who drink during working hours. 8576TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. COL (RTD) CHARLES OKELLO-ENGOLAPeople referred to him – [Member spoke off  microphone] - meaning, if you do not do work that is productive, he would cane you. Lut means cane.This is a man who survived the LRA. I was one of the children abducted by the LRA and I participated to fight in the bush. Madam Speaker, the people and the commanders of LRA in Northern Uganda -THE SPEAKER:  You were together with Hon. Mapenduzi in the bush. (Laughter)MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, many commanders of UPDF lost their lives in Northern Uganda during the war. A man who fought LRA and survived it but ends up being killed by a private is something very painful to the people of Northern Uganda and Uganda as a whole. (Applause) We need to do something about this and it must be investigated very well. Madam Speaker, we have a problem in Uganda. It starts with recruitment. People who go for recruitment sometimes go with names of people already written. We have heard of these cases in Northern Uganda. People who go for recruitment find they have already gone with their names. There is corruption. Some who go to fight in Somalia bribe their ways to go there. Even some deployed to guard the VVIP people bribe their way to guard them. Therefore, it is important that the Government ensures that the recruitment process and deployment must be on merit. We feel the pain as people of Northern Uganda because we have lost a lot and this has been very graving to the people of Northern Uganda.Madam Speaker, I therefore, pay tribute and I wish our gallant son rests in eternal peace. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Can we have Hon. Ssewungu who is representing Buganda? We have to give the body to the family.5.31MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion and I would like to register condolence to the family.I first met the deceased in the Committee on Appointments and in the committee, some of us thought he was still a serving soldier but when he submitted all his documents, we discovered he had been serving as an LCV chairperson for some good time and he took up that ministry, he served very diligently.Madam Speaker, there was an election in Omoro, when I was still the Democratic Party (DP) whip, and my President was Nobert Mao, who left recently. We went for that campaign- THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Nobert Mao has not left DP. He is still a member of the DP.MR SSEWUNGU: Either he left me or I left him. When we went to Omoro for Pamela’s campaign, the late minister came with his vehicles and security. So, I became tough and said, “Now, these people are going to lose this election” because a serving minister was campaigning with the Government vehicles”. Fortunately, with command and respect, I talked to one of his officers and said “Please tell the minister he cannot be here with a Government vehicle during campaigns”. What was very beautiful - and respect I command to the deceased is that he directed his official vehicle and army to move away. He walked diligently and left the campaign rally. We were covering; taking all our recordings which became nugatory at the end of the day because he behaved diligently.When you talk about him as a serving soldier - sincerely from that very time as a backbencher, he feared me because as a Member of Parliament, I ensured that his official vehicle was removed from the campaign rally.Madam Speaker, I am on record and it is well known that I taught in the army for 10 years. When you talk about Gen. Mugira and others, I know them. With Lt Gen. Mugira, sometimes we speak the same language. The issue I would like to emphasise has been said by Dr Abed Bwanika. Let us go back to the norms of the army. I do not agree with the idea of [Mr Akol]8577THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 MAY 2023allowing civilians to be guarded by army men and women. It is wrong. He was a colonel but look at what happened to him? Yet, he served diligently. They have run away from infantry and want to be served by military police. Yet, the military police is mandated to safeguard and discipline the army.The Speaker is a very big person in the country but she is guarded by the police. Who are you to leave infantry and want the military police to guard you? Yet, when you get this soldier, you fail to look after him/her diligently. What do you expect to get out of him or her? Sometimes they also run out of cool.We pray shall continue to pray for the family. This gentleman, even in our lobby has been very friendly to us. I served with Hon. Engola and he knew I used to argue with him, tried to pull him to DP but he refused and stayed in the NRM but at the end of the day, we remained very good friends. We shall miss him.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, pay strict attention - By the way, even for a civilian like me – Ssewungu – who is a Member of Parliament, if I do not qualify by the powers of the Speaker to get one, I must apply. After applying, I must pay some money to the Government as a source of income and look after that person. Kindly, go and revisit that issue. Otherwise, it is unfair and people are complaining. As Buganda, we also feel sorry for the loss of this person. May his soul rest in eternal peace.THE SPEAKER:   Thank you. Hon. Kavuma?5.35MAJ. GEN. SAM KA VUMA (UPDF Representative): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to make a few remarks in paying tribute to comrade Hon. Charles Engola. I insisted on speaking because of many reasons, but the main ones are two. One, I am a member of the mighty family of the UPDF where comrade Charles worked for 44 years. Although he worked for 26 years in active capacity, once you are in the UPDF, you will always be in the UPDF. When you retire, you remain a reservist. So, we were still counting on him.The other reason why I wanted to speak is that I have been in the service for the last 42 years. Out of those 42, I spent 20 years in northern Uganda – in Acholi, Lango, Teso and Karamoja. So, I worked closely with him and I was a close friend of comrade Engola’s.Now, let me begin with the family. Why do we call ourselves a family? When we join the UPDF – or NRA before the UPDF – of course, we come from different families. However, when we join, we form one family called the UPDF. We come from different tribes. You saw during the laying of wreaths; each tribe was recognised. However, for us, the moment we join the UPDF, we form one tribe called the UPDF. We come from different clans, but the moment we join, we forget about those clans and form one clan: the UPDF. We are the only group in Uganda that has got a common language: Kiswahili. For all of you, when you go to western Uganda and you are from Teso, there must be a translator. Therefore, the people who have really lost are members of the UPDG; we have lost our own. Secondly, the man lying here possessed what I would call the NRM/UPDF ethos. It is this ethos that has been our source of strength and success in the last 42 years of our existence. The first ethos is discipline; he has been a highly disciplined officer and leader. The second ethos is patriotism. He has been patriotic. The other is Pan-Africanism. You have heard from testimonies that he fought in Congo. I do not think he had relatives in Congo, but because of pursuing the ideology of Pan-Africanism, he went to Congo and South Sudan to fight. So, he was a Pan-Africanist.The other ethos is good fighting. You heard, again, testimonies that he was a good fighter. Why do we call ourselves good fighters? You become a good fighter when you are 8578TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. COL (RTD) CHARLES OKELLO-ENGOLAdisciplined, patriotic and believe in the African cause. The other point I want to make is that he has been a real cadre. (Applause)  I have my own definition of cadreship: a cadre must be that one who grasps and understands the ideologies, the aims, the objectives and the purpose for which the system he or she believes in stands for. Knowing that does not qualify you to become a complete cadre. You have to add the second one, which is the ability to pass them on to others.The third one is what the English today call “walking the talk”. If you believe in them, do you do them? That is what completes a cadreship. Our comrade lying here was a real cadre.Finally, comrade Charles was a pragmatic leader. When he retired and joined politics to become the LC V Chairman of Oyam District, I was already in northern Uganda - like I have told you – and the insurgency was still going on. However, because of his quality of leadership, he mobilised other leaders and the people of Lango to reject the Kony rebellion and within a few years, the insurgency had been defeated. (Applause)It was not only that. When he became the chairman, I remember – and those of you from Lango can bear me witness -THE SPEAKER:  Can you conclude, honourable member?MAJ. GEN. KA VUMA: You will bear me witness that Oyam became a model district in terms of development. (Applause)Finally, I want to convey my condolences to my sister and the entire family. During my activities there, they hosted me in their home and she fed me for quite some time. I want to convey our condolences – mine and my family’s – to the family and Hon. Sam, to you, Madam Speaker and the entire Parliament, to H.E. the President and the entire Cabinet, to the people of Oyam and Lango and all Ugandans for this sad and unfortunate death of our comrade. May the soul of comrade Charles rest in perfect peace. I thank you very much.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. There is something I have realised. Everybody is saying: “I have eaten; I have visited Macodwogo’s home.” How many have visited your homes? When you go back home, make analysis and say: “What have I borrowed today? What have I got from today’s debate? How many people have ever visited and eaten at my home? How many people have I educated?” Chairperson West Nile Parliamentary Group? He also happens to be an in-law – the widow, Joyce, happens to come from West Nile. 5.45MR LAWRENCE SONGA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the in-laws, on behalf of the people of West Nile and on my own behalf, I want to send condolences to the family of the late; to His Excellency, the President; to the Speaker of Parliament; to the people of Uganda to the Won Nyaci  of Lango. We have lost a humble but very courageous man. In the late 1980s and 1990s, it was very difficult for us, people from Northern Uganda and West Nile, to come to Kampala. On several occasions, I personally had to cross Lake Albert to Wanseko in Buliisa because the road had been blocked by the Lord’s Resistance Army rebels. So today, if we are mourning someone who contributed - of course, he worked with other people - to the return of peace to Northern Uganda and the pacification, where the roads became open for us to move, we really need to thank God for him and say that may his soul rests in eternal peace. The recovery of Northern Uganda and West Nile came about because of the peace these people brought to us. Now that they brought peace and the war has stopped, the recovery is [Maj. Gen. Kavuma]8579THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 MAY 2023now on wealth creation. I went to Oyam and saw how people are vandalising electricity poles, which would help in creating wealth. We now pray that as we send him off, let the vandalism of those poles stop. Let the LRA war victims from Northern Uganda and West Nile be paid so that they can now have a full recovery. I want to pray for the family to be united. At the same time, I want to pray to all of us to give comfort to the family. May the soul of Col (Rtd) Charles Engola Macodwogo rest in eternal peace. THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us now hear from the Teso Parliamentary Group before getting to the Sebei Parliamentary Group?5.47MR BOSCO OKIROR (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. From you, as the Speaker to the Prime Minister, when she moved the motion, and to all the great speakers who have spoken today; I must say that I am a good student and listener. I want to associate myself with all the positive things that have been said about the gentleman.I have been sitting here for some time, listening to all the good things but asking myself a very difficult question. This is a Parliament that makes and amends laws but it has been hitting me so hard that I only imagine if the Bible was such a book that could be amended, I would have revisited the Book of Genesis. At the time when the judgement was passed in the Garden of Eden - you know what happened - when Adam and Eve were there, and God came and questioned them some question but they simply passed it on the blame to one another without putting up any defence. There was no lawyer in the Garden of Eden who could have appealed the sentence. God said, “You will suffer death. You will toil.” If there are personalities that deserve a second chance to live longer, it is the person lying in front of us. (Applause)  I come from the Teso Subregion and we mourn with Lango. Teso was infested with LRA but when the Tabule’s moved away from Lango, running towards Teso, it was like a wounded buffalo. They responded with Amuka; we responded with the Arrow Boys. That is how immense the contribution was. We had to sacrifice at the time to go to the bush to fight. They spent sleepless nights making us the better citizens that we are today. May you rest in peace! (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you.5.50MR TWALLA FADIL (NRM, Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in conveying our condolences. As people from Sebei Subregion, I would like to convey condolences to the family, Parliament and the entire country on the death of our brother, Hon. Charles Okello Engola Macodwogo. I last met him in Namutumba District when we were celebrating International Labour Day. It was that very day that I interacted with him for the first time. When he realised that I had come from Sebei, he told me that he wanted some coffee seedlings. There is a variety called Catimor. He wanted to test that variety on his farm. I had promised him that I was going to get 200 seedlings for him but to my dismay, I will not interact with him again. My message to the family is that if there is anyone who wants to continue with what he has been doing, please I am ready to avail the 200 seedlings for testing – (Applause) - so that his work can as well be remembered. May his soul rest in eternal peace! Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Mrs Engola?5.52MS BETTY ENGOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand in this Parliament with a lot of sadness. The late Hon. Charles Okello Engola Macodwogo was my brother-in-law; 8580TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. COL (RTD) CHARLES OKELLO-ENGOLAfirst cousin to my dear husband, Hon. Sam Engola. In Lango, we belong to and are identified by clans. Macodwogo and I belong to the Otikokin  clan, a very powerful one. He served as an executive member, promoting the Luo local language, culture and tradition. Madam Speaker, Macodwogo supported orphans and churches, and promoted fish farming and agriculture. The late stood with his people both in the good and bad times. He was our strength and hope in the subregion. The late is honoured for serving greatly in the UPDF. He was the first LC V Chairperson of Apac District; the district I represent in this House. He was the LC V Chairman of Oyam for two terms. While he was there, he moved with sticks in his car to beat people along the way or trading centres found drinking alcohol known as “ lira lira ”. Now, that means he advocated for hard work. Madam Speaker, life is very fragile. What has happened has happened. To us as a family, it is too heavy for us to take in and yet we cannot run away from it. Macodwogo was a very courageous NRM flag bearer for Oyam North. He will be remembered for what he did in Northern Uganda, especially during the Kony war and that history in Lango will never disappear.On Sunday, we drove to Bombo Military Hospital to view his body. That body was shot 28 times. As a family, there are questions to ask but God knows. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for your support. I also thank your deputy, colleagues and the Government for the support. I thank you for this opportunity.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have to give the body to the family when it is still early.5.56MS SARAH NAJJUMA (NRM, District Woman Representative, Nakaseke ): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I add my voice in support of the motion to pay tribute to our fallen colleague, Hon. Charles Engola. I send my condolences to the family, the people of Oyam and Ugandans. I am the Vice-Chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, but Hon. Engola has been a very humble and respectful person. Whenever we summoned the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to appear on issues of labour, he used to appear himself. There are ministers who are summoned before committees and they do not appear, but that was not Hon. Engola. When we were handling the petition on migrant workers, he was very instrumental before the committee – THE SPEAKER:  Commissioner, come back. MS NAJJUMA: It is very sad that our committee is handling an amendment of the Employment Act, 2006. Before us, we have two Bills; the Government Bill and the Private Member’s Bill. It is sad that the week Hon. Engola was gunned down, we had to interface with him so as a committee we got a setback.Hon. Engola has been an exemplary leader; both in private and in the army, though he is retired. May his soul rest in eternal peace.5.58MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the Busoga Parliamentary Group and the colleagues who may not get a chance to pay tribute, allow me to be on record to convey condolences to the august House, to you, Rt Hon. Speaker, the UPDF family, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda upon the demise of our colleagues. 1 May 2023 was the last public appearance of our colleague in Namutumba for the Labour Day celebrations. I saw the civility and simplicity of our colleague when they invited the honourable minister to the podium to go and make his remarks; then the invite to the senior minister to speak. When the Aide-De-Camp (ADC) rushed with the umbrella to offer [Ms Engola]8581THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 MAY 2023him shelter on the podium, the man rejected it like it was nothing. The public – those of us who were viewers - saw it in a bad light. After the function, I had a one on one with him and asked him what happened. He said that he wanted to show solidarity to the soldiers who had braved the rains during the parade. (Applause)  That was serious credit that needs to be emulated by senior people in this country.The other issue was the harassment of colleagues who had gone for that function. They were intercepted by the SFC that were manning the different entry points – THE SPEAKER:  By the security personnel because you do not know whether they are SFC or red tops or whichever. It is “by armed personnel.”MR MUWUMA:  I take your guidance but a number of Members ended up at the entrance and went back; a case in point was Hon. Olobo. He said, “You people, this is enough. I cannot stress myself any longer.” With Hon. Luke Inyensiko, I had to bargain with people to usher him in so the minister apologised. The reason I insisted to be on record is because the honourable minister was very sorry and asked me to tell honourable colleagues that it will never happen again. It is unfortunate that he will not see that commitment happen, but as one of the key organisers of the function, he apologised – THE SPEAKER:  And indeed it will not happen again. Brig. Gen. Charity, that harassment of Members should not happen again. MR MUWUMA:  Finally, two weeks ago, we had a meeting on migrant workers at Fairway Hotel where Hon. Okello Oryem and Hon. Arinaitwe attended. Hon. Charles Engola said that he had done his part in fostering the current Memorandum of Understanding to do with the externalisation of labour under Saudi Arabia. He had committed to fast-track similar arrangements with other countries where our children are suffering. I want to appeal to the substantive minister to kindly follow this up to allow our friend to rest in eternal peace while his dream has come to pass. I thank you.6.02MS ESTHER AFOYOCHAN (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. The death of our colleague punches a hole in the professionalism the UPDF has been preaching and has invested in. I did not want this sitting to end without us, Members of Parliament, especially the Women Members of Parliament, appreciating that UPDF is a good Force while you are still alive, but when you die, your family and children are forgotten there and then.I want to remind the UPDF that Hon. Charles Engola is dead because of a gun that came from a UPDF officer. We shall not take it lightly in Northern Uganda that his children, wife and entire family shall not get justice and also they cannot be taken care of, as he would have done. I want to pledge that as a House we shall come back in unity with other Members in Northern Uganda and ensure that our children are well taken care of by the UPDF. Thank you.6.04MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that this Parliament pays tribute to the late Hon. Col Charles Okello-Engola Macodwogo. I happen to be among the district leaders of Apac that held several meetings with the late Charles Okello-Engola, after realising his work during the LRA war, his relationship with the civilians and the need for development, we called him to join politics and become the LC V Chairperson Apac District. At first, he said “No”, I think I should do what I know best, which is the army”. Initially, even the President refused to release him. However, after several meetings, Hon. Engola used his good relationship with the President to convince him to release him. That is when he became LC V Chairperson Apac 8582TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. COL (RTD) CHARLES OKELLO-ENGOLADistrict and LC V Chairperson Oyam, and then eventually he came to Parliament. Madam Speaker, Hon. Charles Okello was a symbol of peace, security, and development in Lango, Northern Uganda and the country. Just seeing the late Okello Engola moving around, you would know we still have our peace and security. Today, our symbol is down. We pray that fire continues to be lit in our kitchen in Northern Uganda, Lango and the country. Madam Speaker, allow me to say one thing I have observed. With due respect to UPDF and other security forces – and this is for all for the ministers in this country that have got escorts and bodyguards. When officers go to the field with their bosses, there is a tendency where their duty allowance is paid to either their commander or the Aides-De-Camp (ADC) or somebody in charge. That person then pays the officers when their principals are not even aware of what goes on.Madam Speaker, from my experience, at one time, I dealt with a District Police Commander (DPC) who presented a budget of Shs 20,000 for paying officers who were going to be on duty. Yet, he ended up paying them Shs 5,000. As a result, the officers put him at gunpoint. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I appeal to you that the permanent secretaries in these ministries must ensure that the allowances of officers who guard ministers and any other person is paid directly to them, not a third party. (Applause)The circumstances under which the man I have known for long, the late Col (Rtd) Okello Engola died -  when I saw him lying, it was a great pity, painful and shameful. Madam Speaker, someone is paid to give money to the officers but then he does not give them all the money. Imagine Col (Rtd) Okello Engola, an innocent person died in circumstance that he did not create. This must be taken seriously by all ministers and their bodyguards. Also, pay them promptly. We are not going to run away from certain facts and truth, then tomorrow, we end up coming back here again talking about the same thing.I would like to tell the family of Okello that the late died an accomplished man; a hero. Forget about the people who believe that one way of survival in this country is to talk negatively about people. It is so painful, when you have lost a dear one then someone starts celebrating, sending messages and recording bad things. Madam Speaker, the Computer Misuse (Amendment) Act that was passed was quashed by court.THE SPEAKER:  That is not correct. It was one provision; Section 25 of the Computer Misuse Act. MR AYOO:  Section 25 speaks about offensive communication. Madam Speaker, Parliament must find a way. THE SPEAKER:  Now, you are talking about the whole Act. MR AYOO:  That section is actually -THE SPEAKER:  Honourable member, you can still prosecute a person using the same Act. You are talking about just one section of the Act. MR AYOO:  Thank you, for your guidance, Madam Speaker. Why is it that in Uganda, someone can speak anything and get away with it? Madam Speaker, on the social media, a man called Tamale Mirundi knows who killed who and he is giving two weeks that if it is not produced, he will to produce it. He actually knows who killed everybody. The hate speech we are allowing to continue to get normal in this country will make people think this peaceful and lovely country is a bad place to live in. Madam Speaker, the law must take its cause and bring this to an end. May the soul of our hero, the late Col Charles Peter Okello Engola Macodwogo rest in peace. Thank you.6.10MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Omoro): Madam Speaker, I rise in support of the motion that [Mr Ayoo]8583THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 MAY 2023was moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to pay tribute to our senior colleague ; Col (Rtd) Okello Engola Macodwogo. I would like to convey my condolences, that of my family and the people of Omoro District to the bereaved family of our fallen brother, Col Okello Engola Macodwogo.Madam Speaker, from what has been talked about in the House this afternoon about Okello Engola, the testimonies are: one is that he is above self and two, serving for the common need of our people. Hon. Okello Engola chose to serve in the military and grew from the lowest rank up to the rank of a colonel, serving in the military field, a department of service that is very risky. He did it very diligently and we are benefiting as a region from the outcome of his service. He has been a pacifier.Madam Speaker, while he served as the 501 Brigade Commander in Opit - Opit is in Omoro District and it neighbors Oyam District. The people of Omoro District have expressed sympathy for the loss of this gallant son. The people of Lango, Opit and Omoro District know the very meaning of Macodwogo because they are direct beneficiaries. I wish to end and quote the words of Scott Hildreth. He said, “ The value of a person’ s life is measured by the amount of people they touch in living it. ” From the efforts of Okello Engola by ensuring that we receive peace in the region, he was able to touch so many lives, particularly of the vulnerable people; the women and the children.Madam Speaker, when he was serving as the LC V Chairperson Oyam District that was the time I got to know him better. I was the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) in Pader District and he was the LCV Chairperson of Apac District. We were in a meeting discussing Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF II) that time and he spoke very passionately on ensuring that we support livelihood component of the people that have returned home. So, I picked interest to know who this man was. I am not surprised with eulogies Members are giving about Hon. Okello Engola Macodwogo. Indeed, we have lost a great man, a man with great humility. There is a word Hon. Okello Engola told me when we were in our campaigns for the first time by-elections in Omoro when I came to Parliament.I did not know Hon. Ssewungu, who has confessed today was in the team of Hon. Mao campaigning on the other side. I was the candidate on the side of Okello Engola with Hon. Mao hitting us badly but Okello Engola told me one thing that when they found him, Hon. Mao entered the rally that he was addressing. When they started throwing words at him, he kept quiet and did not answer. I was wondering: what kind of military man is this? He did not respond to them. I asked him: “What should we do?” He said: “You are a candidate, just sneak from behind and disappear. Let me deal with the situation.”It did not take long. After about six minutes, I got a call from another subcounty – Lalogi – which was about seven kilometres away, that Hon. Okello Engola Macodwogo was already in Lalogi Subcounty. He left Hon. Mao and team in that very place. That was humility. Humility takes you to greater heights. I appeal to honourable colleagues that we are all in positions of leadership and are serving this country: what shall we be remembered for? I wish to express my condolences, again, to the bereaved family of Hon. Okello Engola Macodwogo. May his soul rest in eternal peace.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Dr Jane Aceng?6.15THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I pay tribute to our fallen brother, Hon. Okello Engola Macodwogo. It is a painful death that we cannot change; a death that has robbed us, the people of Lango and Uganda, of a gallant son.8584TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. COL (RTD) CHARLES OKELLO-ENGOLAMadam Speaker, on the 2nd of May, when I was called by the brother, Hon. Sam Engola and his wife, to rush to Kyanja with an ambulance – that Hon. Macodwogo been shot – I thought I was rushing to save life. Indeed, I rushed with an ambulance. However, when I got there, Hon. Engola had no life to save. I looked at my brother, lying on the ground in a pool of blood. It is an image that will never leave my eyes and heart for as long as I live.Hon. Macodwogo was a very loving man, very kind and very humble. As everybody else has said, he served his country in different ministries honestly and diligently, without any word of corruption tainting his name. (Applause)I would like to appreciate his wife whom I had to look for on that day and bring back home because she was very stressed. She was in a clinic and I told her: “Joyce…” - I call her Joyce because I have known her – “…you have to be strong.” I want to appreciate her and the entire family for being strong. (Applause)  Had she broken down, many of us would not have been able to bear the terrible pain that we are going through.Madam Speaker, the areas of Kyanja and Kulambiro need extra attention from the security people. If you look closely, the deaths and attacks – Kaweesi, Kirumira, Hon. Gen. Katumba, my brother, Hon. Macodwogo, Isima yesterday and many others – are happening in the same area. For us who are prayerful, we believe that there is a spirit that needs to be broken. I call upon the security people to study that area. I know there are many other areas where such things happen, but security people need to study that area very carefully.Madam Speaker, for us, the people of Lango, we are in pain. We know the entire Parliament and Uganda is in pain, but we are in great pain. We want questions answered. (Applause)  We want something said to us to relieve us of this pain. We want to understand why somebody wakes up early in the morning to go to work and is shot in cold blood. We do not understand it. Our people do not understand it. The people of Lango do not understand it. (Applause)  We are in pain. That pain can only be relieved by the investigators.Madam Speaker, not even the post-mortem report can relieve our pain. However, I believe that with all your support, the spirit of love and togetherness, we shall overcome the pain.I send my condolences to His Excellency the President and the entire Parliament. On behalf of the people of Lira City – many of Hon. Charles Engola’s relatives reside in Lira City. I bring the condolences of the people of Lira City. May his soul rest in eternal peace. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Cecilia, you speak first and then we hear from the Government Chief Whip.6.21MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo):  Madam Speaker, I had already indicated to you that I would like to move an amendment to the motion moved by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. Before I do that, allow me to raise just two points. One, allow me, with a lot of difficulties, to appreciate the role President Museveni played in identifying the fallen brother, son and friend of ours and making him demonstrate that, indeed, we still have young men and women who can serve with the “Lion Brand”. The “Lion Brand” did not go with Gen. Lokech; the “Lion Brand” was still with our brother, Hon. Charles Engola, and I believe we still have people with the “Lion Brand” in this country. Let us preserve and use them properly. Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would like to say that I am not speaking as a politician, but as a member of the family. My beautiful mother, who passed on a couple of years ago, came from the family of Hon. Okello Engola and Sam Engola. The beauty you saw in her is the beauty which genes we all carry. (Laughter)   So, I am very proud of being associated with that particular clan – [Dr Aceng]8585THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 MAY 2023THE SPEAKER:  That is why you were a Miss Uganda. MS CECILIA OGWAL:  That is what they claim – they claim that I have been Miss Uganda because of them. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, one of the things that we need to note about Hon. Engola is that he would surface at the time of need. Hon. Charles Engola was recruited by his older brother, Olong, into the army when he had just left school. The boy was able to prove his skill as a young man. By the time the NRA came to power, he was already an artillery commander, but deployed in the west. As people who were in the Government, we were wondering what could have happened to Charles Engola, when he quickly moved to the other side of the NRA. Now, I know what might have happened. The President said he caught up with Charles on the artillery. However, I really appreciate that the President was able to identify Hon. Charles Engola and make him play the critical role that we have shared today. Madam Speaker, I would like to move a motion. I have read the motion and I feel that this Parliament has come up with a lot of issues -THE SPEAKER:  Are you moving another motion without notice or you are making an amendment? MS CECILIA OGWAL:  Sorry, I am moving an amendment. I am moving an amendment that:“Mindful of the fearless and dedicated service Col Charles Engola Macodwogo rendered to the country, culminating into normalisation and stability of the security situation in the Lango Subregion and beyond;AND AWARE of the brutal manner in which his life was taken by a soldier deployed to protect his life;I, THEREFORE, move as follows:i. That Government considers the posthumous elevation of his rank from that of Colonel to Brigadier General;ii. That Government further considers reasonable and compassionate remedial package to take care of the widows and orphans, many of whom are still of school-going age; andiii. Finally, Government pays more attention to the recruitment, training, vetting, and deployment processes of armed forces.”I beg to amend.THE SPEAKER: Of course, you cannot move an amendment on what affects Article 93. Can we hear from Hon. Norbert Mao?MS CECILIA OGWAL:  I consulted all of them.THE SPEAKER : Hon. Mao, can an amendment be made when it has financial implications?6.26THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS  (Mr Nobert Mao):  Madam Speaker, a resolution of Parliament means the prevailing sentiment of the Legislature. There is no bar because it is still at the discretion of those concerned to decide whether to do it or not. So, it is in order for this Parliament to express its prevailing sentiment.THE SPEAKER : Leader of Government Business, I need a statement from you before I put the question. I do not want an aspect of, “I was forced.” 6.26THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS  (Rt Hon. Robinah Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker, it is difficult for somebody to make a decision now, bearing the situation under which we 8586TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. COL (RTD) CHARLES OKELLO-ENGOLAare. I request that you allow me to consult Government, the President, and Cabinet. We shall come up with an answer to inform this august House. MS CECILIA OGWAL:  Madam Speaker, these are our recommendations as Parliament; it is the desire of Parliament. If you read the mood of the House, including that coming from the ministers, it is that these are the main concerns. Madam Speaker, we cannot eulogise this man for four hours and leave as if we just came for a cup of tea. We are leaving a widow and children - and there are over 150 other children who have to go back to school and whose fees the Colonel was paying. Therefore, we cannot just leave because we are consulting. Consulting who? His Excellency, the President is even following our debate, knows what we are saying and I am sure he will also subscribe because Col Engola was his cadre - (Applause)  - the children who are left are going to be his responsibility. We want to call upon the President to take care of the children and responsibility. Therefore, we have to reduce our concerns. Now, you are forcing me to speak as an elder when I was actually just speaking as a humble legislator pleading the case. THE SPEAKER : Honourable members, you have heard the amendment to the motion. Is it seconded?HON. MEMBERS:  Yes.THE SPEAKER:  Seconded by who? The amendment is seconded by the whole House with the exception of: Hon. Nandutu, Hon. Oboth, Hon. Harriet, Hon. Amongi, and the Prime Minister. Honourable members, we will make the amendment. It is upon Government to decide whether to implement it or not. This is a trying time. A soldier on duty gunned down Hon. Engola. That is why I am saying that we need to know the cause. Much as we are saying we need to support the family of Hon. Engola, we should also support the family of Pte Sabiti, as we look for why Pte Sabiti did that because he died on duty.6.30THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP  (Mr Denis Obua):  Madam Speaker, from the time the late Hon. Col (Rtd) Charles Okello Engola Macodwogo passed on, it is befitting to say “thank you” to the many key stakeholders who have so far made it possible. I want to thank, on behalf of the political family where the late belonged; and where he was a member. He served with loyalty and conviction, and that is the National Resistance Movement Party. I wish to thank His Excellency, the President and Cabinet, for granting him an official burial. Madam Speaker, I wish to also thank you, the Deputy Speaker of Parliament, and all of you, colleagues. We have demonstrated, through this tribute motion, and generated consensus on the various contributions on the various submissions, especially on the role played by the late Hon. Col (Rtd) Charles Okello Engola Macodwogo; as a father, soldier, politician, and leader; I pay tribute!This is probably the first – I would say, where Parliament has sat and it is coming to almost 7 p.m. in the year 2023, unprecedented. Madam Speaker, we want to thank you even for personally paying homage to the deceased’s home in Kyanja - including the Deputy Speaker. We want to thank you for the personal contributions that you have made and the official one, on behalf of the institution of Parliament. I believe that the journey has not yet ended. Tomorrow, we are at Kololo at 10.00 a.m. Kindly, spare time and come to Kololo, whether you have taken a COVID-19 test or not. (Applause) On Saturday, we pray that you again get time and come to Oyam where our colleague will be laid to rest at his ancestral home. From Kampala to Oyam is about 3 hours 30 minutes’ [Rt Hon. Nabbanja]8587THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 9 MAY 2023drive at an average speed. Come and stand with the people of Lango.Madam Speaker, let me state that in every culture and society, especially in Africa, there will always be this figurehead that is an authority on a particular subject matter. When it comes to the issue of peace and security from the perspective of the people of Lango, we would ably rely on the late Hon. Okello-Engola. His knowledge in the military - the fact that he was a military man and at the same time a politician - whenever Col Hon. Okello-Engola sneezed on matters of peace and security, Lango definitely would see some signs and symptoms of peace.Today, we are here and we have a number of our sons and daughters. Do we know whether they have his courage? The answer is definitely no. The raiders from Karamoja came about two or three weeks ago and he had already demonstrated commitment to move to the field because he was that commander we relied on, on matters of peace and security; and he is no more.Just like stated here, we are human. Whatever statements we make must be taken in good faith at this point in time. The death of Hon. Col (Rtd) Charles Okello-Engola Macodwogo leaves more questions than answers. However, we want to thank him for his contribution. He sacrificed his life for the peace of his people and for the peace of his country. He was a loyal and committed member of his party. Hon. Col (Rtd) Charles Okello-Engola woulds only contribute in meetings of the NRM, if he must.He had that discipline from the military but if he must contribute, you would see a giant rising up with humility and he made his contribution direct and straight to the point. We will miss him, but to the family, we want to say may you find comfort in the risen Lord. To the children, you are not alone. There are a number of orphans in this House, including the Rt Hon. Speaker, but God lifted her. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister is here; a number of orphans are here.The God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob is the God of orphans and widows.  (Applause) The late Col Okello-Engola left a mark and we hope and pray that that mark will not be removed. A number of you have his name, “Engola, Okello.” We hope and pray that the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob will guide the people of Oyam North. We hope and pray that may the legacy of Hon.  Col (Rtd) Charles Okello-Engola live forever and ever. May the angels of the Lord receive him in Heaven. I say all this, Madam Speaker, with humility. I beg to submit. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, Government Chief Whip. Honourable members, having heard from all of you and as we conclude today’s sitting in memory of our dear honourable colleague, mentor, peacemaker, peace lover and a great son of this country, we should come up with a law that reduces easy access to firearms and ammunitions.Before issuing the firearms, we should look into the mental health and wellbeing of the recipient. Ask yourself, “was Sabiti in his normal health?” Any person should be tested for you to know whether that person is okay for you to issue the firearm.I think the Uganda Police Force together with UPDF should look at this because we cannot continue losing our gallant sons like that. As leaders, we need to deliberately preach unity, cohesion and nationalism so that each of us become each other’s keeper. Let us preach forgiveness, togetherness and fairness. Let us instil issues of being together; we need to coexist. We may be here and you may not like me in any way, but we have to coexist. We also need to appreciate the people who have worked for this country. Leader of Government Business, we need to know the intention; you have been told that this person was guarding Hon. Mukula and for three weeks, he was with Hon. Charles Okello-Engola.The due diligence that we need to do on these people who are guarding – leave alone VIPs but whoever is guarding everybody. We need 8588TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. COL (RTD) CHARLES OKELLO-ENGOLAto do due diligence on these people; mental check-ups. We are talking about people who are running mad due to frustration. For example, you send these people to Somalia and wherever and when they come back, you need to counsel them and do rehabilitation. The stress they go through while there cannot be something that you can just push and say, “go and guard Hon. Betty Amongi.” These people are frustrated.When you hear the story that Hon. Mukula was talking about - this young man had a loan and two women in addition to other things. We need to see how best we can handle the stress that these people go through.Honourable members, as we conclude, what Hon. Imat Cecilia Ogwal was talking about was only urging the Government. We urge the Government - and we are not saying the Government should do - but we urge you. That is why she said it is upon you to do it or not. If you loved your person, do it.  (Laughter)Honourable members, I want to end here by urging all of you. We have never failed to support our fallen honourable colleagues. We have lost a number of honourable colleagues in this House and we have continuously supported the families of those honourable colleagues.We lost Rt Hon. Oulanyah and we continued supporting the family. We lost Hon. Okabe and we continued supporting the family. I am also asking this Parliament to continue supporting and standing with the family of the late Hon. Charles Okello-Engola. (Applause)  As the leadership of the institution, we will continue standing by our fallen honourable colleagues. To the family, God gives and takes. Hon. Charles Okello-Engola has fought a good fight and won. He will always be remembered for all that he did in Lango and Uganda in general. Be strong, he has left a legacy; take on the mantle.We will continue to pray for you and where we can support you, we will. May the good Lord continue to comfort you during this painful time and God will see you through. [The Speaker]Many of us, you see here, are total orphans but we have been able to make it. The God we serve is a God of orphans and widows so He will see you through. I now put the question that Parliament pays a glowing tribute in honor of the late Col (Rtd) Okello Charles Patrick Engola Macodwogo, the former Minister of State for Gender, Labor and Social Development responsible for Labor, Employment and Industrial Relations and a Member of Parliament for Oyam North County, Oyam District with the amendment proposed by Hon. Cecilia. (Question put and agreed to.)THE SPEAKER : Remember to go for prayers tomorrow in Kololo at 10.00 a.m. You do not need a COVID-19 test and the House will be sitting at 2.00 p.m. The East African Community Anthem.The National Anthem.(Exit of the late Hon. Col (Rtd) Okello Charles Patrick Engola Macodwogo.)THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, please sit. A reminder that there will be prayers tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. at Kololo. Let us join our colleagues to go and pray for the departed and then, at 2.00 p.m., we will have House. Remember, we have deadlines. We will receive the corrigenda tomorrow and then on Tuesday, we shall pass the budget.I now adjourn the House to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.(The House rose at 6.15 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 10 May 2023 at 2.00 p.m.)