PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - THIRD MEETINGWEDNESDAY , 3 MAY 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA8466Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.STATEMENT ON THE BRUTAL ARREST OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENTWednesday, 3 May 2023Opposition Whip, the ruling party Members write to the Government Chief Whip and the Independents write to the Speaker, expressing interest in the committees they want. However, expression of interest in the committee you want is not a guarantee that you will be given that committee; it is at the discretion of the whip. The whip will know whether you are competent in this committee or not. We are happy that we have tested you so far; we know who can be where and when. This time, the whips are your bosses.  (Laughter)Honourable members, my attention has been drawn to the recent online campaign on the health sector. We acknowledge that while the Government has done much, a lot still needs to be done on the health sector. As leaders, we need to ensure that we have money for the health sector. We also need to ensure that the health workers are in hospitals doing work. I was surprised with a report, which came from my own district, where the medical team went there and the medical workers were not in the hospitals. Much as we struggle to do this, we also need to encourage our health workers to always be available for our people. As Parliament, we will always try our best to ensure that we have money for the health workers, hospitals and medicines. I urge the Government on the interns who have been out there for over a year. These interns need to be deployed. You know very well that without deploying the interns, they cannot practice anywhere else. They need to get a IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 34TH SITTING - THIRD MEETINGParliament met at 2.01 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. Yesterday, we commenced the consideration of the revenue Bills – not losses Bills. We will continue with the consideration of these Bills. As you know, we are going towards appropriation; we need money to fund the budget. That is why we need to be very careful when passing these Bills. We need to put a lot of time to study which Bill is which and we should also be careful about introducing the Bills midway through the process. We should not even smuggle in the Bills. We need to make sure that the Bills we are processing do not disadvantage the population. We need them to continue doing business and contribute to the economy.Honourable members, as you are aware, we are coming to the end of the second session of the 11th Parliament. As such, we will require you to write an application for us to be able to constitute sectoral committees – and this is under rules 160(2) and 188(2), where the Opposition are supposed to write to the Chief 8467THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 3 MAY 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.certificate of practice in internship to be able to practice. Maybe they will even do their personal things, but they need to have a certificate. So, you need to ensure that you make a follow-up on the issue of the interns and ensure that the health sector is fully catered for.Lastly, Members, the students have come back home – and this takes us to the issue of parenting. As leaders, we must encourage our people – talk to our people – on the aspect of parenting. For most parents, when the children return, they leave them to be everywhere and anywhere. It is the responsibility of our people to do good parenting to our children and, in the process, we will have a good population. Yesterday, we passed a Bill on a dangerous practice, which is not good for our children. We will need to make sure our children are catered for. Today is World Press Day. We wish our friends good luck in whatever they do in the press – the fourth estate. You are ably represented by Hon. Ssenyonyi and Hon. Ssemujju. We wish you people well in whatever you do, but we also want to urge the private sector that much as these people work for you, you should always pay them in time. I have got a lot of complaints from the people who work for radios, TVs and that kind of thing; they have spent over a year without being paid. So, the private sector should ensure that they are paid in time. They have families that they cater for. These people need to be paid for them to work effectively and do better reporting. In most cases, they do not do good reporting because they end up being compromised. Why do they get compromised? It is because you do not pay them salary. Pay them; they will do professional work. I thank all of you and wish you good deliberations.2.09DR MICHAEL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Kassanda):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. In your communication, you talked about the interns and I am also aware that you instructed the Committee on Health to work on the interns’ petition. The details they have not given you is that we have over 2,000 interns who are undeployed. Some have been on “ katebe”  for over a year. These are medical doctors who have finished medical school and are transitioning to full practitioners. I would like to request that you give a timeline for the committee to give us a report because you did not tell them when to report.Secondly, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development yesterday said that he was going to release the money for the senior health officers and interns, but he did not give us a timeline. The minister should be specific on when he is going to release the money for the interns because at the moment they are not working. If you allow me to bring the statistics on what is happening in the hospitals, I will do a presentation here, Madam Speaker. THE SEPAKER:  Thank you, Dr Bukenya. It is a fact that we have interns and the Ministry of Health has that information. There is no need for us to wait for a report from the committee. All we need to do is to budget. We have statistics on how many interns are out there. What I instructed the committee to do was to make sure that they include it in the budget.DR BUKENYA: Madam Speaker, if you allow me to add that the interns who have been working have not been paid for six months, and those payments fall in the current budget. The SHOs have also not been paid for six months, irrespective of what is going to happen in the Financial Year 2023/2024. So, the issue is paying the ones that have been working and the SHOs who are already deployed but also planning for those to be deployed in the next financial year. 8468Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.STATEMENT ON THE BRUTAL ARREST OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENTTHE SPEAKER: About the ones who have not been paid, I asked for a report to be brought on Thursday, which is tomorrow. So, that report will be here and we will have that sorted out. Thank you.2.11MR MAXIMUS OCHAI (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your communication. What attracted my attention is your communication on the designation of Members of Parliament by the respective whips. I want to share a story: This afternoon, when I was coming to the House, I met a colleague from the Uganda Police Force and he was excited to see me. When he asked me the committee I was designated to, I told him the Committee on Human Rights. He laughed and could not believe it.I am an economist, well grounded in economic management. When I was designated at the beginning of the first session to that standing committee, I asked myself what I was – THE SPEAKER: Hon. Maximus Ochai, that is administrative. I was only informing you so you can kindly put in your application to your whips. Government Chief Whip, are you listening? It is a given that you have to apply before they allocate you a committee.This House is not going to determine that because you are an accountant, you should be on PAC. Or that because you are a lawyer, you should be on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. In fact, if I were the whip, this time I would remove Hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo from the legal committee. (Laughter)  No, I am just joking. Anyhow, that will be handled by the whips; do not worry. 2.13MR ALFRED EDAKASI (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Regarding your communication about the health sector, the people of Kaberamaido are still below 39 per cent staffing at the general hospital. The information I have is that the finance ministry is not putting any more money on wage. We are worried that our people will continue to suffer or the situation might even get worse.In Kaberamaido, we have several subcounties without health centres III and so, the general hospital is a destination for everybody. We have been working with the Ministry of Health to move the percentage of staffing upwards but up to now, we are stuck at below 39 per cent.I am glad that you raised the issue and hopefully, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or even the House can pick it up to consider the issue of wages as an issue for social services.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I do not think it should only be for Kaberamaido; it should be for all the hospitals in Uganda. We may need to conduct an analysis of the staffing levels in all hospitals in the country for us to determine how much money we are putting into wages. Prime Minister, do you have anything to say?2.15THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Your Excellency – (Laughter) - Madam Speaker, I am sorry. I was attending a meeting with – I am just from State House.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, listen to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. There is only one “His Excellency” in the country.MS NABBANJA: You know I have been in a meeting, so I still have that at the back of my mind.Madam Speaker, the issue of staffing in our hospitals and health facilities across the country continues to hinder health care in our country. However, I want to point out a few issues for Members to note.Because I have been a Minister of State for Health, there are some districts that are given wage, then they return the money. Why? It is because some people have their children who are still training maybe in universities. So, we have had that back and forth. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR8469THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 3 MAY 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.I hope Kaberamaido District has not returned any money for wage because once we upgraded some health centres, we also budgeted for wage through this Parliament. So, I am wondering why Kaberamaido is at 39 per cent, when the national coverage is above that. There could be an issue, which I wanted, through you, Rt Hon. Speaker, to investigate. And so, I request the honourable member to team up with me so that we can know the root cause.Otherwise, you may find that the situation in Bukedea District may be different. In Kakumiro District, as I speak now, it is almost at 60 or 62 per cent. Why is Kaberamaido still at that low level? Why are other districts still low? So, we need to investigate and find out. Some of those issues arise due to delays by some of the district service commissions. Thank you.MR AFIDRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I would like to get from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is: I represent the people of Lower Madi County and Madi-Okollo District.In our wage bill for the recruitment of health workers and the entire staff, we had, as I speak, about Shs 1.8 billion unspent. We came to the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury (PS/ST) as a district, through the Public Service Commission, and we worked on the figures for recruitment this very time. That figure was reduced to Shs 1.48 billion.From the advice given by the PS/ST, when the Public Service Commission had allowed Madi-Okollo District to do the recruitment, the PS/ST said, “No, for now, no recruitment of public officers shall be done, neither will it happen in the coming financial year.” For the health sector in Madi-Okollo District, the number of staffing is below 35 per cent; at least Kaberamaido has 38 per cent and Kakumiro is at 68 per cent. The issue of staffing cuts across this country. Madam Speaker, through your office, I appeal that Government removes that ban on recruiting public servants next financial year. If not, services to this country and the people we represent are going to be highly affected - from the health sector to education and everywhere. Or if Parliament does not say; “We need recruitment of public servants in our districts,” it is going to be a task for us. I beg to submit.MS NALUYIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. A similar situation is happening in Wakiso, as far as Entebbe Regional Referral Hospital is concerned. It was upgraded in 2019, from a district hospital to a regional hospital and it now serves six districts, including even international patients. As we speak today - because I was monitoring the hospital with district officials last month: The administrator informed us of the problems and among them was that 28 per cent of the staffing levels - and this is what I got from them. If need be, it can further be investigated. THE SPEAKER : Honourable members, when we talk about the national health centres coverage, we look at the coverage which would indeed be higher. We could say the national average is at 70 per cent for the whole country. However, when you make individual analysis you will find out that Kampala is at 80 per cent, Madi-Okollo is at 10 per cent and Hon. Edakasi’s place is at 15 per cent. That is where the problem is. When you aggregate it, it becomes a national average, which goes high. Therefore, we need to look at each district and the whole country in totality for us to be able to appreciate what is happening. Let us look at the cost-benefit analysis. On the issue of banning recruitment vis-à-vis people’s lives, whom are we keeping that money for? We need to have these medical workers in place and move on.2.21MR GABRIEL OKUMU (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you for your communication. As a parent, I was touched when you said we are facing difficult times, and yet the children are coming back from school.8470Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.STATEMENT ON THE BRUTAL ARREST OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENTI would like to add my voice to yours that as parents, we should try to instil morals into our children. We should at least try to have time and take children to church. We should engage them in sports and above all, the children who are coming back home should at least be supportive of their parents. I think, in both ways, both parties will benefit. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Some children even call you “uncles” because you leave when they are sleeping and go back when they are sleeping; so they say, “Uncle was here.”DR OTAALA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am still raising a point of clarification to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister regarding the ban on recruitment. If there is -THE SPEAKER:  I have made a ruling on that - that the ban should not be there. Let us make an analysis and see what the issue is.DR OTAALA:  The point I am talking about is in respect to those doctors who made sacrifices during the COVID-19 pandemic. This was the worst situation ever, when people were dying. Even the health workers would get cowed to go to the frontline to save lives. Up to now, even when Cabinet passed a resolution to recruit those doctors who made sacrifices during COVID-19, nothing has been done. This is the greatest disservice that has been done to the doctors of this country; to sacrifice your life and yet you cannot be given permanent employment. The doctors are “floating”. Most importantly, universities are now churning out over 6,000 doctors, and yet we lack doctors in all our health facilities.  The faster Government comes up with a clear recruitment plan for the health sector, the better for our country. I beg to submit.2.24MS HANIFA NABUKEERA (NUP, Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You talked about medicines in the hospital. I implore the Government that when it is dispatching medicine to our general hospitals, it should send us messages from the National Medical Stores (NMS) that they have delivered the medicine.However, I suggest that before delivering the medicine, they should give us information so that we witness this dispatch. Then, we will know what amount of medicine is enough and this will help us to monitor these medicines in our hospitals. I submit.2.25MS JOYCE BAGALA (NUP, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is about your communication regarding the plight of journalists in Uganda and to say that private media owners should be compelled to pay these journalists because you cannot ask for integrity from journalists that you have not paid. As the Shadow Minister of Information, I have received a petition from employees of SEE TV; over 60 employees have not been paid for more than a year. They were last paid in February last year and the owner of SEE TV , Brutus Kagingo, has sold SEE TV to a pastor without paying them. These private business owners should be compelled to pay the journalists who work for them. In regard to the human rights violations of journalists, you find that journalists are abused on duty. Just recently, you all watched, during the demonstration of medical interns, when journalists from NBS Television, Thomas Kitimbo and Francis Isano - who are both photographers - were pepper-sprayed. The officer was very much identified but we have not seen anything done to this officer.We would like to appeal to the Ministry of Internal Affairs to take action against these officers and for these actions to be made public. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, aren’t we finishing all the time on my communication? The Prime Minister has another meeting and she has to make her presentation. Can I hear from Hon. Acuti?[Mr Okumu] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRCOMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR8471THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 3 MAY 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.2.27MR SAMUEL OPIO (Independent,  Kole North County, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also react to the matters to do with health on three issues:The first is on the issue of interns. The ministerial policy statement and the report are indicated as an unfunded priority on the budget for interns for next financial year. What is allocated is Shs 8 billion and what they need is Shs 80 billion.  I request the Budget Committee to make that consideration. The second issue is on HR recruitment. It is not only an issue about money, but it is also an issue about the policy on recruitment. Last financial year, Mulago National Referral Hospital returned more than Shs 2 billion on human resource. The reason why that is happening is that the Health Service Commission needs about nine months to recruit, but the funds are released in the third and fourth quarter. In the end, they cannot recruit and it goes back to the Consolidated Fund.I would like to request the Prime Minister that we should review the policy on recruitment. It should ideally start in the first quarter; at the start of the financial year. Lastly, it is on equipment. About only 47 per cent of the equipment in our facilities are functional; the 53 per cent are not functional. Every year, the Ministry of Health has presented an unfunded priority of just Shs 12 billion. We are failing to identify Shs 12 billion to maintain our equipment. I request again that this be considered this coming financial year; that this budget be provided so that the equipment can be functionalised. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. For Members with matters of national importance, we will handle them tomorrow during Prime Minister’s Time. - Is it a reaction to the communication? No repeating issues of recruitment or health centres.2.29MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County,  Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a need for an ordinance and bylaws by the lower local governments, especially in regard to our children who have come for holidays. There is what we call, “a loose and reckless lifestyle” by these children, where they go dancing, to casinos, and sports betting.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Aza, do not make the Government to do parenting for you. Do your parenting; tell your children the dos and don’ts and be a parent at home. Do not disappear from home the whole day; otherwise, you will not know where the children are and what they are doing. Children could be sodomised somewhere - Your work should not just be to put children there.MR AZA:  Most obliged, Madam Speaker.2.31MR FRANCIS  MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not want to repeat what has been said but I would like to emphasise something. We have been demanding the Ministry of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance to institute a tribunal to deal with a conflict between media houses, UCC and the Government. Without this tribunal, what we are talking about will not be actualised. I propose that on World Press Freedom Day, the Government should give this to media houses as a gift so conflicts will be sorted.Finally, on the issue of health - I come from Buhweju but since October last year, we have not received medicines. I raised it here sometime back and the Minister of Health informed me that something was going to happen. Madam Speaker, I have just talked to the district health officer who said they have no medicines, including ergometrine for the mothers. I know the Prime Minister loves Buhweju very much and she is a very determined woman. I worked with her in the Parliamentary Commission; so 8472Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.STATEMENT ON THE BRUTAL ARREST OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENTI know her capacity. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please think about us. Thank you very much.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Prime Minister, the medicine he has talked about is very important for women. I know you are a mother, and you believe in protecting women. Can you make a follow-up on the delivery of medicine to all hospitals in Uganda? You can start with Buhweju, then all hospitals in Uganda.2.33MS NANCY ACORA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lamwo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you for the communication, especially on absenteeism of health workers in the Government and private health centres. I would like to bring to the attention of the House that the Ministry of Health early this year made a resolution to all nursing assistants in the country, who worked tirelessly to support the health service delivery, to lay down their tools by June this year. Aware that we already have low staffing levels countrywide in health and other sectors – it is said “health is wealth” - but if these nursing assistants who do the donkey work besides the village health team lay down their tools, I do not know how the country is going to move. Otherwise, we know that in the next financial year, there is no wage bill for recruitment in this country - be it in health, education and all the other departments.I am appealing through your office, Madam Speaker, that the Ministry of Health does not ask the nursing assistants to lay down their tools. These people should work until their retirement age. Otherwise, that is time their service is disbarred.In Lamwo District, we have over 95 South Sudan refugees and every day, more than 200 people come to the district. Yet, we do not have a district general hospital. In addition, we have very low staffing levels in the district. How about other districts I have not mentioned?We appeal to the Government not to ask nursing assistants to lay down their tools; they should continue to work. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as the Leader of Government Business, do something for the nursing assistants. Thank you.2.35THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker, on the nursing assistants, the Minister of Health is here - I know she has an answer. However, in the year 2020/2021, we all agreed to phase out nursing assistants. That is the policy of the Government. We agreed here that come June this year, we should have a higher cadre of staff. In fact, those nursing assistants were given opportunity for six years to upgrade and there are those who have upgraded and those who have failed to upgrade. So, we shall -THE SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister, much as there was an agreement, what Members are saying is that there is a ban on recruitment. What do we do?MS NABBANJA:  As you all know, out of our budget of Shs 50 trillion, almost Shs 17 trillion is servicing our loans. So, we remain with almost Shs 33 trillion and out of Shs 33 trillion, when you reduce wages – THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is not Shs 33 trillion; it is about Shs 25 trillion. Rt Hon. Prime Minister finish. I was just making a correction and we are in agreement that much of the money goes for loan repayment.MS NABBANJA : We all agreed here to reduce the appetite to borrow and only go for concessional loans. Madam Speaker, we cannot use loans to pay our workers. The answer is: We all need to mobilise and have more money.MS AISHA KABANDA:  Madam Speaker, what was agreed in this House was the training to be stopped because it was kind of a confused course which was not clear. The stopping of officers from offering services took all of us by surprise.[Mr Mwijukye] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR8473THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 3 MAY 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.This House did not agree that serving officers be terminated without a plan. What was agreed in this House was the training to be stopped and we have a better training package for this country. I seek clarification from the Prime Minister whether it is true this House agreed that the officers be terminated without a clear plan for phasing them out. What has happened in our constituencies is that the officers were laid off and put off the payroll without a way out of the services. I seek clarification whether this House agreed to terminate their services without a way forward.MR GILBERT OLANYA:  Thank you, Hon. Aisha. The information I would like to give is: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, aware that currently all health centres II are being aided by nursing assistants all over the country, especially in my district in Amuru - Most of the in-charges are nursing assistants.  Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if you lay off nursing assistants - I am telling you the staffing levels in most of the districts will go down. (Interjection)  The ideas –  THE SPEAKER:  The problem is that you are all disorganised. Now, you all sit down. (Laughter)  Next item. STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER ON THE BRUTAL ARREST OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT ON THURSDAY , 27 APRIL 2023THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, you all recall – and you witnessed – the brutal manner in which our Members of Parliament were arrested by both uniformed and plain-clothed security personnel on 27 April 2023, near the main gate of Parliament. My presumption is that when you are within the premises of Parliament, you have all the immunity and safety. So, I want – no, even if somebody is a criminal, you cannot arrest them like that within Parliament. For me, arresting people within the premises of Parliament in a brutal way like that was not called for. (Applause)As the head of the institution, I register my apologies to the Members of Parliament for that incident; it is not supposed to happen within the precincts of Parliament . (Applause)This was not an isolated incident. Over the last few weeks, we have witnessed a systematic pattern of disruption of constituency activities of Women Members of Parliament, especially the Opposition Women Members of Parliament. (Applause)What is paramount here, whether you are Opposition or not, is that you are all Members of Parliament. Yesterday I was in the Opposition, but today I am in Government. You never know what happens.Whereas the matter of brutal arrest of the Members of Parliament was raised in this House – and while the Members were released shortly and we picked them from the central police station – the presiding officer then, requested the Leader of Government Business to come and make a submission to this House in regard to the brutal arrest of the Members of Parliament. As you know, Article 23 of the Constitution is instructive on the protection of personal liberty. Article 23(3) prescribes the manner of conducting an arrest. Unlawful arrest is not acceptable. The representatives of the people in this House have been brutalised. Hon. Susan was admitted at Rubaga Hospital in a very bad condition. Madam Prime Minister, it is my responsibility – and yours – first of all, as women, to protect these women. (Applause)It is also our responsibility, as leaders of this country, to help the President – and I am saying to help the President – and the Government. You will find that these people who were arresting these girls are “Opposition” in uniform. If they were not “Opposition” in uniform, then, they would not do that.8474Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.STATEMENT ON THE BRUTAL ARREST OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENTIf you see somebody is protesting and they have a placard, you move behind that person and see whether that person can do anything. You cannot carry a woman – that woman you are carrying is either your wife, daughter, mother or sister. Hon. Nyakato told me they pressed her breasts. Honourable members, I want to guide this way: The Prime Minister is going to make a presentation, but I want us to debate this with all soberness. If you start behaving funnily – what we want is the solution to this issue. If we are going to say Members should be allowed to conduct activities in their constituencies so long as they are not harmful – holding Women’s Day celebrations… There is nobody who is going to go to Bukedea and say “I want to be the guest of honour” when I am the Woman Member of Parliament. Never! You must guard your space. (Applause)Hon. Prime Minister, there is nobody – I know you, Majegere.  You can even punch somebody. (Laughter) I do not think you can even allow anybody to go to your constituency to be a chief guest. - You stopped? Very good. (Laughter)  Now, you are a very good girl. Please, you are welcome.We are going to have this statement in accordance with Rule 52 (1) of our Rules of Procedure. The Prime Minister will present and our debate will not go beyond one hour. Okay? (Laughter) The Leader of the Opposition?2.47 THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga) : Thank you, Madam Speaker. Invaluably, sobriety cannot elude us when debating very serious matters. This is the House of Parliament and I suppose the public construes it as such.Before the Prime Minister makes her statement on the subject matter, she must prove to this Parliament that she is a serious person – THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Mpuuga, there are some things we have agreed on; I have said that let us not put personal feelings in this. By the time the Prime Minister comes – can you all keep quiet? By the time she comes to the House – she was in Kyankwanzi. I told her: “You must come to the House; the issue is about women.” She is serious; She is a very serious person. MR MPUUGA:  Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I can see that the Prime Minister is visibly angry with my use of the word “serious”. I will contextualise it, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  You just withdraw your statement – I beg of you – for us to handle this thing conclusively. MR MPUUGA:  Madam Speaker, I am going to withdraw, as my last statement. Madam Speaker, at the beginning of this session, with your indulgence, I played a video in this House, quoting the Prime Minister about a citizen that had disappeared for three years –THE SPEAKER:  Now, you are destroying my women’s debate.MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, allow me to make my statement. You ordered the Prime Minister –THE SPEAKER:  There is a point of order from the Prime Minister. MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, I am almost two years old. I have tried my level best to serve my country. I am one of those patriotic Ugandans - THE SPEAKER: You have not tried; you have done it.MS NABBANJA: Therefore, is it in order for my brother to say that I am unserious?THE SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I know you as a very serious person and that is why you are here.[The Speaker]8475THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 3 MAY 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MR MPUUGA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have said that I will withdraw it after making my settlement. This is unlike me and I should be understood. The Prime Minister has been in office for two years. She made a comment that she is in knowledge of a citizen who will have disappeared for three years on 30 June 2023. THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Mpuuga -MR MPUUGA:  Madam Speaker, allow me to make this statement -THE SPEAKER:  Honourable Leader of the Opposition, I will allow you to make that statement after we have discussed the women issue. Why are you being discriminative? Why don›t you want us to talk about our women issue?MR MPUUGA:  Madam Speaker, it is after she has proved that she was either lying that we shall listen to her statement as serious. THE SPEAKER:  No.MR MPUUGA:  We are putting into context her statement because that statement she made that she is aware of the whereabouts of Kibalama yet she has never surrendered him to the public and she wants us to listen to her on another statement is the reason I was putting seriousness in the context.Madam Speaker, will the Prime Minister rise to inform the country where Kibalama is so that we can listen to her as a serious leader in this country? You said you know where he is. For two years and 11 months, the family has been looking for Kibalama, only to learn that you know where he is. Will you tell us where the husband of a woman and a father is? You said you know. Where is Kibalama?THE SPEAKER:  Okay, that is done.MR MPUUGA:  I have reason to even not listen to you rather than quarrelling. THE SPEAKER:  Are you quarrelling?MR MPUUGA:   A citizen has disappeared; I have a reason to quarrel.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Mpuuga, you have finished presenting your issue.MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, I am on record on this Floor of Parliament - you allowed us to go and come up with a statement -THE SPEAKER:  On Kibalama?MS NABBANJA:  To inform the country about those people who claim to have been abducted but you have never given us time on this Floor of Parliament to do that. You are the one who came here and said you are not ready for us. As the Leader of the Opposition, are you serious? (Laughter)  THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I also would like to say that it is not true I have not given you time. I am giving you time tomorrow to come and make a presentation on that issue. (Members rose_)  Stop shouting as if you are drunkards. (Laughter)  Honourable members, let us have that statement tomorrow. For now, let us first look at the statement about the female Members. Please, as I have said, let us debate all the things with soberness - first remove that statement. The Prime Minister is serious.Hon. Mpuuga, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is serious. - No, if she is not serious, you will bring it up tomorrow. MR MPUUGA:  Madam Speaker, you know, I handle matters mildly and I give people time. When I raise my voice, I have no information to give to Kibalama’s wife. She has had it for two years and 11 months. THE SPEAKER:  Do what I have said.MR MPUUGA:  And the Prime Minister is happy about it? So, your seriousness, for now, is in perspective. I withdraw to allow today’s debate but I hold her seriousness in context. 8476Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.STATEMENT ON THE BRUTAL ARREST OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENTTHE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, we shall have the report on Kibalama and the team tomorrow on the Floor. So do not expect the Prime Minister’s time tomorrow, she will be presenting to you during that time. Is that okay? When you bring up your emotions as the report is being presented, I will shift the debate to the next item.I want you to listen attentively. Where you want a clarification, ask respectfully. We can disagree in this House but respectfully. Do you get it? Do not lose your emotions because nobody wants them. Yes, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.2.52THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robbina Nabbanja):  Madam Speaker, I will start with the introduction. You guided that a statement be presented by the Government - that was supposed to be yesterday. In response to the incident of Thursday, 27 April, 2023 in Kampala and those before it, in some parts of the country. However, I could not present the Government statement yesterday because of the Cabinet meeting that took place on the same day.I would like to thank you for allowing me to present these statements today. Madam Speaker, let me give the background. In the recent past, we have witnessed confrontations between security personnel and political actors in various parts of the country, including Hoima, Mityana, and Kasese and recently at Parliament and Soroti. These confrontations resulted in the incident of 27th April in Kampala, which involved 11 Members of Parliament and the police. Madam Speaker, our country is governed by the rule of law. Our rules create rights as well as obligations for all people, including citizens as well as for law and order enforcement officers. Following the incident of last Thursday, investigations into that matter, and all the previous ones were started to establish the circumstances under which they happened. These investigations will enable the Government to gather evidence surrounding these incidents and take appropriate action. In addition, this will help ensure that such incidents do not happen again in the way they did, or in the unlikely event that they do happen, they are managed better by security. A summary of these incidents, which is limited to the extent that will not jeopardise investigations is as follows:KaseseThe Forum for Democratic Change, on 3 April 2023, held a leaders’ meeting successfully at Bellevue Equator Guest House in Kasese.Before the meeting started, there was confusion as the organisers had not notified Police about it, resulting in a standoff with the police authorities. However, upon notifying the police, the organisers of the meeting were immediately provided with security and the event took place smoothly.SorotiOn 14th April, Soroti City planned to hold Women’s Day celebrations. However, due to limited resources and other unavoidable circumstances, the event was rescheduled to another date yet to be confirmed.Hon. Joan Alobo, the Woman Member of Parliament for Soroti City, reportedly continued to mobilise people for the function in spite of the resolution of 13th April in a meeting by Soroti City authorities, which postponed the event. Hon. Joan reportedly declined to attend this meeting. The tension that followed was, however, well managed by the police and the situation returned to normal.BuvumaOn 19 April 2023 at around 4.00 p.m., the District Police Commander, Buvuma, briefed police officers at the Central Police Station about the unlawful assembly organised by Hon. Suzan Nakaziba the Woman Member of Parliament for that district.[Ms Rwakoojo]8477THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 3 MAY 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.I am informed that the people had been mobilised to take part in the Women’s Day celebrations, which had not been cleared by the Police. The event was scheduled to take place on 21st at Kyanja Village, Bwema Subcounty in Buvuma District.The DPC deployed a team of officers to ensure that the function did not take place because Hon. Nakaziba Suzan had not informed the Inspector General of Police.The police officers arrived at Kyanja Village at about 8.00 p.m. and immediately reported their presence to the area LC Chairperson. At the request of the police, the LC authorities informed the residents that the event had been postponed.On 20 April 2023 at around 7.15 a.m., one Matovu Stephen, the NUP mobiliser and a campaigner in the district, moved through Kyanja and Kaziru villages chanting NUP slogans telling people to be strong and turn up in big numbers for the event. At about 1.00 p.m. on the same day, a boat carrying a group of men docked at Kyanja Landing Site. It was also loaded with food items including bunches of Matooke , a sack of rice and household utensils like saucepans, plates, knives.The organisers planned to prepare meals for the people at the function - I think the knives were for peeling. I was informed that the police officers confiscated all these items.At about 3.00 p.m., a group of other officers from the Field Force Unit joined the team at Kyanja to tighten security. On 21 April 2023, at around 9.30 a.m., the police received information indicating that Hon. Nakaziba was at Ssenyi Landing Site in Buikwe preparing to cross over to Kyanja Village to meet the people who had gathered for an unauthorised meeting.Part of the team of officers - I am talking about those that I have mentioned above - was deployed on water to monitor Hon. Nakaziba’s movements and stop her from reaching Kyanja – (Interjections)  – I am reporting, honourable colleagues.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, you should be happy that she is giving you information.MS NABBANJA:  At about 1.00 p.m., Hon. Nakaziba was seen in a boat with about six persons heading to Kyanja Landing Site. When she was stopped by police officers, she turned a deaf ear and instead ordered the Coxswain to continue to Kyanja Landing Site. THE SPEAKER:  Was she stopped on the water?MS NABBANJA:  The moment the boat in which Hon. Nakaziba Suzan and her team were traveling docked at Kyanja Landing Site, they all jumped out chanting NUP slogans as they moved towards the site, where a few people had started gathering. Hon. Nakaziba was requested to board the boat and abandon the assembly that she had started organising but she refused. Instead, she continued encouraging people to gather and move towards the venue of the unauthorised meeting. This prompted officers to use tear gas to disperse the crowd but Hon. Nakaziba continued advancing towards the venue.A team of officers stopped the people from moving forward but Hon. Nakaziba and her team refused as they attempted to fight the officers. Six of her team members were arrested. These are; Onyango Gad, Opondo Daniel, Matovu Stephen, Kalumba Ronald, Ssentamu Henry, and Ouma Gilbert. That is what I can report about Buvuma.MityanaOn 30 March 2023, Mityana District planned to hold Women’s Day celebrations at Butayunja Subcounty Headquarters. However, due to political differences in the district, a rift emerged between the two parallel camps. As a result, the Mityana District Chairman, Mr Mugisha Patrick and Hon. Joyce Bagala, the Woman Member of Parliament of Mityana District and members of the district women 8478Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.STATEMENT ON THE BRUTAL ARREST OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENTcouncil committee, all belonging to different camps, failed to agree on the person to invite to the function as the chief guest. This resulted into confrontations, which could be avoided.KampalaOn 27 April 2023, at around 7.19 a.m., 11 Women Members of Parliament attempted to march to the Ministry of Internal Affairs to deliver a petition to the minister. The honourable Members of Parliament were protesting what they called the unfair treatment of female opposition MPs by the Uganda Police Force, the Resident District Commissioners and other security agencies, which stopped them from holding Women’s Day celebrations in their respective districts.Madam Speaker, the honourable Members of Parliament, as you already know, were stopped from marching on to the Ministry of Internal Affairs but they walked out of the main entrance of the Parliamentary buildings on Parliamentary Avenue. This was followed by scuffles followed by the scuffles between the honourable Members of Parliament and the police officers. The Members of Parliament were arrested and taken to Kampala Central Police Station. They were, however, released later that day. Notable parties Madam Speaker, these incidents occurred after various honourable women Members of Parliament, seeking to hold belated Women’s Day celebrations in their areas were stopped from doing so by security agencies. The identifiable actors in all these incidents, therefore, include: 1. The Members of Parliament; 2. The Police, as the enforcers of law and order; and3. The resident district commissioners. Issues How should the shared public space be utilised by all people in the enjoyment of their rights and freedoms created by the law? The sensitivity and duty of care to others in the public space, and how to safeguard the same as we exercise our rights is worth our attention. How should law enforcement agencies utilise their authority and powers given to them by the law, including handling and managing the consequences of a breach of the law? Isn’t it time to examine and agree on the conduct of district celebrations, after the main events at national level? These issues and many others are food for thought.Action takenAn update to the House on the steps taken is as follows:1. The honourable Members of Parliament were released by the Police; 2. Investigations have been instituted into the Kampala incident, which occurred last week. This will include reviewing the CCTV footage in order to take advantage of appropriate action; 3. As soon as the footage of what transpired in Buvuma came to the attention of the Inspector General of Police, he ordered the Police Professional Standards Unit to investigate the alleged beating and torture of Hon. Suzan Mugabi, some of her supporters and the concerned officers were summoned for interrogation. Other police officers were detained and some have been released on police bond. All these incidents are still being investigated in order to enable the Government to get a comprehensive picture of what transpired to inform action. In the medium term, we shall examine additional measures such as those regarding the use of our shared public spaces, mindful of the sum total of shared rights and [Ms Nabbanja]8479THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 3 MAY 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.obligations of everyone, including the political actors.Madam Speaker, in that respect, we need the Police and it is desirable to inform them whenever we plan to hold processions or to assemble so that these functions are well coordinated and regulated. This is a matter in which we need to have a frank conversation like we are going to do today rather than putting all the blame on the law enforcers.Reviews of command, control, coordination, supervision and training as well as evaluation of training standards and Standard Operating Procedures are also being undertaken by the Police in order to enhance good judgement on the part of the law enforcers.Let us not demonise the security agencies. Once identified, errant security officers will always be handled appropriately. Let us all do our part in ensuring that as we enjoy our rights, we remain mindful of the rights of others.In conclusion, the Government does not in any way condone misconduct on the part of our law enforcement officers. We shall address any operational flaws. In addition, all actors are called upon to be law-abiding to facilitate peaceful processes and enjoyment of their rights. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for the response to what we asked. There is one interesting thing I heard from the Prime Minister. First of all, I want to ask the Attorney-General whether the issue of notification of police is optional or mandatory.Secondly, is Women’s Day a national function? If it is a national function, do you need to ask for permission to hold it?Thirdly, if one needs to be cleared by the Police, under which law? (Applause)  Or you just inform the Police for safety so that they can provide you with security?Fourthly, they said Hon. Susan Mugabi had unauthorised meetings and moving from one place to another; so as a Woman Member of Parliament, do I need to get permission to move from one constituency to the other? (Applause) Don’t I have the right to move from one subcounty to another to meet my voters? They said she was chanting the NUP slogans. Is it a crime? If I am NRM, I remain NRM and chant my NRM. So, why should you stop another person from chanting her party slogan?The other issue is that she fought back the police officers. Now, we are here talking about the rights and freedom created by the law, the sensitivity and the duty of care to others in public space; we are talking about  public  space that we must all share between the ruling Government and Opposition but what is important here, Madam Prime Minister, is that when we see army men killing our own, we get scared. I think this debate is coming in timely. When these things are happening, are we safe? Is anybody safe? Attorney-General, can you, first, give me a response to that?3.21THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker –THE SPEAKER: Members, listen to the Attorney-General. I just want the legality. The report of the Prime Minister, first of all, it is very apologetic that it happened – and she is not the one who did it.MR KAFUUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have raised a number of issues. I appreciate the statement of the Rt Hon.  Prime Minister. The honesty in that statement tells it all. That is why it helped you, Madam Speaker, to formulate questions for us to answer as to whether whatever happened was legal or not.You know very well or have heard about the existence of the law known as the Public Order Management Act. You also know or have heard of the fact that there was a ruling of Court in regard to that law. What we need to do, as office of the Attorney-General -8480Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.STATEMENT ON THE BRUTAL ARREST OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENTTHE SPEAKER:  Continue. Hajat, you first sit.MR KAFUUZI: What we need to do, as Office of the Attorney-General, is to advise that a practice direction be prepared and circulated to offices managing security to offer guidance as to how public association events such as these are handled vis-a-vis  the Court ruling. (Applause)The other question is -THE SPEAKER:  Honourable Attorney-General, we passed the Law Revision (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill in this House, which included the same Bill – Hon. Anna is also making noise. MR KAFUUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That was an oversight. What I am trying to say is that we have laws in place and may be, what we need to do is to make them unknown to the powers that be, to make those laws, rules and regulations known to those in charge of public order management so that we avoid the skirmishes that we are having.Madam Speaker, your other question was -THE SPEAKER:  You will ask the clarification, let him finish.MR KAFUUZI: Is International Women’s Day a national day? It is an international day and we celebrate it as a nation. Do women need to seek leave -THE SPEAKER:  Continue.MR KAFUUZI: Like I have said, the mistake that we have made is that we have not made it clear to people in charge that these are international days, we celebrate them as a nation and whoever is bound to do so, in his or her own constituency, should be at liberty to do so in line with the law. (Applause)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. MR KAFUUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Hon. Deputy Attorney-General.Honourable members, in the public gallery, this afternoon, we have a delegation of officials from Roots Africa, a US Non-Profit Organisation. They are led by Hon. Christine Nakiwala and are here to witness our proceedings. Please, stand up and we see you. You are most welcome. (Applause)  Thank you for coming.Honourable members, I asked a question and, one, I am happy that the Attorney-General has said that it is not mandatory for you to inform the police, but that it should be out of courtesy. Now, I am going to give you advice, as your own. Equally, it is very important for you, as a leader when you are in an area, to inform the police. You do not need permission but it is good practice for you to inform the police that: “I am going to have this function here.” You need to do that.Secondly, when you see that security personnel want to fight, you are a woman; do not fight back – no self-defence. I am asking you, kindly. If a general can be killed, what about you? Do you have the energy to fight? If somebody is attacking you -I liked one person on that team: Hon. Ethel. When they were saying “arrest”, Hon. Ethel was the first person to enter the vehicle. (Laughter )Honourable members, you have heard from the Prime Minister. We can hear from you – one minute each.3.27MS FLORENCE KABUGHO (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. It is unfortunate that they are talking about what happened in the evening of 3rd. However, before that, I had a graduation ceremony for the young mothers who had been skilled in 8481THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 3 MAY 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.tailoring as well as salon and hairdressing. I had got clearance from all security offices, beginning with the RDC, DISO, RPC and DPC -THE SPEAKER:  You do not need clearance but I want whoever says they had clearance to give me a copy of the notification they gave them. MS KABUGHO:  I will do it, Madam Speaker.When we were in the middle of the function, police came, closed the gate and stopped people from accessing the venue. The function was with the support of my fellow Women MPs who had come to support me. They closed the venue when the guest of honour was getting close to the gate – that is, Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, accompanied by Hon. Ssemujju Nganda. The fact that they stopped the function really got me worried. It was not only my function that had been disrupted. In 2011, around September, I took an ambulance to my constituency. They stopped me from handing it over to the people yet my colleague in the same area had been given permission to hand over his ambulance –THE SPEAKER: Was that in 2011? MS KABUGHO: It was September 2011 – (Interjections) - sorry, 2021. It was a brand new ambulance. The security personnel stopped me from handing it over yet I had got clearance from them. Madam Speaker, it is very unfortunate –THE SPEAKER: Did you finally hand it over? MS KABUGHO: I just took it to a health centre where people can access it. Madam Speaker, it is very unfortunate that despite the fact that the security ministry is given a heavy budget – (Member timed out.)3.30MS JOAN ACOM (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti City): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is, indeed, saddening and disappointing that we have heard such a report from the Prime Minister –THE SPEAKER: Honourable members,  I plan to allow all of you to speak. I am going to dedicate this whole afternoon to this. (Applause)  After listening to Members who were affected, I will move this side. MS ACOM: I would like to thank you for standing with us, the women of Uganda; you are one in a million. As for Soroti, I am very disappointed to hear the report our “mother” has given. How do you postpone Women’s Day celebrations by saying there is no money? Did we hear today that the Government did not send money to districts - give us an account that only Soroti did not benefit from the Shs 3 million that was sent to all districts? (Applause)This is not the first time I am being blocked –THE SPEAKER: Hon. Joan Acom, are you saying Soroti did not benefit?MS ACOM: The reason the Prime Minister gave is that the function was postponed because there was no money.THE SPEAKER: No, the Shs 3 million was sent to all the districts in Uganda. What the Prime Minister was saying is that there were insufficient funds for hosting the function. That is the reason they gave.MS ACOM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The function was postponed, following a report that the Resident City Commissioner (RCC), gave, upon hearing that the chief guest of the day was going to be the Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. He is on record saying that as long as he is the RCC of Soroti City, he will never allow any Opposition member to preside over a national function. THE SPEAKER: So, who did the RCC want, if not Hon. Cecilia Ogwal? Honourable members, the chief guests at all Women’s COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR8482Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.STATEMENT ON THE BRUTAL ARREST OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENTDay celebrations are women Members of Parliament. (Applause)  It is the woman Member of Parliament to choose the person she wants. However, stop delegating those functions; be your own chief guest; that is politics.MS ACOM: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Again, around June last year, the same police stopped me from entering the main market and paraded officers everywhere around the main market, just because I had gone to listen to my women who were complaining about the market saga –THE SPEAKER: Couldn’t you meet the women outside the market?MS ACOM: They are always in the market. (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: No, Hon. Acom - (Laughter)  - that is a place for business for everybody. Let us be considerate. 3.32MS JOYCE BAGALA (NUP, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not know whether I should thank the Prime Minister for the report or not. THE SPEAKER: Please, do. I know the lady in you. (Laughter)MS BAGALA: Just for the sake of it, I appreciate the report. I will start with Mityana. I am glad that her report is just two paragraphs. Madam Speaker, you have asked us to share with you copies of the notifications we sent the police. I gave a notification to the IGP, and shared the same with the DPC and the District Chairperson. I have all the copies of correspondences sent out to Mityana District Executive, the RDC and the DPC.I have read the report of the Prime Minister. She says, “However, due to political differences in the district, a rift emerged between two parallel camps. As a result, the Mityana District Chairperson, Mr Patrick Mugisha, Hon. Joyce Bagala, the Woman MP and members of the District Women Council Committee all belonging to different camps…”I would like to know, which camps she is talking about. The good thing is you have guided that for all Women’s Day celebrations, the Woman MP is supposed to be the guest of honour. She is saying in the report that a disagreement arose from failing to agree on who the guest of honour would be yet I am the Woman Member of Parliament. Let me also say this. In Mityana, the district executive communicated the venue for the function and what was going to happen there. However, the RDC - and that is why I am very disappointed because in the report, they mention that among the parties involved were RDCs. I did not read anything in the report where the Prime Minister talked about the RDCS yet in Mityana District, the RDC said he was deployed to ensure that Hon. Joyce Bagala is removed. I am thinking that if you want to remove Bagala, you should wait for 2026, not now when I am still a Member of Parliament. I will also add this because the Minister for the Presidency is here. In the petition, we wrote to you, Madam Speaker, we requested that the Minister for the Presidency comes here and explains the role of RDCS in this chaos - (Applause) - because they say they are the leaders in these districts. In my own situation, the RDC, Mr Africano Aharikundira, went ahead and said, “You see, oyo Bagala, I can slap charges of treason against her and that will finish her.” Wasn’t –THE SPEAKER: Do you have evidence to that? MS BAGALA: Yes, I do.THE SPEAKER: Can you bring us that evidence?MS BAGALA: I will bring it. I also have evidence to the fact that he said that he was deployed to fight us. In fact, the LC V [The Speaker]8483THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 3 MAY 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.Chairperson can come here - there are even phone recordings of the RDC saying all those things; I can bring them. Madam Speaker, after that, I would like to talk about Hon. Susan Mugabi’s situation because I was going to that function when they told me what was happening. I see them mentioning Ronald Kulumba.As I told you before, in the case of the plight of journalists; there are these security operatives who are fighting politicians but the journalists are also included. It was not only Kulumba who is a journalist but also Yuda Musisi of BBS Television.They were first of all handcuffed before being ordered to delete all the video footages and pictures they had taken. That is a violation of the rights of the media. If you know that you are doing something right by beating a politician and people, why don’t you want to be highlighted, because you are doing it and think it is under the law? Madam Speaker, there are people who are not mentioned in the beating of Hon. Susan Mugabi. Apart from the MP, her mother slept in detention but I did not hear the report mention it. How can someone’s mother - if I am a politician, why do you include my mother in my shenanigans because I am the politician? Her sister was beaten and fondled, almost undressed and that is very unfair. You do not include someone’s parents in their politics. Was Suzan’s mother the one organising the function? What about her sister? Not at all. Where is that in the report? Nothing.Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. One thing I can also tell you is - do not bring Hon. Nabakooba here. Did you see her there? Do not remain in Kampala; be involved in organising those functions as the Women Members of Parliament. If it is mine, I organise it myself. That is one. Two, how does a Resident District Commissioner (RDC) come into this? An RDC is the head of security in a district but he is not supposed to interfere.  He does not choose for you who is going to be the chief guest. However, why don’t you get involved in organising your functions? If you do not want to be the chief guest, I am going to make an order that I will be the chief guest for all the Women Members of Parliament functions. (Laughter)  Where I feel that I cannot come, I will delegate; I will even delegate the Prime Minister or Hon. Cecilia Ogwal.3.41MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. When you listen to the comments of these RDCs, it is as if there is an invisible hand. Kiboga is not included in the report -(Hon. Otimgiw rose)THE SPEAKER:  First tell us what you want Hon. Christine to do. Stop whispering. There is a microphone.MR OTIMGIW:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The safety of Members in this House is paramount and I am afraid the black Gomesi brigade are very intimidating. They are not even smiling. If they could smile at least so that we feel safe - it feels like they are going to attack us at any time. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Christine, Hon. Otimgiw wanted to see your smile.MS KAAYA: Madam Speaker, this is not a joking matter but we have our smiles on for certain debates. First of all, the report on the Kiboga incident is missing. We have a district women’s SACCO. We hold annual general meetings and this was going to be the first annual general meeting for the SACCO. However, because I am the patron, the annual general meeting was cancelled. The RDC together with the deputy RDC and the DPC came, analysed the function and said, “It seems 8484Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.STATEMENT ON THE BRUTAL ARREST OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENTthis is going to be Women’s Day and I am not accepting it.” When they came to the venue in the morning -THE SPEAKER:  What is the problem? Don’t you want the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition to have fun? They are just exchanging ideas.MS NABBANJA:  Madam Speaker, colleagues know that sometimes we are very close friends. I am a close friend to the Chief Opposition Whip and the Leader of the Opposition and sometimes we share - (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as politicians, any disagreement in this House remains in this House. When you go outside the doors, hug each other. Feel free, we are one. Do not carry disagreements from here outside the gate. MS KAAYA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was saying that it is not only on women’s days, but RDCs intervene in all functions planned by the Women and Opposition Members of Parliament. The RDC would somehow accept and then asked me to wait. She called some people and then came back with a report saying, “No, they have refused me.”There is some invisible hand which we needed the head of all RDCs to tell us here. It is as if they would get ashamed to let the functions continue but they were under certain instructions.We had also invited a lot of service providers to talk to some of these women; service providers in insurance, auditors of the SACCOs, and medics, and we had paid for food and all those items. For us in Kiboga, we were given only 30 minutes for women to eat the food and run away from the venue. Since they had put their soldiers at the entrance of the venue, most of the women did not turn up due to the intimidation and all those expenses are on us. Therefore, before we listen to any apology, we want to recover all the costs that we spent on those days. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Give us the bill of cost that you incurred and we will see who meets the costs. That is the “Kungfu ” lady. (Laughter)3.46MS ASINANSI NYAKATO (FDC, Woman Representative, Hoima City): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and the Prime Minister, for the statement. What happened on Thursday last week was just a symptom of a problem that Government is was just a symptom of a problem that Government is deliberately denying to address.Personally, when it happened in my constituency – unfortunately, the Prime Minister has deliberately skipped Hoima City on what transpired on 28th March. I did raise a matter of urgent importance and you give me space here. I did not stop there. I wrote to the Ministry of Presidency and the Ministry of Internal Affairs. It is just today that they are giving a response.What transpired in our constituencies as far as the RDCs are concerned has become a real problem. Little does Government know that these people are not working for them but they are working for an invisible hand, like my colleagues have said.What happened to me -THE SPEAKER : As I said before, we might be having people dressed in our uniforms but they are opposition. Continue Hon. Asinansi. The people who carry out those arrests and beat people are not for Government.MS ASINANSI NYAKATO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Those could be NRM rebels -THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the word “opposition” is just an English word that you need to interpret. I do not mean they belong to NUP, DP, UPC and the like. They are opposition. Opposition can be anything else not working with you.[Ms Kaaya]8485THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 3 MAY 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MS ASINANSI NYAKATO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for coming to our rescue when they brutally and unlawfully arrested us but also boxed us. These police officers who brutally arrested us - everywhere they touched, they left a bruise; they left a body injury. If I could open for you here - (Interjections)THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members respect the princess. MS NYAKATO ASINANSI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will not undress for colleagues to see what happened to us, but it was very brutal. Madam Speaker, a female police officer squeezed my breast; she actually pulled it. If I did not have a breast holder, I think she would have gone away with my breast. (Laughter)  THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, let us listen to Hon. Asinansi. MS ASINANSI NYAKATO: The manner in which that lady pulled my hair to the extent that I saw it in her hands forced me to box her and to defend myself because what these women had come for was not humane. We condemn the brutal arrests by some of the police officers in uniform. Some of them come in civilian wear so you cannot know whether they are anti-terrorism police officers or whether they have come to arrest terrorists. If the Government does not address this problem – leading to women Members of Parliament -You wear a “ Gomesi”  to go to the streets because something is suffocating you - instead, the Prime Minister, who is also a woman, mother, and daughter comes here and makes a statement which is full of lies. Most of you saw how our colleague, the Member for Buvuma was mistreated. These things do not require the whole Government to go and investigate. People were touching her thighs, holding and tearing the buttons of our “ Gomesi” .THE SPEAKER:  Do not undress for us. (Laughter)  We have heard your issues Hon. Asinansi. Much as we act in self-defense, I want you to avoid that on armed people.3.52MS APOLOT ISODO (FDC, Woman Representative, Ngora):  Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate you for acknowledging that Uganda is under a multi-party dispensation. When you alluded that if you are NRM, you chant NRM slogans, and if you are FDC like me - I cannot chant another party’s slogan. I would like to give reference to Ngora District Women’s Day celebrations last year on 10 June 2022. As stakeholders of Ngora District, we organised a women’s day together and I preferred we have a chief guest. When I approached the Office of the Speaker, then the Rt Hon. Thomas Tayebwa - Hon. Sarah Mateke was the chief guest, but she was the first person who told me that the women’s day in Ngora had been cancelled at 9.00 p.m. Yet, I had already booked two buses from Parliament for Members of Parliament.Madam Speaker, I am here to lay the expenses I incurred last year. (Laughter) May I lay on the Table the costs I spent in Ngora?THE SPEAKER:  First of all, lay the letter that shows you notified the police. Honourable members, we are trying to agree on how we should act.MS ISODO:  Most obliged. I am here to appreciate the Rt Hon. Prime Minister - but she has not given a report. (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER:  Switch on.MS ISODO: The RDC of Ngora has been giving us a hard time. I would like to know why the RDC is blocking our activities in Ngora.  I have evidence of letters notifying them; not requesting permission for the functions. We need a proper report by the RDCs.Finally, I had a fundraising event last year in September where you, the Rt Hon. Speaker of 8486Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.STATEMENT ON THE BRUTAL ARREST OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENTParliament and Woman Member of Parliament for Bukedea District, Rt Hon. Anita Among - until a call came from Kampala to Ngora, the function was cleared.  THE SPEAKER:  Who made a call from Kampala to Ngora?MS ISODO:  The Office of the Presidency.THE SPEAKER:  Do you mean they were not going to allow you even when I was there?MS ISODO:  Madam Speaker, they had blocked it. So, I am here to attest to this. We want to know why we have been embarrassed in our own district. Thank you.3.56MS ETHEL NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform this House that many of us are still undergoing treatment arising from what happened. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for making a good communication that we are supposed to inform the police but not asking for permission. Many times, the police have dispersed our meetings claiming that we did not seek permission from them.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, listen to your colleague.MS NALUYIMA: That aside, I have an issue with the RDC of Wakiso District. I almost failed to talk during the celebration of International Women’s Day that took place in March.  Having scuffled and made it out and spoke – she had sent so many others – in fact, my predecessor was the one needed as the Woman MP of the district. She made it clear and I have a video recording. She told the audience that for national days, it is only RDCs or ministers who are supposed to be chief guests. If Article 203 provides for functions of RDCs as chairpersons of district security committees, monitoring local and Central Government services within the district, how come RDCs have taken over even the work of local government leaders and preparations and everything? Can we know where they are getting their powers from? Can we also know where they get powers to ensure that local governments are not in a position to commission projects apart from inviting RDCs as chief guests?I am getting complaints from mayors, district chairpersons, and other leaders that RDCs are failing them because they feel they are the bosses.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. The issue of RDCs stopping Members from holding their functions is going to stop. We are going to ask the minister to ensure it does not happen again. All they need to do is to ensure there is security to protect people, but not stop people from doing what they are doing.3.58MS LOY KATALI (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the Prime Minister for her statement. I just want to find out who is responsible for organising the Women’s Day celebrations. In my case – this is my second term. In my first term, I used to organise it with the district and we did not have issues. Madam Speaker, like Hon. Bagala said, we need to find out the terms of reference for these District Resident Commissioners (RDCs). In Jinja, they are harassing my personal assistant (PA). They are moving around with people who are going to stand against me. I am cool with it. Let them promote their candidates – their wives and side chicks. (Laughter) What I am not comfortable with is when they thump their chests that they will not allow me to organise the Women’s Day celebrations.  When we keep quiet, it is not because we are dense or stupid; we are human and also want them to behave likewise.[Ms Isodo]8487THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 3 MAY 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.Madam Speaker, we have the mandate of the people. We will – I will send them out of Jinja if nothing is done. Thank you. (Applause)THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I now withdraw my earlier statement. I had said it was harassment on the Opposition girls, but it is now all over. Can I hear from Hon. Osoru? 4.0MS MOURINE OSORU (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua City):  Thank you Madam Speaker.  First of all, allow me to thank you for having rescued our honourable colleagues when they were arrested. Secondly, I condemn brutality. Madam Speaker, for the incident involving Hon. Susan, I was there. I only survived the teargas because they undermined my size. (Laughter)I was there in Buvuma. For the report the Prime Minister has given here, the police misinformed her. On that day, when I went to support my colleague on the other side – we were at Kiyindi Landing Site. Even the District Police Commander (DPC) came and took my full address. They wanted me to identify myself, which I did. Shortly after, they were asking for Hon. Susan. I did not know that they were looking for her, actually. I had never been to Buvuma – that was my first time there.Shortly after, Hon. Susan jumped in my car – actually, she was hiding in the boot of my car. The soldiers started running after us – even the police. We had to run away from that place. We connected to – I do not know which district that was, Madam Speaker. We went to another –(Interjection)-  no, it was not Buvuma. We had not yet crossed. Even the speed boat that we were supposed to use was confiscated.Madam Speaker, I saw whatever happened to Hon. Susan with my own eyes; nobody told me. I condemn what happened. We went to somebody’s home – we did not know the lady – in Buikwe. We even ended up undressing and wearing somebody else’s clothes. It was that serious. On reaching the other side, we found the security officers waiting for us on the water.  I refused this time – I told Hon. Susan that I have a phobia of water. So, it was Hon. Susan and Hon. Manjeri who stepped into the boat to go to the other side. Madam Speaker, it was a very nasty experience. Any person, leader or Ugandan should not be in that situation.We have Members of Parliament who are mandated to carry out their roles. Even Arua City Members, are complaining about the RCCs; they have become a headache. In Hon. Susan’s case the, RDC actually has an interest to contest in Buvuma. That is what is happening.So, Madam Speaker, I think we should look into that. If they are sent to disorganise us – Madam Speaker, as our leader, we have faith in you. Please, something must be done. On that day, I tried calling you, but the number was engaged. That is how we ended up running like mad dogs on the streets. Indeed, I condemn the brutality and those officers must be apprehended for what they did. For Arua, we may not hold guns, but if the opportunity was given for us to exchange – and they are not in uniform – you can trust me. For us, we are trained in that one, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I am sorry that you could not reach me on the phone, but I was the first person to reach the hospital when all that happened. It has moved away from harassing the Opposition to the issue of indiscipline. It is now about the indiscipline of all the mentioned persons in the report. Hon. Akello?4.04MS CHRISTINE AKELLO (NRM, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is a different issue; I represent a 8488Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.STATEMENT ON THE BRUTAL ARREST OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENTconstituency. However, every year, on the 21st of February, we commemorate the 302 people who lost their lives in Barlonyo. I always get a problem. For example, this year, when I was trying to organise the function – I even invited the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister to be the chief guest – the RDC tried to block me, yet I am a Member of the NRM. (Laughter)  They even called security people. I went and found that they had come up with six resolutions, stopping me – that they were not aware of the function – yet it was declared by His Excellency the President in 2004. Barlonyo is a war memorial site and it is recognised by the ministry in charge of tourism.I had to use my energy – I was about to fight. Even the DPC had to challenge me –THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Christine, switch on. MS CHRISTINE AKELLO: I became vocal. I told them: “This has been a community programme and it was there before I even went to Parliament. If you are not aware as a district, with or without money, we are going for the function.” What happened? I had to pull my own money to make sure that the function could go on. Each time when I have a function, they fight me, yet I am in NRM. However, I am not a simple lady. I managed them using my energy. Next time, I am also going to fight back. Thank you. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER:  Let us have Hon. Rose, Hon. Rita, Hon. Grania and Hon. Jennifer. 4.06MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true; we do not accept indiscipline and harassment. Madam Speaker, the Shs 3 million that was given for Women’s Day in Terego arrived as Shs 1 million. Up to today, we do not know where the other money went.Madam Speaker, it is on record that I called the minister in charge of the presidency over the women’s day celebration because after contributing my own money to the function, I was denied the chance to be the guest of honour –  THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Rose, only Shs 1 million arrived; where did the Shs 2 million go?MS OBIGAH: Up to now, I do not know where it is. THE SPEAKER:  Maybe it is still on the way. (Laughter)MS OBIGAH: Madam Speaker, the bottom line here is this: to avoid fighting, I told RDC: “You will be the RDC of Terego, but you will not be the Woman Member of Parliament.”I have had meetings with my colleagues from the Opposition and I told them that two wrongs do not make a right. You can break your bones. It was wrong, Madam Speaker, for my sister from Hoima to take a hand and kickbox.Honestly, I want to be on record: that was wrong. I condemn it – (Member rose_)-  I have not given you permission; go and sit down. Madam Speaker, our armed men are not paid well; our armed men are provoked. If they stop you, why do you go and beat them? You are wrong. Madam Speaker, it was wrong. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, if a Member is speaking and you get up heckling at a member, I will send you out. This is not a battlefield; this is a place for intellectuals. Come and speak your mind and debate respectfully. Can I have Rita? She has a right to her opinion. If she says that they are not paid well, somebody may also say, “Members of Parliament are not paid well.”4.09MS RITA ATUKWASA (Independent, Woman Representative,  Mbarara City):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like [Ms Akello]8489THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 3 MAY 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.to thank you for delivering ‘twins’ to Mbarara City. I had my women’s day on Friday. And I would like to say that all colours in this House were well represented. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, to mention but a few, was there. Madam Speaker, what we witnessed today and what happened to the women, I condemn in the strongest terms. Being women Members of Parliament, I think most of these RDCs being men, think, they have wives to tease around, which I condemn in the strongest terms. In this position, patriarchal tendencies - day, when we are serving. When somebody sees you, they do not even mind about Government protocol. They do not even want to care about the people who voted for you. And it is unbecoming that the government, I for one, which I credit for creating my capacity this far, now wants to turn the guns to the people they have empowered; I think that is wrong; the women! Because it is a natural process that a woman can give birth to a child, at some point, they will marry or get married and might probably make more money and/or earn more than you. Look at our teachers. They create professors, doctors and MPs like me, yet some are still in the classrooms. So, what am I saying? What I am saying is that there are fundamental and historical issues with Women’s Day that need and must be sorted. It is evident that this day has no money at all - when you went - you remember the meeting we had at Hotel Africana? While we had a little drop of that money, and thanks to you, it is insufficient. We are addressed as women Members of Parliament and that comes with a social obligation as per what our constituents expect. Women’s Day is on our shoulders. Therefore, for us to make an effort, you divide your finances but later on, you are fought. Madam Speaker, we are fighters. I had a successful day in Mbarara City because I am a fighter. The pockets of fighting do not come out in the same way. Yours could be security and mine could be that of a technocrat. But what we are saying? We need to support our colleagues. Let us not just laugh as we speak because we need to address the fundamental problem that as liberated women in this House, we must celebrate Women’s Day, as Government intends it to be. Thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:   Thank you so much. Regarding whatever support I give you as women Members of Parliament, I give it for and on behalf of my Government; it is not from my pocket. I am a very poor woman; I give it on behalf of my Government.4.12MS GRANIA NAKAZIBWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende):   Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for responding to the issue that happened, though some people say it was shallow; those that experienced what exactly happened.I also would like to thank you for standing with our colleagues, especially by getting them out of the police cells on that day; we saw you standing as a woman, by securing their freedom. Madam Speaker, I would like to very much condemn the way our honourable colleagues were arrested on Thursday. It was uncalled for. And I hope that by you giving us this opportunity to have this debate, this will not happen again. Madam Speaker, this is not only happening in opposition constituencies or constituencies that have opposition Members of Parliament. We have a number of stakeholders that take part in organising Women’s Day - that is considering the fact that while Government organises Women’s Day, there are similar celebrations that are always organised at the districts. Someone mentioned that when they sent Shs 3 million from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, only Shs 1 million came. For Mubende District, by the time we held the Women’s Day celebrations, all Shs 3 million had not come. And that was almost two months after we had received the letters indicating that we had received that money. 8490Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.STATEMENT ON THE BRUTAL ARREST OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENTI wrote to the CAO quite a number of messages and he was like, “Let us look around” but on the exact day, the money was not there and I had to keep peeking out of my pocket. And considering the little budget that I had planned or organised for that day, I had to put in more money. And considering the same, most of the Women Council Members did not get their allowances as they usually do. On that very day, it was terrible that I had to look for money out of my pockets. I want to thank my colleagues, the male honourable members in some constituencies that were able to support some of their constituent’s women.However, Madam Speaker, I think we have another underlying problem of having, let me say, outdated women’s councils. These still pay allegiance to the previous women Members of Parliament and so, they give us a lot of headache. I think having the Rt hon. Prime Minister here, this should be addressed as soon as possible. Thank you for this opportunity.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister for gender, we may need to find out more about the disbursement of the Shs 3 million for Women’s Day to all the districts, whether the money is still walking - you know, the roads are bad and there are so many potholes, it might take along for the money to reach.4.15MS JENNIFER ABAHO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kazo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to begin by condemning the act of our women and men in uniform for what they did. I would like to apologise, on behalf of NRM, to those who think that they were mistreated because they are in the opposition. That is not the case. I want to confirm this - I represent the people of Kazo District which was curved out of Kiruhura, and Kiruhura is the first district. One time I was in a meeting, and I had not notified the RDC and his team, the DPC and the rest. I had the women in the meetings, and they came for me; they did not know I was in that meeting. But when they were told that I was in that meeting, they called me out and I explained about the meeting. It was an executive SACCO meeting. Therefore, that - with only the opposition.However, I would like to request the women in this House to always behave as women; let us not fight with men at any level. Not only those with guns; we are mothers, wives and parents.  When something like that happens, I request that we behave as women because in so doing, we are there to be respected. Let us make relationships with those that we work with, especially those at the districts. I am not talking about the other relationships one would think about, but working closely with the RDC, CAO or the LCV Chairpersons is very important. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. There is a point of procedure.MR KIBALYA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. These women can only shine when men are around them. Secondly, Issues concerning women - either a lady is your mother, sister, wife or daughter. We are very concerned as men. And Madam Speaker, as you have ruled, we are worried that ladies in this House are more than the time we have to debate this matter.Madam Speaker, if the policy continues that only ladies debate, you will lose out on the benefits -THE SPEAKER:  Is that a policy I have given? So, are you a woman now? (Laughter) MR KIBALYA:  Not so, Madam Speaker. My procedural matter is that whatever submission we make, we should bring out a solution. We need solutions for what is happening.THE SPEAKER : Now you are talking. Give us a solution to this. [Ms Nakazibwe]8491THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 3 MAY 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MR KIBALYA:  Madam Speaker, the solution is, first of all, when you asked the Attorney-General whether somebody must get permission, he testified that it is not permission, but notification. It has taken two years for the police to put into force the court ruling. The Attorney-General has said he is going to write to police to notify them how they should proceed. Could he tell us when the letter will reach the police and when we shall know that the police is informed? Secondly, on the solution for Hon. Suzan, we shall not come here and romance with the issue of Buvuma. Buvuma was nasty. This was a water body, and we could have lost the Member of Parliament and we would be here lamenting. Either the Minister for Presidency or somebody concerned should tell us the action that has been taken against those errant officers because this was a water body. You cannot chase somebody around the water body like that. Some of these young men and ladies do not know how to swim, like the Member of Parliament from Arua. We could have lost someone. Therefore, could we know when a comprehensive report is coming to tell us which action has been taken?  When I go to Buvuma and find that RDC there, we shall act if the government is not acting – (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, let us not repeat what has been said. Minister for Presidency, one, all your RDCs who are defiant - we are all equal before God and we must share this political space amongst all of us, but what is important is mutual respect for each other. All your RDCs, who are defiant, must be brought to book. We want a report in this House on which of them you have brought to book. (Applause)Two, all the Women Members of Parliament must be given space to – (Laughter) -  all the girl children must be allowed to celebrate Women’s Day freely. (Applause)  They can be supported by the boy children like Hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Three, we need a report on the Shs 3 million that was pledged in this House to go to all the districts. We need to know which district has got the money and which one has not and the reason it has not got that money.All the officers who were involved in the brutality must be brought to book and a report be given to this House. (Applause)  We need a thorough investigation of this thing. In one month, you should be having a report on who is who and what happened. All Members of Parliament, when you have an activity, it is just out of courtesy for you to inform the police that you are going to have this activity. It is not by law. At the end of the day if you get any problem, you need to be protected. As such, we would again blame police if they were not aware that you were having such an activity.Somebody mentioned that we need to know the terms of reference of the RDCs so that we know what they are there for. I know that they are the head of security. I also know they have got involved in land grabbing. Honourable members, I want us to have respect. I am insisting on this thing. From what happened yesterday, kindly do not fight back. We need you alive – when they squeeze you -MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Under the Income Tax Act, when you move from your place of work to another and get money as an allowance or transport, it is allowed for tax purposes. During the time when they wanted to tax transport allowance, which was being given to Members of Parliament, it came here and we said we must determine where the place of work of the Member of Parliament is. It was decided that their place of work is their constituency and the Parliament of Uganda. 8492Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.STATEMENT ON THE BRUTAL ARREST OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENTTherefore, any allowance given - in Kampala going to Budadiri or Budadiri coming to Kampala is allowed for tax purposes. What am I trying to say? The place of work of a Member of Parliament is their constituency. If it is your place of work and you are doing your parliamentary work, why would you go to police to ask him - who is also doing his police work - that you are going to do your work?Madam Speaker, we have to be very careful –THE SPEAKER:  It is unfortunate that you came early. One of the questions I asked the Attorney-General is whether a Member of Parliament is at liberty to move from one subcounty/village/household to the other in his constituency. The answer was “Yes.” The second issue is; do I need to get permission to hold a function as per the law? The answer is “No.” However, we said that for security purposes and out of courtesy - the word I used is “courtesy.” I do not know how we call it in Lugisu. When we are having a function where you have invited a number of people, it is out of courtesy that you just inform them that “I have guests here.”However, your place of work is a known address - your constituency, period. It is not in doubt that you are supposed to be there. Who has ever arrested you there?MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  Madam Speaker, I am very grateful. It is good you asked how it is called in Lugisu. I know you know it because those are your areas. However, why was I raising that? The Member of Parliament at his place of work is free to invite people who can come and assist him or her to do work. Police says they do not have manpower to be there to assist you but when they come to disperse the meeting, they come with all the manpower and artillery, which is beyond and unnecessary -THE SPEAKER:  That is what I am saying must be investigated. If you do not have the manpower to protect the people, where do you get the manpower to come and disperse them? This is why I am saying that must be investigated and these people should be brought to book. MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we thank you for that. Now, you have been very kind to the ladies alone. Otherwise, the ladies will assume that men are not allowed to be protected. This is why I am saying, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for you to rule that all Members of Parliament should enjoy what the women are going to enjoy on Women’s Day and they should also be protected throughout rather than talking of only the women? THE SPEAKER:  Okay, all male Members of Parliament should enjoy the women on Women’s Day. (Laughter) Honourable members, we adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.(The House rose at 4.29 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 4 May 2023 at 2.00 p.m.)   [Mr Nandala-Mafabi]