Wednesday, 6 May 2009

Parliament met at 2.42 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. Please join me in welcoming a delegation from Botswana - the Committee on Subsidiary Legislation Assurances and Motions. They are hon. Mokgwathi, hon. Moruti, hon. Batsile, hon. Maswabi and Mr Ngcongco. You are most welcome. 

Hon. Members, during the short recess we had, two colleagues lost members of their families. Hon. Magulumaali lost a mother and her burial was held yesterday. Hon. Malinga lost a sister on Labour Day. Please, join me as we observe a moment of silence in honour of the deceased. 

(The Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: The good news is that two of our members got promotions in the UPDF: Bright Rwamirama became a lieutenant colonel and Capt. Guma is now a Major. Congratulations. 

Hon. Members, as you will appreciate, we are about to end the third session this month. We propose to end around 21st May when Parliament will be prorogued to prepare for the new session, which is likely to start in the first week of June. There is a lot of work still pending and therefore we have decided on key legislations that should be passed before prorogation. I believe you have received the list of these Bills. If there is any other matter of emergency, we may include it but we are going to follow that programme strictly. I would like to appeal to you to keep time. Our rules say that we start at 2.00 p.m. but practically we should start at 2.30 p.m. If everybody is here by that time and we start business, we can cover a lot. Thank you very much.

2.45
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance relating to the looming human catastrophe in West Nile and I believe in the greater Northern Uganda too. I was in my constituency for the last one and a half weeks and I came back on Monday. While in the region I had an opportunity to move not only within my constituency but also to the neighbouring areas. The problem that West Nile is faced with is of extreme famine. This famine has come about as a result of the long drought that the area has experienced. There are some parts of West Nile which last had rain in November and over the Easter weekend received a slight drizzle. Since then, there is completely nothing on the ground. 

Our people are right now surviving on mangoes. I am afraid the season for mangoes is soon running out and once it runs out there will be death looming in the area. The people are starving right now not because they are lazy but because of the drought situation that I have explained. In addition to that, many farmers who had food in that part of the region and even in the entire country took advantage of the lucrative food market in Southern Sudan and tonnes of food have been crossing the borders uncontrolled. My appeal, therefore, is that government comes up with a strategic intervention to save lives. 

You will remember some time back when the East Africa region experienced some famine and our neighbour, the Republic of Tanzania, put up measures to control exports of rice so that the domestic basket is enough for domestic consumption. For us we have uncontrolled trade with Southern Sudan. Food items which probably could have been bought by local traders are being supplied from as far as Ankole and Bugisu and they cross our borders uncontrolled to Southern Sudan. My appeal on that note is that government should secure its borders. Yes, it is good for us to do business but it is more important for us to secure food for our own domestic consumption. 

By the time I left on Monday, a 90kg bag of cassava flour in Arua market was at Shs 120,000. With this high level of poverty among our people, how many people can afford a bag of posho or a bag of cassava flour? Even right now in West Nile, to see a family have lunch and supper; that must be an affluent family of working class. The ordinary person either has one meal or nothing at all. 

My appeal to government is that it sends a team to the ground to asses the situation and be able to intervene timely rather than only coming when many graves have been dug and people have been buried. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether you are going to provoke a debate on this matter? This is a report which requires action.

2.50
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Kassiano Wadri for bringing this to the attention of government. I would like to request that as soon as possible, you and the Prime Minister’s office meet so that we can be in a position to look at the matter and see what we can do immediately. (Mr Ecweru rose_) Okay, you are here. Thank you.

2.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I have the following information to give to these distinguished representatives of Ugandans: 

The Office of the Prime Minister, Department of Disaster Preparedness, works with district disaster management committees. What has happened in the last three weeks is that we conducted a survey across the country using the structures we have in the districts. I am happy to report to this House that the Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) have sent reports to my office agreeing that there is a food deficit in the country that has been created by the factors that have been enumerated by my colleague. Certainly, there are areas that are worse off. That is why about two weeks ago we had to launch an emergency operation in Karamoja because the situation in Karamoja had actually degenerated to a famine situation. 

What is happening now is that we are going to employ a two-pronged approach to address this problem. The first is that we have mobilised some resources, which we are going to use for delivering relief to the most vulnerable. We are also mobilising resources together with partners and the Ministry of Agriculture and NAADS to deliver quick maturing seeds and implements to many places that are now receiving rain.

Mr Speaker, in some parts of Teso, for example where I come from, with adequate rain it would take only about three weeks for the cowpeas seed to mature and people can start eating its greens. This means that it would now reduce the burden on the mothers to only struggle for bread while at least they have the greens. What has been happening is the struggle for bread at the same time struggling for vegetables. I want, therefore, to let the House know that we have mobilised some resources and we are going to address the problem. 

As far as our commitment is concerned, no Ugandan will die because of famine -(Interjection)- we are committed to ensuring that we will save our people. 

Having said that, Mr Speaker, I also want to put something on record; about a week ago there was a problem in the House and at that time I was in Karamoja trying to sort out what I have elaborated to you. It was reported to this House that Amuria had suffered a situation of famine which had resulted in deaths, and a list of names was given to this House by the Chairman LC V of Amuria. I want to make it abundantly clear to you that there is a report here signed by the Chief Administrative Officer of Amuria acknowledging that there is hunger in Amuria but he has been very clear to indicate that the said Takan John Michael died of the following:

According to the medical report by the Senior Clinical Officer in-charge, Kapelebyong Health Centre IV, Takan John Michael, aged 42 years, was a teacher who was serving in Moroto District local government. He hailed from Acegerekuma village, Okoboi Parish, Kapelebyong sub-county. He was admitted to the Health Centre IV at Kapelebyong for five days with a history of failure to talk and eat for a week. According to the report of the clinical officer, the patient was HIV positive and had opportunistic infections of meningitis and some oral thrush -(Interjections)- what I am saying is that this is a report by the Chief Administrative Officer and I want to make it abundantly clear to this House that there is no other authority in the district that is more authentic than the District Disaster Management Committee when it comes to matters of disaster, and we are relying on this authority. It has been agreed that there is hunger in the country but we wanted to put this on record. As you know, government is run on facts; government is not run on emotions. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: We are not going to debate this issue. This was a report made by hon. Wadri and the Leader of Government Business has said they are going to have a meeting where this will be discussed. 

Honourable minister, one aspect you did not respond to is the issue about selling the little food in the area to Southern Sudan. You know, some people want something that makes noise in their pockets and they do not care about the wellbeing of the family so they sell. What are you going to do about that?

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, it may not directly be my mandate but this is what we are trying to do in some parts of country which have suffered this kind of problem: we are indicating to our people that this year, with the resources government has been able to mobilise from the support of our partners, we want our communities, weather permitting, to produce food for themselves and endeavour to also produce surplus for the market. 

I was explaining to my people in Karamoja that the Sudan question should not be seen as a problem, particularly for the future; it should actually be an answer to our challenges and it is up to us, Ugandans, to respond to this. For now I know there is need for us to control the sale. However, the other thing that needs to be done is to ensure that our communities go and produce. We used to have granaries but the culture of granaries has died over the years because of the insurgency that bedevilled the region. We are now encouraging the – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, as the Leader of Government Business has stated here, he should convene an emergency meeting, maybe this week, where members from these affected areas should meet you and then you discuss and find a solution to that problem. 

2.58
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of public concern. For the last ten years or more, we who come from the North have been pressurising government to build a power station in Karuma. Initially, the government position was that Karuma would not start until Bujagali is commissioned. Fortunately for us, recently the government yielded and agreed that Karuma power station should start. Our people became very happy because we believe that with a power station in Karuma, the development of the northern part of Uganda will be triggered off. 

Today there is a very glaring headline in the Daily Monitor newspaper saying that the Karuma project has collapsed. This is the second time within 12 months that projects in the North are either suspended or collapse. Recently, PRDP was suspended for one year and now Karuma has collapsed. We demand a clear explanation from the government; let them tell our people why when it comes to the North things disintegrate like this. What are the reasons? I thank you. 

3.01
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Okello-Okello for seeking the correct position on Karuma. Up until February, I was the minister for energy and I have a good idea regarding what is happening to the Karuma hydro power project. The fact of the matter is that the Karuma project is being pursued by government. It is true that the Norwegians who originally had been given the licence to develop Karuma hydro power station had some problems. When they got problems, the government sat down with the Norwegian firm and a position was taken that they should get out of this project. At that time, government took a decision that it will - taking advantage of the resources which we have been accumulating - develop the Karuma hydro power station. 

I want to give assurance that this work is on course. There is dire need for electricity in the country and there is no way government can abandon the Karuma hydro power station. When the substantive ministers, hon. Onek or hon. D’Ujanga, turn up I am going to request them to come and give a status report on the Karuma hydro power station. However, the critical thing is that government has taken a decision to develop that hydro power station and this is factual. I thank you. (Applause)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.04 
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament. I take the Floor to regrettably inform you, colleagues, of the tragic incident that took place in Kampala City on Saturday at Top Bar and Restaurant. 

On the fateful day of 02 May 2009, one soldier by the names Pte Mucunguzi Nicholas of the Presidential Guard Brigade shot at people at the said bar on William Street, killing some on the spot and injuring others. Four of the victims died instantly and nine were rushed to Mulago Hospital. The errant soldier shot himself dead at the scene. Two other people who had been injured died later at the hospital. 

The dead have been identified as follows, as I indicated in Table 1 - I hope that colleagues have now received the statement: 
1.	Ssali Yusuf Hassan: this is a Tanzanian national who had been a porter at a building site in Namungoona.
2.	Kamuntu Victor who resided in Nsambya. 
3. 	Ssenyonga Kiwanuka
4. 	Kasozi Abdul
5. 	Pte Mucunguzi Nicholas himself

Two others have not yet been identified. The bodies are in the City Mortuary but we have not yet identified the particulars of these people. 

As I said, the injured were taken to hospital. Some of them have been discharged; only six of them now remain. I am glad to inform hon. Members of Parliament that I went to the hospital this morning and saw each one of these injured Ugandans. The injured are:
	
1. 	Tugume Arnold. He is male, 20 years. He had a laceration on the right lower limb and surgical toilet treatment was done on him. He is on antibiotics and in a stable condition.

2. 	Christine Mbabazi - a female, 24 years old who sustained a compound fracture of the left metatarsal bones; these are bones within the foot. She also received a surgical toilet and antibiotics and her condition is stable. 

3. 	Namatovu Anita - female, 25 years who also sustained a compound fracture of the tibia and fibula. These are the two bones in the lower leg. She also received surgical toilet and the leg was fixed externally. Later on, once the soft tissues have healed, she will require a bone graft so that she can go back to a functional state. 

4. 	Birungi Norbert. He is male, 20 years, who also received a compound fracture of the metatarsal bones; again, these are bones in the foot. By compound fracture, we mean that the bones got fractured but in addition, the wound is open to the outside. He also received the surgical toilet and is in stable condition.

5. 	Bemelikye Silva – male, 29 years who also sustained a compound fracture on the left leg and got a soft tissue injury on the right one. Surgical toilet was done and he is on antibiotics. 

6. 	Mugume Gordon – male, 21 years. He had injuries in the abdomen. The bullet went through the cavity of the abdomen and injured the stomach, the large intestines and the small intestines. So, a laparactomy was done; the abdomen was opened up and repair of these organs was done. Initially, this person was in a very poor state but I am glad to report that the doctors confirm that this patient too is now stable. 

Mr Speaker, following this tragic incident, there are responses that government has made: 

1. 	The dead and injured persons were evacuated to Mulago Hospital by Police and exhibits, including an AK-47, were recovered from the scene. 

2. 	His Excellency the President visited the scene of the shooting and had the opportunity to address the people that were present in regard to this tragic incident. 

3. 	The President directed that the Chief of Defence Forces should immediately set up a board of inquiry which will among other things establish how a soldier who was not on duty managed to get out of the barracks with a gun. The President further ordered stricter control of firearms.

4. 	The UPDF has taken responsibility for transportation and burial for the dead persons. The Army is also taking care of the people who got injured including, where necessary, meeting treatment expenses. 

5. 	The Kenya and Tanzanian High Commissions have been informed about their nationals that were killed and one that got injured in this incident. 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Army and the Government more generally, I apologise to the country at large for this tragedy. 

Secondly, I also wish to convey our deep felt condolences to the families and relatives of the deceased. 

Thirdly, we obviously sympathise with those who got injured but are alive. 

Finally, I want to assure Parliament that more strict control measures of firearms are being undertaken. Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members.

3.11
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the hon. Minister of Defence. Allow me to thank the minister for being honest in his statement and for doing what is very unusual in Uganda - a Cabinet minister coming and apologising to the nation for a failure of this magnitude. 

We were in Kenya with my colleagues, led by hon. Bikwasizehi, when we heard that His Excellency the President had gone to the scene of the crime. I felt good that the President was able to do that. It was an act of courage and I think he needs to be applauded. 

Some of us know that it is difficult to study the mind of somebody, especially the criminal mind, but it is not very difficult to suspect a criminal mind. It is therefore not satisfying up to this stage to learn that a soldier at the level of the PGB was able to behave this way. The shock I got was that he could as well have shot at the President and killed him. Remember the President is a human being like the ministers and others. 

Following all that, I am totally unconvinced with the view that the UPDF should be the ones to investigate themselves. I urge this Parliament to recommend that we get a judicial inquiry into this matter. It is a serious act and it cannot be thrown back to the people who failed to guard the soldier who went and committed this atrocity.

I also find difficulty in accepting the gestures that were extended by the President and the state, that they are going to bury the dead and that they are going to assist the sick. Those are things that can as well be done by the bereaved families without government assistance. My strong recommendation is that these families be properly compensated. The idea of giving them help is exceedingly welcome, but to compensate them is a must. It is a new practice and there are individuals who are already saying that if government is not going to compensate these people who were killed innocently, they will have to resort to the courts of law to squeeze the compensation out of the state.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you for giving way. Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give to this House is that last year in July, we had a similar incident in Kitgum District, in Naam-Okora sub-county. An armed soldier, because of some disagreement, shot six people dead in a disco hall and injured many. At that time, the government came up very quickly and said that they were going to assist the sick. I want to let this House know that those who were injured were given only the initial assistance and thereafter abandoned and the dead have not been compensated up to now. So I hope that as we ask government to take responsibility and compensate those who they have killed and injured, it will be comprehensive. Thank you.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, my sister, for that information. My last point is that the chief of the PGB cannot at this time be judged as one who had a mission and connived with this errant soldier; that would be errant as well. However, the fact is that he is not capable of doing his duty. It is my proposal therefore that during the judicial inquiry, the chief of PGB should be suspended for a while in order to allow for a smooth inquiry. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have only 30 minutes to debate this statement and eight minutes are already gone. 

3.17
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): I want to thank the minister for coming before Parliament and apologising for this unfortunate act. I also want to send my condolences to the families of those whose lives have been lost in this very bad incident. 

In his statement, the minister said that the soldier was on duty. I am wondering whether his duty was at Top Bar and Restaurant were this incident occurred?

MR KIYONGA: What I said, hon. Member, was that the soldier was not on duty.

MS AKELLO: Even if the soldier was not on duty, you would wonder how a soldier would get out with a gun and commit such an act when he is not on duty. 

I want to add my voice to that of the previous speaker who said that he is concerned with government not making a commitment to compensate the people. I want the honourable minister to make a commitment before Parliament and this country that the families of the victims will be compensated. This is because they have been killed innocently and it was a soldier of this country that killed them. 

Lastly, in 2007 a similar incident happened in my district, in Laguti sub-county, where a soldier killed about seven people. Promises were made to compensate them but up to date not much has been done. So, whatever statements made towards compensating the people who lose their lives in such mysterious ways should be taken very seriously. Thank you.

3.20
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also send my condolences to the families of the deceased and to those who are now nursing wounds in hospitals. 

On page 3 it is said: “The President further ordered stricter control of firearms.” The way we handle our firearms is a very big problem. Last week we interfaced with the Minister of Internal Affairs and the IGP and one of our observations was on mishandling of firearms. We are yet to experience more scenarios of this kind. Almost all police posts lack metallic armoury boxes. Police officers do not have anywhere to keep their guns. We were informed that the officers use the guns as pillows or put them in their mattresses. So, if the situation is the same in most of our police posts and barracks, are we safe or is our President safe?

Secondly, on the same page they say that His Excellency the President visited the scene of the shooting and addressed the people. Having visited the scene, may I know from the minister when he will visit the injured in hospital? Visiting the scene is a good thing, but I would have expected that after visiting the scene His Excellency would have rushed to Mulago Hospital to follow up on those who were injured. However, since I am a civilian, I will not order a General but I would request him to do so.

3.25
MS JUSTINE LUMUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the minister for the statement. If a member of the PGB can do this, how safe is the President of this country? They are supposed to have gone through specialised training besides the training those in the regular army go through. So how safe is our President?

The misuse of arms in this country has increased over the years. They talk about stricter measures on handling arms but citizens, private individuals who have arms have always been pulling out arms on each other and they do not even withdraw the guns from them. We have even had government civil servants pull out guns on innocent people in villages – not even in Kampala. What have you done about it in your ministry? It is a very important issue because the lives of the people who do not carry guns are in danger. 

In the minister’s statement he did not mention anything about compensating the owner of the bar. That is business. His business was disorganised; the place has been cordoned off and nobody can go there. Assuming this person had acquired a loan, how do you expect him to handle it? So you need to compensate the owner of the bar because that business has been paying taxes on the beer they take, the sodas and the water. Government has to compensate the owner of that business. At this time, he cannot be allowed to even carry out a fridge because the investigations have to go on. So, government should consider compensating the owner of this bar.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I want to request you to let us observe a moment of silence and pray for our people. Thank you. 

(The Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

3.28
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the Minister for this concise and clear explanation of the events that happened on that day. 

Whereas the Minister and the President have stated that stricter control be made on guns, in my opinion guns are not actually bad –(Interjections)– guns are not bad; the challenge lies somewhere else. Hon. Members, some of you carry guns. I see some of you dropping your pistols there. There were also so many applications at the committee investigating the Police; most of you were asking the IGP for guns. Why were you asking for guns if they are bad? Guns are not bad because I do not think anyone in this House is bad. 

We need to consider and demand of the minister that whoever is charged with the duty and responsibility of protecting any person, including our President, should be well selected, examined and understood to be a person who can take full control of his or her senses. That should be a requirement for one to qualify for important assignments such as being a member of the Presidential Guard Brigade. It is a common exercise around the world. Even for one to be a pilot, one needs to be examined so see that his or her personality is not erratic as to put other people’s lives in danger. I think this is a very important criterion that we need to have in the people that we charge with the responsibility of carrying arms in this country, and more importantly protecting the institution of the presidency. 

The second issue I would like to talk about is on our history. I shared with one of the colleagues here that the most important issue is character. Given the history of our country, if they are supposed to be on duty guarding the President, how do you expect them to keep the guns somewhere in a box? In the event of anything, they are supposed to be ready with their guns, not keeping them in a box. In many barracks around this country, they are on full alert throughout the night; they sleep with those guns in the barracks. Theirs is not a leisurely job where you can lock up the guns and then go to sleep in the bedrooms. They are required to have the capacity to respond at all times.

So, where we need control is on how the gun is managed when you are on duty. Also, consider strict qualifications for the people handling guns. Guns are not bad. If you have the capacity to carry a gun, go ahead and ask for a gun. Thank you.

3.30
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the Minister for the timely report and to thank the President for that gesture. 

This should not surprise us! Individuals have individual minds, so this soldier acted individually. We should not look at it in the context of the whole army because the discipline of UPDF is not so much in question.

About these people who are in hospital, I have been in that hospital myself as a Member of Parliament and I must say that everything was okay. However, do not get surprised to find that those people may remain there languishing without a single tablet in future. So, hon. Minister, you need to follow it up. Do not take it for granted that because they are in hospital, it is okay. 

The common people are suffering in Mulago. If you visit that hospital, you will see it. As a Member of Parliament you may not notice if you are not careful because if you go there, they will give you all the treatment necessary because of your position. However, these are local people so we need to follow it up.

On the issue of compensation, we should not just leave it to the President or the minister. As Parliament we need to be firm and state what should be done. We have seen people suffering. After buildings collapsed, people were not compensated yet it was due to the negligence of the Government, and these people may even have children. In the same way, this may also end here. Therefore, let Parliament be in the know on how these people are going to be compensated instead of government giving them a token, like Shs 1 million, and saying that they have compensated them. Let us be serious in this. 

Mr Speaker, the Minister has talked about putting stricter measures on firearms, and I agree with him. There is a bit of carelessness in this country. People use guns at will. Colleagues have alluded to many incidences. Hon. Minister, I know you are a serious minister but you need to be more serious.

THE SPEAKER: We have spent over 30 minutes debating this and the minister wants to respond to the suggestions made. Let us hear from the minister and then close.

3.38
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank colleagues for the common voice they have sounded following this tragic accident, and I particularly want to thank hon. Lumumba who has caused us to stand and observe a moment of silence in honour of these departed brothers and sisters. 

I have synthesised six points from the contributions that have gone on the Floor. The first is the issue of following up management of those who are alive and being cared for in the hospital. As I said, I was there only this morning and I agree that we should follow up these people until they are safely out of hospital.

Secondly, the issue of the safety of the President has been raised since this particular soldier was working with the Presidential Guard Brigade. But as hon. Kyanjo said, you can go so far. You can examine someone and say at this moment this person is alright. That is not to say that for every 100 or 1,000 people examined, there are no failure rates. Today I may have no disease and tomorrow I may have one. When it comes to testing temperaments of people following different provocations, you cannot be so exact. 

However, what I would like to assure Members of is that when you join PGB - like this private was hardly there for six months - there are grades in how far you go in guarding the President. It does not mean that all of them are around the President. Caution is always taken but you should expect that there should be some errors in judgement as to the mental state of some of the people that are deployed there. But it is good that Members make this observation and we will continue to take strict observance.

Hon. Kyanjo has also proposed that rather than have a board of inquiry within the Army that there should be a commission of inquiry. My view is that the history of the strictness of the Army speaks for itself. Whenever incidences like these have occurred, very serious disciplinary measures have been taken. Soldiers have been executed after due process of law, and I want to assure hon. Members that there can never be cover up of an incident like this one.

The issue of compensation has been raised –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Thank you for giving way. My fear is not for the UPDF’s competence to investigate a given situation. My fear is the vested interest that the UPDF has in its own institution given the fact that the person who would have been closed on killed himself. My worry is that how are you going to investigate yourselves under such circumstances, and what is the worry of a judicial inquiry anyway if there is nothing to hide? 

I also have a wild suspicion and nobody knows whether this particular soldier is the one who did the act. Who knows somebody could have shot at him in the centre of an act like that and he runs away. This is why I very humbly request that we insist on a judicial commission of inquiry rather than a UPDF inquiry itself. Thank you.

MS AKELLO: Mr Speaker, I want to concur with what hon. Kyanjo is saying because several cases have been reported under the pretext that they are carrying out investigations, nothing has actually been yielding. 

In my district last year, a DSO in Patongo sub-county killed a civilian one evening and they pretended to arrest him. The man was taken to Gulu and now he is walking free. No justice has been achieved. I concur with hon. Kyanjo that we have an independent body to investigate this. 

MR FUNGAROO: I have a clarification to seek. Once there is a gun with anybody there always remains the permanent possibility of using it. Here we have not reflected so much on what created the possibility of using that particular gun by that person. In the papers, reference was made to some kind of provocation that some US $300 plus a phone were taken out. The theft that led to the provocation here is a moral act. What responsibility has the Minister of Defence placed on the Minister of Ethics in the area of trying to encourage Ugandans to behave in such away that they do not provoke people who have guns? (Laughter) 

In Arua, for example, if anybody is suspected of being a thief, the mention of the word “thief” alone will mobilise the people around – the one from whom they have stolen will not have time of looking for a gun. The public will run and arrest that person and lynch him there and then. That is why there is no theft openly in the streets of Arua. A soldier robbed of money in Arua will not go to the barracks to look for a gun because the public will have assisted him. 

Here, if it was true that the soldier went to the gates and claimed that somebody had stolen something from him and she had gone there, the public should have responded properly and prevented the soldier from getting annoyed to the extent of going home to get a gun. In Kampala, Education against immorality is needed 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. From the statement we are told the incident occurred in the wee hours of Saturday morning and I am seeking for a clarification. When you look at the list of those who were injured, they are all youth. I believe even all those who are dead are youth. This problem of people drinking trans-night, I think there was some degree of drunkenness in the whole saga. May we find out what strategies government is coming up with to control drinking hours in this country? In fact it is partly responsible for the vicious cycle of poverty.

THE SPEAKER: What you are asking is whether we have drinking hours in Uganda or you can drink 24 hours?

DR CHRISPUS KIYONGA: My strong view is that the board of inquiry will bring out the facts. There is no necessity for us to put in place a commission of inquiry. What perhaps colleagues in the House could demand is that the board of inquiry should be expeditious and you should get to know the results of that inquiry so that if at that stage you have doubt then perhaps that step can be considered. 

On the issue of compensation, we are responsible for the funds of the taxpayer; our laws govern compensation. It would be presumptive of me to stand here on the Floor of this House even before the board of inquiry has finished and undertake that compensation will be given. These will be issues that will be clearer once we have the results of the inquiry. 

Lastly, the issue of stricter control of guns - as colleagues have said there are reasons why soldiers will be given guns –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, can I get protection from hon. Okello? I want to finish the statement. In regard to stricter control of firearms, what we mean here is that at some point when security was not stable, it was wise to keep soldiers with their guns just in case something should happen. But obviously now, like in Kampala and most parts of the country, this is no longer the issue. This stricter control is going to mean that only soldiers and police officers on specified duty will carry firearms. Otherwise, they will be in the armouries and if they are required then they be issued to the soldiers at that point in time. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Because of the tight programme we have, we have to end this debate so that we handle the Bill. 

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If I stood here and laid down questions including one that was demanding the suspension of the commander of the PGB and the minister does not respond to it, would it be procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: Why do you suspend the commander? This was a drunkard; he went out with the gun; why do you suspend the commander?

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, I would urge this Parliament to agree with my assertion that this commander was himself/herself incompetent in his/her duties and this commander is an impediment to the investigation. 

I would urge you to urge the minister to take serious consideration of suspending this commander so that we can have a clean inquiry, otherwise we still have lots of suspicion both in the inquiry itself and in the commander who will continue to give orders either indirectly, directly or sometimes inadvertently. I continue to insist that if this commander is still in the seat, it will be difficult to discover whether this soldier killed himself or he was shot.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PARTNERSHIPS BILL, 2008

3.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Partnerships Bill, 2008” be read for the second time. 

This Bill seeks to repeal and replace the existing Partnership Act, Cap 114 with a new legislation that amends, consolidates and gives a modern outlook to the law relating to partnerships in Uganda. This is necessary because the existing law on partnerships, which is based on the Partnerships Act of 1890 of the UK, is considered obsolete and no longer responsive to the current needs of Uganda especially in light of contemporary globalisation and technological developments. 

The Bill is apart of the reform of commercial laws undertaken by the government to support private sector development, commercial justice reform and encourage private investment.

I believe colleagues have read the Bill, the summary of which is embodied in its memorandum which you can easily glance at for a quick refreshment of our minds from part I to part VI of the Bill. But I believe that colleagues have read the Bill and are able to make useful contribution. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.50
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Partnerships Bill, 2008. 

The Partnerships Bill, 2008 was read for the first time on 17 June 2008 and it was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in accordance with rules 112 and 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

In analysing the Bill, the committee was guided by Rule 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Methodology

In the process of analysing the Bill, the committee discussed it and received memoranda from the following stakeholders:
1.	The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs;
2.	The Uganda Law Reform Commission;
3.	The Uganda Law Society; and 
4.	The Uganda National Chamber of Commerce.

The committee also made cross-reference to the Partnerships Act, Cap 114, the Business Names’ Registration Act, Cap 109, the Interpretation Act, Cap 03 and the Company’s Act, Cap 110.

Objectives

The objective of the Bill is to repeal and replace the existing Partnerships Act, Cap 114 with a new legislation that amends, consolidates and gives a modern outlook to the law relating to Partnerships in Uganda. This is necessary because the existing Cap 114, which was based on the Partnerships Act, 1890 of England is considered obsolete and no longer responsive to the current use of Uganda especially in light of the contemporary globalisation and technological developments.

Mr Speaker, the Bill is a part of the reform of commercial laws undertaken by the government to support private sector development, commercial justice reforms and encourage private investment.

I would like to report that the committee made the following observations:
1.	That the current law on Partnerships in Uganda, Cap 114 was transplanted from the United Kingdom and supplemented by common law and equity in the courts of law. In essence, the Act was simply a declaratory with the common law and was not exhaustive. Uganda therefore, needed to have a law that would flourish in its own territory since technological developments and social economic changes have since developed.
2.	Mr Speaker, as a result of laws being transplanted, Uganda has had so many piecemeal legislations on Partnerships scattered from the Partnerships Act, Cap 114, the Contracts Act, Cap 76, the Bankruptcy Act, Cap 67, the Business Names Registration Act, Cap 109, Registration of Documents Act, Cap 81 and the Company’s Act, Cap 110. The committee therefore, agrees with the idea of having a solid legislation on Partnerships rather than having piecemeal legislations.
3.	The committee also observed that since the Partnerships Act, Cap 114 was enacted, it has never been amended. 
4.	The committee also observed that the Partnerships Bill, 2008 has introduced a new aspect of limited liability Partnerships, an aspect Ugandans had not had before.

Recommendation

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that the Partnerships Bill, 2008 be passed into law subject to the above proposed amendments. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. Hon. Members, the issue is now open for debate. In default of the debate, can I put the question? Okay, let us hear from hon. Banyenzaki.

3.55
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee members for the report. I also would like to thank the minister for bringing such a law. 

My only observation and maybe, which will be in form of seeking clarification is that although I agree with the committee that this was really an obsolete legislation of the last century, there are many more legislations that are obsolete and need to be reviewed because they have been in existence for long. Actually, within the business arena some are not applicable at all. For example, if you look at the Money Lenders’ Act of 1959, it does not apply any more at all yet this business is flourishing within the country and the law that regulates it is obsolete. 

So, maybe the minister will, at a later time, let us know what time all these commercial laws are going to be brought before the House for review. If they had brought all these laws at a go for us to handle at once, it would allow business within this country to be conducted according to the law; it would provide a good environment. Mr Speaker, I would like to say that because of this kind of laws you find that we have a large backlog of laws especially in the commercial court; it is because the laws that are being applied – sometimes judges find difficulties; they end up depending on precedents. 

As I wind up, I would like to thank the committee and the minister for bringing the motion, except I appeal to the minister to also bring the other laws that are obsolete and are being applied to the citizens yet they are actually not palatable to the business environment within this country. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion. Okay, –

3.59
THE MINSTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Banyenzaki for that concern. However, as it has been the practice in the House, Members ought to know what takes place in other committees. Although I think hon. Banyenzaki is not a Member of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, he may wish to find interest in reaching out to that committee and see how much legislation is before it in terms of commercial reform. 

For instance, I have been told that this Friday we may have to debate the Contracts Bill. They also already have, before them, the Trademarks Bill. Sometime back we passed the Hire Purchase Bill and the Trade Secretes Law. I know that much legislation is about to be presented here for first reading, particularly the Company’s Law and so forth. So, I would like to inform the House that there is a lot that we expect to be done in terms of commercial justice reform. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that a Bill entitled “The Partnerships Bill, 2008” be read the second time. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PARTNERSHIPS BILL, 2008

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The committee proposes that clause 4 be moved to the miscellaneous section and inserted after clause 62 and the Bill be re-numbered. The justification is that it is appropriate that it is brought under the miscellaneous provisions.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The amendments that we have from the report of the committee also have several issues to deal with clause 1. I do not know whether the chairman has decided to abandon those proposed amendments to clause 1 or he wants to wait until we recommit?

THE CHAIRMAN: You see; the procedure is that if I call out a clause and you have an amendment either as a committee or another person, you stand up and you move the amendment. If you do not, then we proceed. But should it be a pressing amendment then later you may ask us to recommit. I put the question that clause 4, as amended, stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Clause 5 should be moved to clause 1 after the definition of the word “currency point” and re-drafted as follows: “Firm means persons who have entered into a partnership with one another.” “Firm name means the name under which the firm business is carried on.” 

Justification: the clause is defining what the firm and firm name mean.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I rise on a point of procedure. I do not know how we should proceed because this House has pronounced itself on clause 1 but I now see the chairman bringing an amendment on this particular clause. I would like to seek guidance from you on this matter.

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, he is moving an amendment to re-allocate the clause and is saying, “You take it where clause 1 is.” But I think the best practice should be that the definition clause should always come at the end. I think that will save us this kind of problem. But as of now, he is concerned with clause 5 which you maintain. He is adding another provision to it. It seems we might have to recommit clause 1 sometime. Let us proceed. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that clause 6 be renumbered as sub-clause 1 of clause 6 and a new sub-clause 2 be introduced immediately after sub-clause 1 of clause 6 to read as follows: Clause 6(2): “… where any partnership operates as a partnership in contravention of sub-section 1, every partner in the partnership commits an offence and is liable on conviction, to a fine not exceeding 20 currency points and to an additional fine not exceeding 5 currency points for each day for which the offence continues after the expiration of 14 days.” Justification: to provide a penalty for non-registration.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think what he is trying to do is to create the original sub-clause 1 and adding another one since clause 6 did not have two parts. This is what he is doing.

MR WACHA: Sorry, Mr Chairman, you will excuse this intervention. I am a member of the committee but unfortunately I was not around when this matter was being finalised. I do not know whether you will allow this interjection to improve on what appears here. 

The principle to me is okay. I would have redrafted a new sub-clause as follows: “…where any persons operate a business as a partnership in contravention of sub-section 1, every party to the business commits an offence…” and it continues because we cannot start talking about a partnership which is not a partnership. I think we are talking about a business which is purporting to be a partnership because it is not registered as such. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Yes, Attorney-General.

MR RUHINDI: I think hon. Ben Wacha’s amendment may have to come a little bit more formally so that we get it in detail. The way I heard him, if you subject every party to the transaction, then the third parties who are doing business with the partnership under an arrangement where for instance some partners are holding out, will also be responsible and that makes it very wide, and I think, unsustainable. I think this provision intends to tie those members within the partnership to this kind of responsibility, but not third parties. 

MR WACHA: Sir, my question is: how do you have a partnership, which is not a partnership? How do you have a business entity, which is not registered, and you start calling it a partnership? If there is a way that you can improve on this so that you remove that doubt then that is okay. I think the Attorney-General’s fears are actually not founded because we are talking about persons who are operating this particular business; a particular firm. They are operating it as a partnership and not those who are trading in it; not those who are carrying out business with that so-called partnership but those who are within the business entity and carrying it as a partnership whereas in law it is not a partnership.

MR TASHOBYA: I consent.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Then I put the question to the proposed amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR TASHOBYA: The committee proposes that in clause 7(2) the words “ …in the usual way, business of the kind carried on by the firm of which he or she is a member …’ should be deleted and replaced with the words “ …the ordinary course of business of the firm …” The justification is clarity.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR TASHOBYA: In clause 8 sub-clause (2) the words “…general rule of …” should be deleted and replaced with the following words “general principles of”. The justification is that there is no general rule of law relating to the execution of deeds or negotiable instruments.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, in clause 9 the committee proposes that clause 9(2) should be deleted. The justification is that it is redundant.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I don’t think this clause is redundant. While in clause 1 we are talking about the firm not being bound, in clause 2 we are trying to emphasise that the personal liability of an individual partner still remains. So I don’t know why the chairperson is saying it is a redundant clause.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, I think we could call in the marginal note to assist us. The marginal note here is saying partners using credit of the firm for private purposes. If you bring that as an aid then you see how irrelevant clause 2 is because clause 2 is talking about the obvious. If I incur my own personal liability, it has nothing to do with the firm and that is what we are talking about.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR TASHOBYA: The committee proposes that after clause 11(2) a new sub clause 3 be inserted to read as follows: “The estate of a partner who dies or who becomes bankrupt or of a partner, who, not having been known to the person dealing with the firm to be a partner, retires from the firm, is not liable for partnership debts contracted after the date of the death, bankruptcy or retirement respectively.” 

The justification is that the sub-clause concerns the liability of partners.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that in clause 18(1), a new sub-clause (2) be inserted to read as follows: “A firm shall not be liable for the acts of any person who falsely holds out himself or herself as a partner of a firm.” 

The justification is to further clarify clause 1.

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Chairman, are we not stating the obvious by saying that somebody who tries to masquerade - if somebody out there says, “I am the Speaker of Parliament”, when he is not and signs documents on your behalf purportedly to originate from this institution, do we take that seriously?

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes. Suppose he gets a stamp and appends the stamp of the Speaker? This is for avoidance of doubt and that is why I think the amendment is there.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I am sorry I am a member of the committee but for the sake of clarity, I wanted my chairman to tell me what value the word “falsely” would add because holding out is a legal concept so there is nothing like falsely holding out. You are either holding out or not so I would suggest that we delete the word “falsely” as it would still leave the contents intact.

THE CHAIRMAN: What is your formulation?

MR ODONGA OTTO: We just delete the word “falsely” and leave “holds out” because “holds out” is a legal concept that speaks for itself so you cannot falsely hold out. You either hold out or you don’t.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is falsely presenting yourself as if you are a partner when you are not.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Or you are not. 

THE CHAIRMAN: It is falsely presenting yourself as if you are a partner when you are not. I think this is what he is trying to do.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, what you have just stated is what is holding out is all about; holding out is presenting yourself like me presenting myself as the Speaker. Legally you say you are holding out. So, there is nothing like this.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, what term do you want to delete? 

MR ODONGA OTTO:  “Falsely.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I see; okay. 

MR RUHINDI: Assuming, “falsely” is dropped then that amendment becomes redundant. Because that is actually what is being stated in the clause 18(1) and I had actually wanted to ask my colleague, the chairperson, what does falsely here entail? Because holding out as hon. Odonga Otto says is holding out. 

THE CHAIRMAN: So what is the amendment, hon. Member, I want to know? 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman, if I may explain this: you see, you need to get it from the provisions of clause 18(1). What it is all about; the full import of that clause. It makes a person who holds out as a partner liable to a third party who acts on representation. But now this amendment comes in to protect the firm. That a third party can sue that individual as if he is a partner but the partnership shall not be liable for the acts of that impostor. That is what the amendment is all about and it is very important. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Yeah, but he is saying if you are using “falsely,” you do not use hold out or you do not use the two, isn’t it what you are saying? 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, I do agree with that because the moment you hold out, it means you are trying to give a false picture. 

THE CHAIRMAN: So, we delete the word “falsely”? 

MR LUKWAGO: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. 

MR NYOMBI: Mr Chairman, the addition of the words “falsely holding out,” is intended to imply the guilty intent. It is because one may hold himself out through actions; not intending to portray a certain position but falsely holding out shows that someone intends to tell a lie.
 
MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, if I am to take the advice of hon. Nyombi, then my immediate defence in this case would be that I am rightly holding out. So, as long as we are saying there is falsely holding out, by default we are making provisions for rightly holding out and yet holding out is a legal concept which you know very well. 

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, I think we all know what we are trying to say. Could it help if we said: “Misrepresents himself as a partner of the firm?” Because the idea is that he is doing something which is actually not true. So if we – (Interruption)- hon. Okello-Okello let me get clarification; let him answer first. Yes, Sir. 

THE CHAIRMAN: So you are saying, misrepresents himself? Maybe that will be understood by many more people than holding out which is a bit sophisticated. 

MR ODONGA OTTO:  Mr Chairman, misrepresentation can even involve me reading a different text of what I would have ordinarily been asked to read. But it may not exclusively amount to holding out. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Can we really solve this thing and move on?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Chairman, I am not a lawyer -(Laughter)- but I also did some law as part of my course. Can someone hold out truly? Holding out is holding out; you are doing it wrongly or falsely.  So the word “falsely” is not relevant here, you cannot hold out truly.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, what would happen here is that maybe somebody is just an employ of a firm and he goes out to claim that he is a partner when he is not. Or if he thinks that because he is working with that firm, he is a partner. So, if he thinks that he is a partner by virtue of working there, he is holding out but not falsely. I think falsely is trying to actually make it absolutely clear that you have that intent of falsely presenting yourself. I think that that is what they were trying to do. But does it do any harm if we leave this thing here?

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. So, I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.) 

MR TASHOBYA: Sub-clause (2) of clause 18 should be re-numbered as clause 18(3) and the words “of the” should be inserted after the word “administrators.” The justification is for proper numbering and reading. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay; I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Clause 18, as amended, agreed to. 

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to. 

Clause 22, agreed to. 

Clause 23, agreed to. 
 
Clause 24

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, in clause 24(2) the words “but in trust so far as necessary for the person beneficiary interested in the land under this section” should be deleted. The justification is that they are redundant. So we should have a full stop after “trust”.  

THE CHAIRMAN: But what is your report reading - what I have here in clause 24(2) the words are: “But in trust, so far as necessary for person beneficiary interested in the land under this section.” The command of delete is not there but is that what you intended? 

MR TASHOBYA: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. So I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.) 

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to. 

Clause 25, agreed to. 

Clause 26, agreed to. 

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, on clause 30(3), the committee proposes that the word “it” should be deleted and replaced with the words, “the notice in accordance with the deed”. The justification is for clarity.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 31

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, in clause 31, the committee proposes that the words “so far as is consistent with the incidents of a partnership at will” should be deleted and the justification is clarity.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I do not see the rationale of removing this as redundant because it really emphasises that without any express agreement for a partnership, what actually remains is consistent with incidents of partnership at will without an express agreement. So, maybe he has a better reason for wanting to have this one deleted.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The reason this phrase should be deleted is because it tries to create a new kind of partnership, which is not defined. The moment, “in as far as it is consistent with the incidents of partnership at will,” yet we are saying those rights and obligations remain and continue even after the expiration of the term of the partnership. By whatever terms they can be defined, the partnership remains.

The partners, in continuing the business, shall remain liable for their conduct whether it is a partnership at will or what; that is immaterial. The moment you put, “So long as they are consistent with the incidents of the partnership at will”, which incidents are not defined here, you are creating an absurdity. What are those incidents of a partnership at will? 

We are trying to quantify the partnership law. So if they are not defined here, those incidents and the partnership at will are not defined, why are you creating a new formation? So that is why we are saying we should leave the obligations to stand and the rights unaffected, since you have decided to continue with the business. That is my understanding and that is why I am defending the position of the committee.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40 

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that under clause 40(2), the words “by any partner” should be inserted after the word “Gazette.” The justification is to have the advertisement done by a partner and not just by anybody.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I agree with the amendment but I thought maybe since it has come in, we could improve it so that it is not any partner that puts an advertisement in the gazette but we could say “by an authorised partner.”

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, my problem is: are we now going to start ranking partners? I thought under the partnership law, any act done by any partner will bind the firm? How do we now start ranking the partners?

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you sit in a meeting and say you authorise? That is what he is asking. I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49

MR TASHOBYA: The committee proposes that clause 49 should be moved under miscellaneous after clause 62 and the Bill be renumbered. The justification is that it is better placed under the miscellaneous provisions. 

MR RUHINDI: I have no objection to this amendment except that instead of putting it after clause 62, which provides for the making of the regulations, it should be before clause 62 because normally a clause in respect of making regulations comes where it should be and it is.

THE CHAIRMAN: So I put the question to the amendment and the adjustment by the Attorney-General.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 49, agreed to.

Clause 50

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that just before clause 50, in the heading of part VI, the word “liability” should be inserted after the word “limited” and the justification is that this part of the Bill provides for limited liability partnerships.

MR RUHINDI: I have a problem with this fundamental proposal. What is provided in this Bill is actually a limited partnership not a limited liability partnership. There are some countries where there are limited liability partnerships and they are provided for under separate laws. And if you look at clause 50 and the way it is tailored and the relevant provisions, it does not provide for a limited liability partnership. It means that there are general partners like I may come in the partnership as a general partner and then the limited partners come in and make a contribution and their liability is to the extent of that particular contribution put in the partnership and it means the name limited partnerships. 

However, I concede that there was a problem in clause 51(2) where they say that after you have registered that kind of partnership, you put at the end, “LLP”. It should have been “LP” and I will move an amendment to that effect. If you import in limited liability partnership, it is completely a different concept and I have already been talking with my technical staff and they have been working on this together with the Uganda Law Reform Commission to see how they can incorporate that concept of limited liability partnership in the general companies law because that is where the concept properly falls. Thank you. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, the presentation by the Attorney-General is a bit confusing because my understanding of this concept of limited – it is the liability which is being limited and like this sub-title in part VI says, limited partnerships, more or less you are creating limited liability companies. For us in the committee, our view was that if you are coming up with a concept of limited liability of particular members like in this case we are saying one or two or three amongst the 20 members, liability can be limited. That is our understanding of this concept - that limited liability of those particular members who have contributed a particular percentage of the capital. You are not limiting the liability of all the members in the partnership.

My understanding is that if you are saying limited partnership, you are creating it as a body corporate. You are saying the entire partnership is limited which is confusing. We are trying to create liability which is limiting to a particular group of individuals within a given partnership and that is how we understand it. So if you change it like in this case to say limited partnership and you are saying two or more partners can come up and say we are contributing this sum and our liability is limited - and there is no limit to the core partners. Supposing all of them come up and say we are all limited, it will become a limited partnership whose liability is more or less like that of a body corporate. I think it would be appropriate to have this amendment and Attorney-General, I implore you to concede to the amendment so that we say it is limited liability partnership and then we define it.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I am seeking clarification from hon. Lukwago in trying to support the position of the Attorney-General. If we have a limited liability partnership, what then will be the other type which is not the limited liability partnership? That is if you are saying the heading should be “limited liability partnership”?

MR WACHA: I want to continue from where hon. Lukwago stopped and say that his argument is buttressed by the provisions of clause 53. Let the Attorney-General read that and if he is not satisfied that this provision actually accepts our proposed amendment, then I would suggest that we put a stop here and the Attorney-General comes and addresses the committee. 

Hon. Otto, the general partnership that we have been handling had no concept of people who come into the partnership and say I am only going to be liable for a particular amount of money which I have contributed. Any partner under the general provisions of the partnership law that we are now bringing is entitled to all the debts of the partnership. It is not limited. But here now we are trying to provide for a situation where hon. Otto would come and join the partnership and say I am going to be entitled to make good debt limited to the amount of money that I have paid in the partnership. So, there are now two types yet originally there was only one type of partnership.

MR RUHINDI: To the extent of the amendment proposed by the committee, I would have no problem. Why? Because the proposal to add the words, “limited liability” would be qualified by the relevant provisions that are in the Bill; they are actually not being amended. In other words, should you want to know what we mean by that expression then we have to look at the provisions of the law. 

What I would like to make clear on the Floor of the House is that we are not creating an entity. I am saying this because if, for insistence, you have a limited liability company, the liability of the shareholders is to the extent of their unpaid up share capital. In this kind of partnership, although you may actually put in the element of limited liability, it would not be the same because here the general partners will be liable, jointly and severally, to the obligations and debts of the partnership not the partnership as a legal entity.

The limited partner – what we may want to call limited liability partners – will be liable only to the extent of their contribution in the partnership. For as long as that is appreciated, I have no problem with the amendment.

MR WACHA: But I think let us not go round and round. What the Attorney-General is talking about is provided for under 53(3). And that is where we got the concept of our amendment. If it were not so – because it says that the limited partners shall not be liable for the debts or obligations of the firm beyond the amount of capital so contributed. I think it is so obvious.

THE CHAIRMAN: That is why they wanted the word “liability” to feature. I think it is now okay. I put the question –

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, if you look at clause 8, which we just passed a while ago, you would have realised that it talks of partners being jointly and severally liable to each other. My sense is that we are now creating a scenario where we will have partners having limited liability. But supposing in a firm of five people, all of them opt to have limited liabilities in the partnership, and the business goes bad, by implication many partners will opt to go for limited partnership! So who bears the remaining liabilities if you want to relate it to Sections 8, which states: “All partners are jointly and severally liable…” What I am saying is that we should not presuppose that in a firm –

THE CHAIRMAN: I think if you read clause 53, which they referred you to and it reads thus: “Limited partnerships, in addition to general partners, have one or more persons called limited partners who shall contribute the stated amount of capital to the firm and shall not be liable for the debts or obligations of the firm beyond ….” Have you seen that? 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, I think hon. Odonga Otto has got a point in what he is saying. My sense is that there is a ceiling on the membership; it is 20 and we are saying “one or more.” The argument is, supposing all of them opt to be limited?

THE CHAIRMAN: No that cannot happen because the law says in part, “in addition to the general …”; so not all of them can be limited.

MR LUKWAGO: In addition to?

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, read the first sentence. It says: “Limited partnership shall in addition to general partners ….” The general partners are those – I think you have understood it. Is it clear, hon. Members?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I now put the question to the proposed amendment by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52, agreed to.

Clause 53

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, we propose that in clause 53(1)(d) the words “and address” should be inserted after the word “names.” 

The justification is to ensure that the relevant details of the partners are obtained during registration.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 53, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 54

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, in clause 54(1)(d) the committee proposes that the words “and address” should be inserted after the words “the name.” The justification is to ensure that all the relevant details of the partners are obtained.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 54, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 56

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that under clause 56(3), the word “would” should be replaced with the word “wound.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, I also would like to move that in clause 56(4)(a)(ii), the word “general” should be inserted after the words “to a”. The justification is for proper service of the demand of the sum owing from the partners.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, in clause 56(4)(b) the words, “or from the partner” should be deleted. The justification is to limit the institution of suits to partnership debts.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, in clause 56(4)(c) the committee proposes that the words, “or any member of the firm” should be deleted. The justification is that it is a consequential amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 56, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 57, agreed to.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

Clause 60, agreed to.

Clause 61, agreed to.

Clause 62

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, in clause 62(1)(c) the word “be” should be inserted after the word “to”. The justification is for better reading.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 62, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 63, agreed to.

Clause 64, agreed to.

The Schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Partnerships Bill, 2008” and passed it with very useful amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PARTNERSHIPS BILL, 2008

5.09
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. May I propose that the Bill be recommitted for consideration of clause 1? 

THE SPEAKER: No, I think that should come when there is a motion for the third reading. Isn’t that the case? Yes, you called it up. Ok, but can you tell us the reason. You just don’t say, “Recommit”; there must be some reason.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Speaker, we are proposing a recommittal of clause 1 to provide for, in the long title, limited liability partnerships, which is a subject of this Bill. 

We are also proposing to add some words of interpretation coming up in the course of the Bill that are not provided for in the interpretation clause.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there is a motion that we recommit for consideration of Clause 1.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PARTNERSHIPS BILL, 2008

Clause 1

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The committee proposes that the word, “liability” be inserted after the word, “limited” in the long title of the Bill.

The justification is that the Bill in part V provides for limited partnerships and not only partnerships. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, clear? I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, now that we are at this stage, I wanted to recommit two provisions of the clause, if I may be listened to. I thought it would be a burden to get back there and come back again. Thank you so much. 

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, the decision to recommit that one would only come when I am still there.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Okay, I will wait until you are there. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, what do we do hon. Members? Should we really be in a ping-pong situation or should we allow it to be - but the procedure is that you should have made your prayer while I was still there. Okay, let us finish this one. Any other amendment?

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, in clause 1, in the definition of the word “partnerships,” the word “includes” should be deleted and replaced with the word “means” and the justification is that they both define the partnership. 

This is the last on page 4. We are saying that partnership means a partnership referred to in section 2 and a limited partnership referred to in section 50. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. I put the question to it. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TASHOBYA: And lastly, the committee proposes that in clause 1 after the definition of the word “registrar” which is the last word in the definition clause on page 5, the following should be inserted: “Trustee means one, who having legal title to property, holds it in trust for the benefit of another person and owes the judicial duty to that beneficiary.”

“Trust property means property subject to a trust normally held by trustees.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the recommitted clause 1 of the Bill and the long title and passed the same with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PARTNERSHIPS BILL, 2008

5.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Partnerships Bill, 2008” be read the third time and do pass.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion that clause 50 of the Bill be recommitted to the Committee Stage. 

The justification: if I may read clause 50(2): “A limited partnership shall consist of not more than 20 persons and shall have one or more persons called general partners who shall be liable for all debts and obligations of the firm.” The intent of my motion is to the effect that I think this Parliament should come out clearly and specifically state the maximum number of limited partners we can have in a firm. This is because the way it is drafted now, you can have one general partner and 19 limited partners so that when it comes to liability it may be a little too much for the individual.

It would have been more prudent if we said, “Will have limited partners and any other number not exceeding the one required by the law as far as the general partners are concerned.” Otherwise, we are going to have a situation where we have one general partner and 20 limited liability partners making it a very risky business to start dealing with firms. So I really beg that it be recommitted for consideration.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there is a motion to recommit clause -

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I wish to object to the motion for recommittal on this matter for want of fixing a number for either general or limited liability partners in the partnership. Why should we do that? If you say 19 limited liability partners, one general partner and you make the business risky, so be it because they would have agreed to do that.

You cannot regulate persons’ businesses in the way you want. They may actually think contrary to the way you think. They may think that by having one general partner and 19 limited liability partners, the business will be more profitable. So it is a question of circumstances and I do not think it is wise to regulate the business of individuals that way.
 
MR ODONGA OTTO: Just a quick clarification before the shadow Attorney-General comes in. The advice of the Attorney-General that it is not wise to regulate the private business of persons raises the question: why then do we say a partnership should have at least two members and a maximum of 20? Why don’t we leave it even up to 1,000 people to form a partnership? What is the essence of that provision if you want to relate it to the arguments you have just presented before the House?

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I would add my voice to hon. Odonga Otto’s observations and support the motion. When you look at this concept of a limited liability partnership, it is a novel concept. We are trying to create a special kind of partnership and it must be regulated. It is not like any general partnership. So if you are saying only one person can remain a general partner and he assumes all the liabilities of the partners in excess of the capital contributed by the corporate or core partners, you are making business risky to those who are going to deal with that partnership. 

And if you are to limit the liability of the members, there should be a ceiling like we have in private limited liability companies. In this particular case it should be restricted to a particular number and we say, that if we are to have 20- a partnership might not even have the whole number of 20; they might be five and then they are saying only one will be general partner. No. It should be in terms of percentage and we say a particular percentage of the partnership in that particular business should be corporate and then we leave a wider percentage to general partnership to cushion the general members against that liability. So, I support the motion and I urge the honourable Attorney-General to please concede as it would help us a great deal. I thank you.

MR RUHINDI: Before I concede, Mr Speaker, what is the purpose of bringing in a limited liability partner? What is it that we are trying to achieve? We are trying to bring in a person who may not want to be subjected to the normal routine of obligations of a business partnership, wanting to bring in money and these other partners be it one or many may say, let me have the money, I will meet the challenge. That is one way of looking at it. The other way is what we are saying. Why 20, why seven, why two? Those have come up after long best practices and usages knowing that those are more or less the suitable minimum or maximum numbers of regulating that kind of business. Mind you, the partnership is not shielded as a corporate entity is. The more you have the numbers, the more complicated it is to manage deposits based on mutual understanding and agreement -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much for giving way. Mr Speaker, the clarification I am seeking is, look at yourself as a lawyer. Today we are making a law that you can form a law firm and you are 19 businessmen without any appreciation of the law becoming limited partners by virtue of having the capital; the rich people of this world. So don’t you see that by default we are mortgaging your profession to the hands of those with the money? Don’t we have to regulate the number? That is the clarification I am seeking from you.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I am getting confused. I believe that people who go into partnerships are mature and reasonable. If I choose to be the only general partner among 20 people, why should you waste your time bothering about what I will face? Let me say I have four children and I go into partnership with them so that we are now five. I tell my children, “I know your capacities, your liability will stop at what you have contributed but I am strong so mine will be general”. What is wrong with that? I am just taking on -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, why don’t you trust this new system? Should it cause difficulties, we can always amend. Let us see how it works out first.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, I just want hon. Otto and hon. Lukwago to read (2) and (3) together. Don’t isolate (3) only and you will find that there is enough insulation to take care of their problems. 

Secondly, as hon. Okello-Okello says, business partnerships are really an arrangement between people who know their capabilities. We cannot regulate that however much we try to. As for hon. Otto’s problem about 19 people trying to associate with an advocate like he is going to be, that is not possible, because the Advocates’ Act does not allow it.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Mr Speaker, I think the lawyers have sorted themselves out in terms of example but even lay people – here you work with an accountancy firm and by virtue of your work, you are given the title of partner and in that capacity you are actually a limited liability partner and your contribution to major decisions and liabilities of the firm is very minimal. I think this is the same context, which is provided for here. 

If that is understood, I also wanted to move a motion of recommittal of the same clause 50 on the amendment, which was introduced to change the title of part IV to limited partnership simply because 50(2) creates a clash between having that title and having a 50(2). 50(2) talks of a limited partnership and that the definition shall consist of not more than 20 persons and shall have one or more persons called general partners who shall be liable for all debts and obligations of the firm. 

This title and this particular clause is making reference to the nature of the partnership where you have partners who have limited liabilities called LLPs and general partners who are fully liable. Now if we put a title of limited liability partners, it cannot be consistent with the definition in 50(2).

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, maybe it was our fault. I thought after the concept of limited liability partnership was accepted, the others were consequential amendments -

THE SPEAKER: Yes, they are consequential amendments and they will be amended consequently. When the title is amended to introduce liability, the person arranging it will have to have consequential amendments to quote it wherever it is applicable. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I was following the debate from my office and the Attorney-General actually opposed the proposed amendment at that time. I have recommitted so I am just relating what happened. Looking at it, I rushed down here because once you have 50 as the title, limited partnership, if you change that to limited liability partnership and you read 50(2) then there is a contradiction.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable professor, we have accepted the amendment although it is not printed there and because of this, there will be consequential amendments way all through including the 52 you are talking about. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: No, because the consequential amendment that would then be required to make the title of limited liability partnership consistent with 52 means that you must remove general partners from that provision. 

THE SPEAKER: No, in the limited liability partnership, there are general partners and those with limited liability. There are two categories: those who have limited liability and those who have open liability. I think let us really try the law. If it fails, we shall come back.  

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, just for the record, I want to concede and give in to the advice from my learned colleagues, hon. Ben Wacha and the Attorney-General. So I have abandoned my attempted amendment. (Laughter) For the record, I do not want to be left on the rail. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Odonga Otto for his concession. The issue raised by - 

THE SPEAKER: No, but we have now finished. We are now going with your motion. The motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Partnerships Bill, 2008” be read the third time and do pass. That is what we have and you had moved it -(Laughter)- that is when the interruption came in. So the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Partnerships Bill, 2008” be read the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED THE PARTNERSHIPS ACT, 2009

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations! (Applause) Hon. Members, this disposes of our business of today. Tomorrow we shall reconvene at 2.00 p.m. to deal with the other business, which has already been indicated to you. 

With this we come to the end and, therefore, the House is adjourned until tomorrow 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.25 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 7 May 2009 at 2.00. p.m.)
