
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Thursday, 6 May 2021

Parliament met at 11.34 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala 

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning sitting. I do apologise for the late start. We were touching base on matters relating to our work as we conclude this Parliament. So, we will try to catch up as usual. Let us go to Item 3. 

I think we shall not have matters of national importance because there will be no time to respond to them. We are really closing. We shall look at them next time. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF PROPERTY BELONGING TO THE LATE FORMER PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA, HIS EXCELLENCY FIELD MARSHAL IDI AMIN DADA AT PLOT 10, PRINCE CHARLES DRIVE KOLOLO AND BUILDINGS IN KAWEMPE

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development here? The minister is not here. We will reflect it on tomorrow’s Order Paper.

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF THE REVISED EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2019/2020 AND THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2021/2022

THE SPEAKER: The minister of finance is not here. 

Is the Chairperson of the Committee on Human Rights here? Are you ready with any of your businesses? 

11.38
MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Madam Chairperson, in three minutes, I can be ready. 

11.38
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Robert Kafeero): Madam Speaker, with your indulgence, my minister and I are ready to proceed with Item 7.

THE SPEAKER: I want to give opportunity to that standing committee. They have not reported on any of their issues yet. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I see Item 4 concerns one of the most committed ministers, hon. David Bahati. He normally comes here for loans and appropriation at the Committee of Supply. I think he might be having a problem. Wouldn’t it be procedurally okay that the minister around finds out what could have gone wrong with him since  he is not here in time? Otherwise, -

THE SPEAKER: They are consulting somewhere. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Otherwise, I was wondering –

THE SPEAKER: They are within the building. However, we need to do some work in the meantime. 

MS TAAKA: Madam Speaker, let me pick the report. 

THE SPEAKER: We shall give you time. 

Where is the chairperson of – Let us have of the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government).

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE HEALTH SECTOR FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2018

11.43
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek your indulgence. We have all the reports from financial years 2016 to 2017, 2017 to 2018, 2018 to 2019 and 2019 to 2020. I seek your indulgence that all of them are laid at once so that we make a general summary for everything in 30 minutes. 

THE SPEAKER: You can lay them all at once. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to lay the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) for Financial Year 2017/2018 of the entities which were not completed in the Education Sector, the Health Sector, the Justice, Law and Order Sector (JLOS) and the Public Service sector.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to lay the report of the public sector, JLOS, Uganda Missions, Public Universities, Ministry of Education, and the Ministry of Health for Financial Year 2017/2018. 

I would also like to lay the reports of the Public Accounts Committee for the financial years 2018/2019 and 2019/2020. 

I would like to lay all the attachments for this period for Financial Year 2017/2018, including our summarised minutes for financial years 2016/2017 to 2019/2020. 

Madam Speaker, given the volume of the work, I have brought the CD and the flash disk of all the recordings on those reports of 2016/2017 to 2019/2020 and I would like to lay them on the Table. 

Having laid all those on the Table, I would like to make quick summaries because all the issues we are talking about are crosscutting and we need the House to know about them and generate a general debate. 

I will start with Article 163(4) and (5) of the Constitution. Article 163(4) reads: “The Auditor-General shall submit to Parliament, annually, a report of the accounts audited by him or her under clause 3 of this Article for the financial year immediately preceding.” 

Article 163 (5) reads, “Parliament shall, within six months after the submission of the report referred to in clause 4 of this article, debate and consider the report and take appropriate action.”

I would like to indulge the next Parliament to take quick action whenever the Office of the Auditor-General submits reports. If they cannot do it, it does not bar them from bringing the reports here and having them adopted, as it has been so that they can go and work on the Treasury Memorandum and the audit is done. 

Madam Speaker, due to that, I would like to lay three more reports, which consolidate all the accounts of Government: the report of the Auditor-General of consolidation of the summaries for 30 June 2020; for 30 June 2019 and for 30 June 2018.

The justification is that these reports are very important for the Committee on Budget to look at before they can come to their conclusion. 

The summary of the committee’s general observation and recommendations on some of the salient and critical queries raised in the Auditor-General’s report on Central Government in the financial years 2016/2017, 2017/2018, 2018/2019 and 2019/2020 are indicated below: 

    i) Poor budget performance;
    ii) Inadequate releases; and 
    iii) Low utilisation and under absorption. 

Basically, the queries were on that.

The committee observed that whereas Parliament approves the budget of MDAs and their work plan, which include procurement plans and recruitment plans as per Section 15 of the PFMA, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, every financial year, unilaterally decides not to release all funds approved in the Budget or sometimes makes late releases at the closing month of the financial year.

The committee further observes that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has consistently released money late in the last month of the Fourth Quarter when it is impossible for MDAs to absorb. This has perpetuated low achievements in recruitment and procurement, among others. 

The non-release or late releases of funds have made most MDAs to perform dismally in their budget execution and fail to achieve the projected outputs and in most cases, incur domestic arrears in contravention of the PFMA.

The delay on the part of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has worked against the MDA's ability to achieve their mandates, pay contractors and suppliers on time, and pay the salaries of newly recruited staff. This has led MDAs to make mis-procurements. 

The persistent and consistent low utilisation/under absorption of the approved budget, commitment of domestic arrears and understaffing in MDAs is attributable to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Whereas Section 17 of the PFMA provides that money  unutilised by a Vote at the close of the financial year shall be paid back to the Consolidated Fund and further that a Vote whose money has been swept back shall revise its annual work plan, procurement plan and recruitment plan to take into account the unexpended money and should form plan of the Budget for the proceeding year, the committee has established that this has not been implemented by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and MDAs, as per Section 17 (3). 

Failure to implement rollover of the Budget to the next financial year has not only caused distortion in planning but has also led to accumulation of unforeseen domestic arrears by MDAs and non-completion of activities. 

Recommendations 

    i) The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development takes full responsibility for the perpetual non release, late release of funds, under absorption and accumulation of domestic arrears.

    ii) The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Accountant-General should provide for rollover of money unspent by an MDA to the next financial year, as provided for under Section 17(3). To this end, the committee is proposing that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, PS/ST and the Accountant-General should develop guidelines and mechanisms of practically implementing the rollover (unspent funds) envisaged under Section 17(3).

    iii) The minister should, in every month of July, present to Parliament, for approval, the revised work plans, procurement plans and recruitment plans of MDAs to take into account the unspent funds. 

    iv) The rollover funds should not form part of the Budget appropriated for the next financial year. What has been happening is that the money they sweep back becomes revenue for the next financial year, which should not be.

Domestic arrears 

2017/2018 – Shs 2.6 trillion 
2018/2019 – Shs 3.3 trillion 
2019/2020 – Shs 3.8 trillion

It is being projected that it is going to be over Shs 4.5 trillion this financial year. 

Madam Speaker, there is a key implication of domestic arrears because you are not paying your suppliers and the suppliers borrow money. In short, you are killing their businesses and that is why you see very many properties in the newspapers.

Oobservations 

    i) The committee observes that the accumulation of domestic arrears is spiralling out of control. The delays in payments for goods and services procured by MDAs have led to the deterioration of financial positions of businesses.

    ii) The committee notes further that failure to settle domestic arrears adversely affects the subsequent year's budgeted programmes since it may lead to a reallocation of funds or non-delivery of critical services.

    iii) The committee attributes this to the failure by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to release all the money appropriated to MDAs by Parliament and release of funds towards the end of the last quarter.

    iv) The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should take responsibility for accumulation of domestic arrears that are not as a result of Accounting Officers over committing the Government.

    v) (v) The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should always bring a realistic budget to avoid over commitment of government (arrears) or non-execution of activities approved by Parliament.

Parliament should consider disallowing further approval of monies to MDAs that have continuously failed to perform. The post budget performance of MDAs should always be taken into account before approval of a new budget.

We discovered undisclosed domestic arrears; in 2017/18 it was Shs 267 billion which means they hid it. In 2018/19, it was Shs 377 billion, in 2019/20 it is was Shs 644 billion. This means, it is hidden off the balance sheet, and then they bring it the following year because you have appropriated and say they have committed arrears. What this means is that they have overspent beyond the approved budget but they cannot declare. This distorts government accounts.  

Contractual obligations of MDAs

The committee notes with concern that many contractual obligations of MDAs such as rent and counterpart funding among others are not adequately budgeted for and in some cases, nothing provided at all by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

Contractual obligations is where we have agreements but do not budget for them or budget less if we do for example when rent is Shs  10 million, they give you Shs 5 million. Now what do you do with the balance?

This has 1ed to several MDAs to default and incur the resultant penalties, interest, costs, damages, fines and garnishee orders. This nugatory expenditure has increased the domestic arrears of many MDAs.

In many instances, accounting officers have diverted funds as a preventive measure from incurring further interests, costs and fines or litigation in the courts. They transfer to pay such monies, which are for contractual obligations.

Many MDAs have low capacity to detect and prevent legal risks associated with contractual obligations and in most cases, the advice of the Attorney-General is sought after breaches or decisions have already been made.

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide adequate funds for all contractual obligations to avoid nugatory expenditures associated with defaults.

The Attorney-General should devise a policy of proactively addressing potential risks in all contracts signed and being managed by government ministries and with no legal counsel.

Loans/Donor funded projects

The committee observes that whereas the Government incurs loans for projects, many have not been fully absorbed and implemented despite the funds being available. This low absorption is attributable mainly to failure by the Government to honour its counterpart funding obligations.

Although the Government commits itself to these loans well aware of the components for counterpart funding, inadequate or very low funds are released. Because of this, donors withhold their releases since their releases are tagged to the Government fulfilling its part of the bargain.

The committee further observed that whereas project managers and accounting officers bring work plans and budgets to Parliament for approval in accordance with Section 15 of the PFMA, there has been very dismal performance and execution of these approved work plans. 

This, the committee notes, is an indication that accounting officers and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development deliberately mislead Parliament into allocating funds to activities they know that they will not implement.
Many projects have either stalled or remained incomplete long beyond the contract period. 

This has led to costs overrun hence casting doubt on value for money for such expenditure. The expenditure incurred for the stalled projects translates to ineffective use of public resources, as the projects are not achieving their intended purposes and value to the taxpayers.

The committee further observes that, given the donor's intricate procedures many project managers lack the capacity to supervise and manage these projects. Most often, coordination in getting donor's approval is not done on time and so implementation is delayed.

Some of these delays are attributed to laxity on the part of the project management in ensuring proper feasibility study, timely procurement, mobilising government counterpart funding and coordinating with the donors on their requirements and modalities and financial rules. It means that when we sign for a loan, we have procurement rules here, then you are subjected again to the procurement rules of the one giving you the money.

This delays the project because you must also satisfy the other one which becomes complicated. Some of their rules are in conflict with our own rules. Those who sign should know that. We shall make a recommendation. 

In many cases, the public servants seconded on work in projects enjoy better facilitation and incentives compared to the traditional public service. This has been attributed to deliberate extension of project times and slow execution in order to continue enjoying the associated perks.

The committee expressed its concerns on the challenges imposed by donors financial/procurement rules in the implementation of the projects and the resultant bureaucracy and delays that are not compatible with Uganda's financial and procurement rules.

The committee observed that we pay interest charges for non-utilisation of the loans.

The Government needs to reiterate its positions to the donors on harmonisation of its operational procedures so as to reduce transaction costs and lengthy processes and make disbursement and delivery more flexible, taking into account national laws, development needs and objectives of our country. This is in line with the guidelines of the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD).

The Government should conduct adequate feasibility studies before embarking on these projects and should guarantee and confirm availability of funds for counterpart funding.

The PS/ST should strengthen the supervision and evaluation of project managers. All project managers and staff should be subjected to the Uganda Public Service Standing Orders in the execution of projects works. Non-performance by public servants seconded to projects should be treated as a disciplinary matter.

The performance of all project staff should be assessed and appraised, annually.

Non-implementation of planned activities should attract sanctions of the responsible officers. The costs overrun due to unjustifiable delays should constitute a surcharge on individual project managers – 

A11 project staff should be recruited by the Ministry of Public Service. They should come up with a harmonised salary structure to avoid others being not paid better. 
 
We also request the Ministry of Public Service to come up with a harmonised salary structure to avoid others being paid well and others poorly. 

Fleet management

Madam Speaker, the committee examined the following:

    (i) Examination of the motor vehicles registers by the Auditor-General and subsequent verification by the committee revealed several shortcomings in the control and management of the government fleet. This has been caused by the lack of a comprehensive policy on management of government vehicles and irresponsibility on the part of most accounting officers to ensure prudent use.

    (ii) The committee notes that most expenditure, allocation and usage of motor vehicles are irregular, and in breach of prescribed laws and guidelines. In some instances, government vehicles are assigned to officers, who by law, are not entitled to;

    (iii) The committee also notes that although the existing policy prescribes for the mileage and age of vehicles eligible for disposal, the ban on purchase of new vehicles and inadequate funding make it impractical for accounting officers to dispose of vehicles notwithstanding their old age.

Madam Speaker, the policy is that a vehicle is disposed of when it is five years old or has moved 240,000 kilometres. This was the case during the colonial time, Amin’s time and Obote’s time. By then, I think the roads were very bad. However, now that the roads have improved, why do we go for 240,000 kilometres? When you check the cars here, you will realise they have moved more than 500,000 kilometres and are still sound. Therefore, we want that policy changed;

    (iv) The committee advises that government, in the circumstance, asks the Ministry of Works and Transport to liaise with the MDAs for efficient and affordable utilisation of otherwise old fleet.

    (v) The committee urges government to review the old policies and formulate a number of policy and guidelines to ensure the prudent use of government vehicles; and
    (vi) The Ministry of Works and Transport should amend the rule on the five years or 250,000 kilometres to 10 years or 500,000 kilometres because the roads have improved.

Staff Performance

Madam Speaker, we always come here to account for only money and we forget the human resource yet this is one of the key resources in service delivery in this country. This is what the committee noted:

    (i) The committee noted several lapses and weaknesses on the implementation of the Uganda Public Service Standing Orders 2010, in regard to staff performance appraisals, execution of performance agreements and sanctions for non-compliance. Most accounting officers failed in the supervision and strengthening of staff performance. Human resource managers lack motivation to enforce this exercise that is very critical for efficiency.
 
    (ii) The committee urges accounting officers to take this exercise seriously and institute disciplinary proceedings for non-compliance.

    (iii) The Ministry of Public Service should continue building the capacity of accounting officers and the human resource managers on adherence to the Uganda Public Service Standing Orders, 2010.

    (iv) The Ministry of Public Service should carryout quarterly inspections in MDAs; and

    (v) The Ministry of Public Service should manage the training budget of public servants in collaboration with the Civil Service Training College.

Madam Speaker, we have a good service college build in Jinja but it is underutilised. What is happening is that civil servants just go out for small courses, which could be done at our service college in Jinja. Uganda Management Institute by then was called Institute of Public Administration but it was taken over and now, we have built another one. Therefore, we want it to be managed properly.

Procurement and contract management

    (i) Madam Speaker, the committee observed that although public expenditure through the procurement of goods and services constitutes about 80 per cent of the annual budget of Government, the integrity of the entire process has been compromised by very high prices/costs for often lower quality of goods, services and works. There are unreasonable and astronomical prices/fees charged against Government. This means the moment PPDA puts a price for example, that this pen costs Shs 200, whether you get a better pen at Shs 50, you must buy it at Shs 200. That is not fair;

    (ii) The committee is concerned that suppliers, contractors and public officers collude to inflate prices, bill for work not performed, and fail to meet contract standards, reduce quality of work or use inferior materials, in the case of public procurement of works. This results in exaggerated costs of goods and services and a decrease in quality, to the detriment of Ugandans. 

	Madam Speaker, I do not know whether you used the Express Way. It was recently worked on but as you join it from Busega, you notice that there are already big potholes before we even use it for one year.

    (iii) The index on common user items and their average prices by the PPDA is ineffective and is not followed by PDEs. The committee finds the PPDA toothless in guaranteeing value for money in public procurement. The committee recommends that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should establish a committee, within 30 days of adopting this report, to review the costs/prices of goods and services procured by Government entities.

Deficit in budget releases

The committee observed that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, year in and year out, releases less funds to entities as opposed to the approved budgets. This causes non-performance of activities as per section 15 of Public Finance Management Act. What happens is that we blame the entity and forget the person who is supposed to have given full money.  

Recommendations:

    i) The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development be held liable for the budget deficit, which has 1ed to non-implementation of approved activities as per section 15 of the Public Finance Management Act. 

    ii) Parliament should not approve budgets, which are not implemented. We should not come here and pass budgets of Shs 50 billion and next year they request for Shs 100 billion and we give Shs 20 billion; it does not make sense.

    iii)  Before a budget is processed, Parliament should review the previous budget and confirm its performance before any further approvals are done; and

    iv) Parliament is also responsible for approving budgets, year in, year out, that don’t perform fully and lead to accounting officers being held liable for non-achievement of the desired output. 

Under absorption

We release money and there is under absorption. The total under absorption in Financial Year 2017/2018 was Shs 1.9 trillion; in 2018/2019, it was Shs 1.8 trillion and in 2019/2020, it was Shs 2.1 trillion. This means that this money has been released but not absorbed; it is then shot back to the Consolidated Fund. 
  
Committee observations

    i) Late release of funds by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development towards the end of the financial year. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development releases money on 27th June of the end of the financial year. That means they are giving an accounting officer three days to do whatever he is supposed to do, including procurement. Will he be able? In short, that money goes back; and this is done deliberately.

    ii)  Late releases have led to mis-procurement because entities try to absorb the money. What it means is that the accounting officer now tries to use under methods to procure within those days so that they can consume and this leads to mis-procurement. 

    iii) Wages because of non-recruitment by the Public Service Commission, the Education Service Commission, the Health Service Commission and the Judicial Service Commission. Madam Speaker, all the returns are indication that we could not absorb because we never recruited.

	In addition, the accounting officer cannot recruit but the commissions are the ones to recruit, yet they have evidence that they have submitted for recruitment but those entities are just sitting there and not recruiting.

iv) 	Pension files for beneficiaries not being updated, leading to non-payment of pension. They said that the beneficiaries’ pension files are not updated. The committee wondered why if someone who has been earning on the normal payroll has to fill other forms when it comes to going to the pension payroll. This should be automatic from that active payroll to the pension payroll because I have been earning a salary. These are the reasons old people are dying without getting their pension and gratuity.

Recommendations:

    i) The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development be held liable for all these late releases and this must stop.

    ii) All funds released late should be rolled over as per section 17(3) of the Public Finance Management Act. If we agree to roll over, even if they release the money on 30th June, it will be for the following month and it should be applied.

    iii) The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should, every July, submit work plans for the rolled over funds. 

    iv) Unspent balances for each financial year, which are for activities planned, should not form part of revenue of the Government for the following financial year.

    v) The Public Service Commission, the Education Service Commission, the Health Service Commission and the Judicial Service Commission be held liable for non-recruitment of staff as per section 15 of the Public Finance Management Act.

    vi) Accounting officers should update all pension files within 60 days from our report. 

    vii) The Ministry of Public Service should provide all documents of pensioners to accounting officers for update within 30 days.

    viii) In this digital age, any accounting officer who does not update the pension files within 60 days will be held liable for non-performance.

    ix) All pensioners should access the pension payroll on the day of retirement. Madam Speaker, we are in a digital world. 

Arrears and non-budgeting of arrears

We were doing this for emphasis. The committee observed that the causes of arrears and non-budgeting are the following:

    i) Deficit in budget releases hence non-payment of goods and services provided as per section 15 of the Public Finance Management Act.

You give an accounting officer a budget of Shs 100 billion, you release Shs 80 billion. It means if he or she is building and there is a certificate, which has been issued and not paid for because you have not released a balance, that certificate will be arrears. Now, whose problem, is it? It is the problem of Parliament and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for having not given the accounting officer the entire budget. Now the Auditor-General says the accounting officer is a problem; “No”. The problem is Parliament and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because we did not give the accounting officer all the money. 

    ii) Non-budgeting failures for contractual obligations and commitments under counterpart funding. If we do not budget fully for counterpart funding and contractual obligations, arrears will come.

    iii) The budget of the next financial year is always passed without closure of the financial year. Therefore, budgeting for domestic arrears is not possible for the accounting officer.

Madam Speaker, we are going to pass the budget today and the year is ending on the 30th of June. That accounting officer must be an angel to know the number of arrears he will have by the end of the financial year so that he can budget. The person who has an idea is the Minister of Finance, since he is in charge of the financial year.

Recommendations

    i) The Minister of Finance should release the whole budget to the accounting officer to avoid domestic arrears.

    ii) The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide fully for contractual obligations and counterpart funding. 

    iii) The responsibility to budget for arrears by accounting officers should be the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development not the accounting officers since the cause is the minister.

    iv) Accounting officers who committed arrears due to non-release of approved budget are hereby exonerated except those who committed beyond the approved budget.

What I mean is that if they have given you Shs 100 billion and you go beyond your budget, it means you have become Parliament. Those below what we approved have no case because we approved those activities but never released the money.

Mischarge and diversion

In the Financial Year 2017/2018, it was Shs 370 billion. In the financial years 2018/2019, it was Shs 385 billion, in 2019/2020 it is Shs 315 billion.

The committee observed that most of the cases of mischarge were due to the following:

    i. Payment of contractual obligation and counterpart funding which were attracting interest and court cases.

    ii. Garnishing of entity accounts due to non-payment because of court orders.

    iii. Wrong codes used by accounting officers due to non-clear specification of codes by the Accountant-General.

Recommendations:

    i. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development be held reliable for non-release of contractual obligation and counterpart funding.

    ii. The Accountant-General provides codes very clearly and locks in the amounts to budget lines, as payments are being made.

    iii. That accounting officer should be held liable for diversions, which are committed outside where the Minister of Finance and Parliament is responsible.

Staff performance 

The committee observed poor performance in the Government institutes due to inadequate

    i. Monitoring and evaluation of staff;
    ii. Non-appraisal of staff on annual or bi-annual basis;
    iii. Filing of performance reports;
    iv. Retooling and training of staff;
    v. Monitoring attendance of staff; and
    vi. Availability of time sheets. 

Observations 

    i) We have talked about staff employed by a project accounting officer but not the Ministry of Public Service.

    ii) We also observed that payment of project staff with more money is demoralising traditional civil servants.

Recommendations:

    i) The Ministry of Public Service should strengthen the inspectorate department of its ministry. 

    ii) Accounting officers should submit quarterly reports on performance of staff to the Ministry of Public Service, Office of the Prime Minister, and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

    iii) Human resources are important like financial resources and should be evaluated by the Ministry of Public Service, Office of the Prime Minister and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

    iv) The Ministry of Public Service should carry out quarterly inspections to all the Government entities.

    v) The Ministry of Public Service should even do abrupt visits to entities to find out on their performance not to be structured.

    vi) All accounting officers should come up with training programmes, which should be handled by the civil service college.

    vii)  All accounting officers should monitor their staff for attendance by ensuring they clock in and out every day, after signing in the attendance book. We are also doing it in Parliament.

    viii) All accounting officers should submit annual appraisal forms to the Ministry of Public Service by 30th June of each year. 

    ix) All project staff should be employed by the Ministry of Public Service because they are paid from public resources.

    x) The Ministry of Public Service should come up with harmonised salary payments to avoid others being over paid while others are underpaid within 30 days.

    xi) The Ministry of Public Service should evaluate the performance of project staff against their work plans, as per Section 15 of the Public Finance Management Act.

    xii) Accounting officers should have time sheets to be filled in by staff on a daily basis and reviewed on a weekly basis by the supervisors.

    xiii) All accounting officers should ensure that the Public Service Standing Orders are followed without exception. 

Advances 
Madam Speaker, we discovered that money was advanced to people  and after one year, thy cannot account for it . In the Financial Year 2017/2018, it was Shs 20 billion and Financial Year 2018/2019, it was Shs 7 billion.

Observations:

    i. There are very many advances, which were not returned within 60 days as per the financial laws. The Public Finance Management Act says that within 60 days, you must account for advances. 
    ii. No accountability of funds means that funds have not performed and hence misappropriation.
    iii.  Some accounting officers transfer money to bank accounts of the staff.

Recommendations

    i. All accounting officers should recover all the advanced funds within 30 days and effect disciplinary action against the concerned staff.
    ii. All accounting officers should immediately stop transferring money to staffs’ bank accounts.
    iii.  Any accounting officer who transfers money to personal accounts should be personally liable.

Non-Tax Revenue 

Madam Speaker, the committee observed that:

    i) The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development budgets for NTR of entities, without entities involvement. That means you are not involved; they will say, “You will collect Shs 2 billion” when you do not know whether you will collect Shs 10 billion or less.

    ii) There are entities which collect NTR but it is not budgeted for.

    iii) Not all entities have a window for NTR and this distorts revenue collection. These are the monies which are not budgeted for because they have no window for it.

Recommendations:

    1. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should budget for NTR, in consultation with all entities because they are the ones who know the performance.

    2. The Accountant-General should provide all entities with an NTR window, whether they collect NTR or not. 

Measurement of outputs 

The committee observed that the accounting officers are not quantifying expected outputs every financial year. Government has not established a tool or method on how to quantify outputs.

Recommendations

    i) Accounting officers should produce both quantified and qualitative outputs for each activity. There are activities you can quantify; there are those you can only describe. That is what we call qualitative.

    ii)  The Ministry of Finance and the Office of the Prime Minister should establish a tool to measure outputs of each activity and sanctions for failure.

    iii) All accounting officers should produce variances of each activity and the causes clearly examined.

    iv) The Auditor-General should audit the variances and provide a report to Parliament.

These are very important for performance of every entity.

Untitled Land 

Madam Speaker, we observed the following:

    i) Government has a lot of land which is not surveyed and not titled.

    ii) Encroaching and stealing of land is on the increase, by both the public servants and the general public.

Recommendations

    (i) That Parliament budgets for surveying and titling of all Government land.

    (ii) The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should provide the necessary support to have all Government land titled.

    (iii) The titles should be in trust of the entities which use the land, as per the Land Act. What we mean here is that if the land is for Mulago Hospital, it should be Uganda Land Commission in trust of Mulago Hospital, but not open and that is why the commission is selling our land.

    (iv) This process should be concluded within six months.

Madam Speaker, these are types of audit opinions, which the Auditor-General provided.

    1. Unqualified means accounts are okay.
    2. Qualified means they are bad.
    3. Adverse means very bad.
    4. No opinion means it is beyond bad and the Auditor-General cannot form any opinion. (Laughter)

They are all general in nature.

The committee received from accounting officers responses of financial years 2019/2021 of the Central accounts, as per Article 90(3) of the Constitution, except of Missions abroad. 

Madam Speaker, we would like to tell you the qualified ones and the bad ones. These were basically in the health sector. The adverse one was the Judiciary – Not the Justice, Law and Order Sector but the Judiciary. 

There was a ‘No Opinion’ for one of the entities, which we have asked the Auditor-General to go and review. They said they could not form an opinion and we told them to take it back and form an opinion. They should be sanctioned because they said, “Income was this; expenditure was that, but we cannot form an opinion”. We asked them how possible that can be. If they have no data, then those are prosecution cases.

Madam Speaker, I want to turn to the health sector and summarise it quickly and then we can move on to the last part. These are the general observations in the health sector. This is the Ministry of Health and all the referral hospitals, Uganda Blood Transfusion Services, Uganda Cancer Institute, Uganda Heart Institute and the Uganda Virus Research Institute. 

We had meetings, reviewed documents, there were field visits and these are our observations for those years.

Observations

Lack of essential medicines and health supplies 

The committee observed the following in the health sector, with regard to essential medical health supplies.

    i) This is basically due to low supply and not improper budgeting.

    ii) The users are not involved in the planning and budgeting process. That means the users of the medicine are not involved.

    iii) The National Medical Stores provides the indicative figures of the essential medicines and health supplies to users after the budget process, which is after the Budget has been passed. 

    iv) Prices charged by the National Medical Stores were beyond the market prices.

    v) No private hospital or health unit can buy from the National Medical Stores because of its high prices. 

    vi) Hospitals prefer buying drugs from the Joint Medical Stores because they are cheaper.

    vii) Even the President, in his letter dated 16 May 2020, called NMS anti-Ugandan because of the prices and operations. It is also in the report. 

Recommendations

    i) Indicative prices of medicines should be provided to users, to assist them determine the usage of their vote allocation.

    ii) Budgeting should be done when the users know the prices and this would be the transparent way of determining that National Medical Stores is providing the essential medicines and health supplies at the market price. 

    iii) Every vote should have a deposit Account, as per Treasury Instruction (IS) 10:18, for purposes of accounting with the National Medical Stores.

    iv) Monopoly of National Medical Stores should be stopped because it is overcharging hospitals and health units.

    v) Vote controllers should manage their respective votes.

    vi) Under Section 75 of the NMS Act, health facilities are supposed to pay for drugs after supply, not before supply. We have mentioned it and the law is there. 

Lack of uniforms

Madam Speaker, every Government entity which must wear uniforms should have the appropriate prescribed garments provided by Government, like the police, prisons and the medical staff. The committee observed that the Ministry of Health did not procure uniforms but contracted the National Medical Stores to supply the uniforms.

It was observed that a deposit account was never opened for the money to procure uniforms, contrary to the Treasury Instructions governing one entity performing financial functions, on behalf of another.

The committee noted that the National Medical Stores does not manufacture uniforms and the reason to contract them defeats the purpose. The uniforms were never delivered on time and if delivered, they were not the right quality, quantity, size and wrong distribution. We have attached this information; you will see it.

The uniforms supplied by NMS were overpriced compared to the market prices. The prices charged by National Medical Stores was Shs 153,360, plus 3 per cent delivery charges per uniform and the total cost by National Medical Stores was Shs 165,629, yet when the ministry conducted its own procurement process this past financial year, it paid Shs 101,000 from the same supplier; Nytil.

All the funds deposited by the Ministry of Health to the National Medical Stores were diverted as follows:

    i. The deposit Shs 4 billion of Financial Year 2016/2017 was made but no uniform was delivered in Financial Year 2016/2017. This cash was all withdrawn by the National Medical Stores as soon as the money hit the account in Standard Chartered Bank. (Refer to the bank statement here attached.) 

The deposit for Financial Year 2017/2018 was Shs 5 billion. Only Shs 3.125 billion was delivered despite the inflated price. There was no evidence to show that the balance of the money was still on the account by the end of the financial year because the statement showed a nil balance. 

The deposit for Financial Year 2018/2019 was Shs 4.35 billion, but they delivered Shs 5.24 billion because the Committee on Public Accounts had raised the issue. Therefore, by 30 June 2019, the Ministry of Health had deposited Shs 13.35 billion and yet the deliveries were only for Shs 8.37 billion. 

They claimed deliveries of Shs 8.37 billion could not be verified by the Internal Auditor-General because there was no accountability. Shs 4.97 billion was unaccounted for by NMS, by 30 June. 

The uniforms delivered were not as per user request. National Medical Stores just made uniforms without measurements and delivered them because of the pressure to account for the money. 

Withdrawals on 05 July 2017 from Standard Chartered Bank, Account 010561066100 of Shs 2,509,476,000 was done in cash. Shs 159,898,811 for uniforms was also taken in cash on the same day. 

The committee noted that for example, in Mbarara Regional Hospital, 13 nurses’ dresses delivered were cream in colour instead of white. They delivered three clinical coats instead of dresses. Four Kaunda suits were cream instead of white while 30 Kaunda suits were returned because they were excess due to the male staffing level. 

According to the reports received by the committee in Isingiro District, Health Centre IV received six orthopaedic coats whereas there is neither an orthopaedic service nor orthopaedic personnel deployed at that health centre. 

The complaints of no uniform, wrong sizes, wrong colours were in the whole health sector; all hospitals and units. 

The Auditor-General qualified the accounts of Ministry of Health instead of National Medical Stores which could not show the Ministry of Health’s money in the accounts yet since Financial Year 2016/2017, the Auditor-General is the auditor for both because of the lack of that money. 

The Auditor-General never raised the issue of payables to the Ministry of Health for uniforms under NMS. This is a clear indicator that there is serious collusion. 

Arising from the above, the committee recommends that:

    1. The Ministry of Health should procure their own uniforms as they used to do before they contracted NMS to deliver uniforms on their behalf. 

    2. A forensic audit to be carried out to establish the supply of uniforms by the National Medical Stores totalling to Shs 13.35 billion by the Auditor-General. 

Expired Drugs

The committee received the Auditor-General’s reports for health sector’s entities and observed that:

    1. There is a lot of expired drugs;

    2. The expired essential medicines and supply is a result of a pushdown where essential medicines and health supplies are sent down by National Medical Stores without a requisition.

    3. The essential medicines and health supplies sent are those which are about to expire due to short shelf life. 

    4. Health units are being used as dumping grounds.

    5. National Medical Stores accounting for their mismanagement.

    6. Essential medicines and health supplies about to expire are given by manufacturers or pharmacies free or at a very low cost because destruction is more expensive than sale of drugs by the suppliers all over the world. This implies that National Medical Stores procures drugs that are about to expire at no cost or at a cheaper price and bill health facilities at high prices, which is fraud of the highest order. 

Recommendations

    1. Essential medicines to health centres should be those they have requested for. You do not give them what they have not asked for. 

    2. No health centre should receive essential medicines and health supplies which are about to expire or have a short shelf life because drugs purchased in a financial year should be those manufactured in that financial year. 

    3. Government should establish a control system where National Medical Stores should not be the sole executor; that is, procure, store, distribute and destroy drugs.

Destruction of Expired Drugs

The committee observed that National Medical Stores, which is responsible for the supply of essential medicines and health supplies, is the same entity that destroys expired ones at the cost of the health unit. The destruction does not follow the established laws and ease the corruption and theft by NMS.

Section 35 of Public Finance Management Act (PFMA) is being violated by National Medical Stores. What does Section 35 of PFMA say? Any destruction of Government store must be done by the approval of Parliament. So, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is supposed to bring here the stores which are going to be destroyed and we approve their destruction. 

Under Section 35, any abandonment of claims and write-off of public money and store is done by the approval of Parliament. Parliament has never approved write-offs of expired essential medicines and health supplies. This means that the National Medical Stores escapes accountability.

Recommendations:

    1. No expired essential medicines and health supplies should be destroyed without approval of Parliament as per Section 35 of PFMA.

    2. Government should establish a separate unit to be responsible for the destruction of essential medicines and health supplies, and not National Medical Stores. 

    3. Before destruction is done, an audit should be carried out to establish why the essential medicines and health supplies expired in stores. 

    4. The cost of the essential medicines and health supplies to be destroyed should be established and when they were they purchased and the time they were sent to health facilities. 

Infrastructure

The committee observed the following: 

    1. Many referral hospitals were carrying out development of a capital nature. The money is given in piecemeal, which is not enough to do any meaningful construction and development.
 
    2. The cost overruns have increased due to delays and non-completion of these projects. 

    3. Interest charges have been levied due to the delays to pay contractors. 

    4. Accounting officers have diverted funds to pay for contractual obligation to avoid some of these costs. What it means here is that if you go to Masaka Regional Referral Hospital, they plan to construct a building of Shs 20 billion, but the minister, every financial year, gives only Shs 2 billion or Shs 1 billion. That means it is going to take 20 years to complete that building. It means there is no value to be got. Prices of thing change every day. 

Dilapidated buildings

The committee observed that most of the buildings and water systems in hospitals are in a sorry state with leaking pipes, falling ceilings, peeling paint and walls and deplorable wards. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should come up with a comprehensive plan on how these buildings should be renovated. Parliament should appropriate funds for these renovations. 

Madam Speaker, this is very urgent. We should do it because all of us are potentially sick. If we do not work on these buildings, tomorrow we may need them and we will have a problem. A live example is the former Minister of Health, hon. Stephen Malinga, who died from his village in a health unit, which had a falling ceiling. It never had medicines. The management of that health unit had been coming to his ministry to ask for it to be upgraded. He fell sick in his village and they carried him – you remember this – and he died in the health unit, where there was no medicine and drip.

We should work on these health centres because we are also potentially going there. It is important that we work on them. 

Outstanding Debt of Shs 340 billion for Essential Medicines and Health Supplies

The committee observed that the National Medical Stores contracted a debt of Shs 340 billion on behalf of referral hospitals and health units for essential medicines and health supplies without their knowledge. When the committee sought to know how this debt was incurred, the NMS quickly adjusted their accounts and said it was only Shs 121 billion. The committee wondered whether NMS was going to pay for “air supply” if the committee had not inquired, or whether they were going to just steal the money on behalf of the health units. 

The committee observed that when the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, on 20 January 2019, wanted Ernst & Young to audit the dates of NMS, NMS objected and ran to court to defeat the cases in file. The committee wondered why NMS did not want to be audited for the dates contracted. 

The Minister of Health, who was the former Director General of Health, continued to protect National Medical Stores at the expense of health units, which are the providers of Medical services to the taxpayers. We have attached all that evidence. 

Recommendations 

    i) The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should carry out a Forensic Audit on the NMS debt before any payment is done. They should not pay before they have carried out the debt audit. 

    ii) The NMS should provide the authority from the health units, which led to contract this debt on their behalf. If it is my Vote, I must give you authority to contract. 

    iii) The detailed debt of Shs 340 billion should be provided to Parliament; how it was incurred and the creditors are.

    iv) The Minister of Health should be investigated in her role of defending NMS at the expense of health units.

    v) The Appointing Authority should hold the Minister of Health accountable for low supply of drugs in health facilities and poor performance of health units and having qualified opinions. 

Lack of Boards in Referral Hospitals and Health Units

We observed that almost all the hospitals do not have Boards. If they are there, they only have a skeleton. The reason was that they have submitted their requests for approval to the minister but this has not been done for a long time.   

The committee observed that a number of Regional Referral Hospitals had expired boards and the submissions made to the minister had not been acted on for years; there was evidence.

The committee further observed that the minister had re-appointed the General Manager of National Medical Stores six months before the expiry of his contract but the same minister took years without appointing board members of hospitals, who serve the population.

The committee observed that the appointment of the General Manager of NMS on 22 November 2019 by the minister was in fear of the immense Cabinet reshuffle which was done in December, 2019. 

Recommendations:

    i) All board members of hospitals should be approved within 30 days before the expiry of the old board.

    ii) The Minister should support Referral Hospitals and not only concentrate on individuals who can facilitate her processes.

    iii) H.E the President, should take keen interest in the health sector from procurement up to last users of essential medicines and health supplies.

    iv) The appointing authority should investigate the relationship of the Minister of Health with NMS. 

Lack of a Management Committee in NMS as per Section 11 of the NMS Act

The committee observed that NMS has no management committee as per Section 1(i) of the NMS Act. The Management Committee comprises of the General Manager, the Deputy General Manager, the Chief Pharmacist, the Chief Procurement Officer and the Chief Stores Officer and in matters of engineering, the Chief Engineer Officer. The General Manager is, himself, the Management Committee, standing alone

Recommendations:

    (i)  The Board should have the Management Committee but not the General Manager alone; they affect the hospitals. 
    (ii) This creates a monster not a worker.
    (iii) The General Manager has compromised all systems including investigative bodies because he has power and resources
    (iv) The President should take interest in NMS Management and delivery of services. 

Expensive blood 

The committee discovered that blood is very expensive in Uganda and we did some research. The committee observed that the cost of units of blood in Uganda was more expensive than any other country in the world i.e.: 

Blood screening test (one unit) – Shs 58,378
Blood collection bag		- Shs 16,200 
Blood grouping reagent		- Shs 41,260
Nucleic Acid Test (NAT)	- Shs 66,600
Accessories				- Shs 23,826
Total					- Shs 206,264

This clearly shows that while blood is essentially free, NMS is inflating the cost of blood by inflating the commodities essential for the safe handling of blood.

The committee recommends that the Uganda Blood Transfusion Services should be in charge of its budget for the procurement of essential supplies and sundries related to the safe handling and management of blood. They told us that they do not touch the budget. They just give them a number but they do not hold the budget vote, so they have no control. 

Expensive Essential Medicines and Health Supplies

The committee observed that the cost of essential medicines and health supplies in Uganda is excessively and unnecessarily expensive.

It was further observed that these medicines supplied by NMS to health facilities across the country are procured locally and not following competitive procurements, as per the PPDA audit. We have attached the PPDA Audit. 

The committee further observed that;

    i. There was no economy of scale as per NMS purchase.

    ii. There is no law which compels referral hospitals, health units and the Ministry of Health to send their funds to NMS.

    iii. NMS is supposed to "supply against payment of medicines and medical supplies to Uganda Public Health Services and Associates and private health care”, as per Section 15 of the NMS Act. Therefore, it means the entities pay to NMS but not NMS to budget for them.

    iv. There is a total lack of control of essential medicines and health supplies by Vote holders. That means they cannot control it. 

Recommendations:

    i) All hospitals should be provided with their funds to buy essential medicine and health supplies from the most cost-effective sources, especially in cases where NMS medicine and medical supplies cost more than some commodities on the open market. 

    ii) Hospitals should have pre-qualified pharmacies to supply the essential medicines to them. 

    iii) The Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Health should lead in looking for good and affordable essential medicines and health supplies for hospitals and health units to avoid the monopoly of NMS, which is cheating the people of Uganda.

    iv) NMS should be a government stockist. They should be funded from their resources, not budgets of health units.

    v) All health units should have had deposit accounts as per Treasury Instruction 10:18, where there is monthly accountability to the Vote holders by National Medical Stores.

    vi)  All Vote holders should control their Votes, not NMS to control on their behalf.

Cancer drugs

The committee observed that when NMS was supplying essential medicines and health supplies to the Cancer Institute, the price was, in some cases, more than three times the cost on the open market.

The committee further observed that NMS would procure medicines that were not essential to the management of cancer.

Furthermore, when the Uganda Cancer Institute took over procurement of drugs, there was a total improvement in essential medicines and health supplies for Cancer Institute, with coverage of patients, receiving free cancer medicines increase from 28 per cent to over 80 per cent and average stock out days reducing from 120 to nil.

The treatment of Cancer patients increased when Cancer Institute was put in charge of procuring its own medicines. Madam Speaker, this audit was carried out by the Internal Auditor-General and the Ministry of Finance. This is the price analysis of some of the items that have been supplied compared to the market prices and the Uganda Cancer Institute control. 

There is a drug whose price was Shs 36,000 but NMS was giving it at Shs 95,580. Capsule tablets were Shs 365,750 and NMS was supplying them at Shs 1,720,000. Uganda Cancer Institute got Ritsam at Shs 1,350,000 and NMS was supplying it at Shs 6.6 million. The table is attached and it is there for you to read. 

Recommendations:

    (i) The Cancer Institute should be facilitated by Parliament to open up regional Centres to assist patients at regional level instead of maintaining long distances and costs;

    (ii) The medicine budget of the Cancer Institute be increased so that more patients can be treated;
 
    (iii) All referral hospitals be granted the same independent status like that of the Cancer Institute. The mention of account is there; we want you to account for it. Refusal on IMF, transfers of money - and we recommend for write offs of Shs 130 billion. The details are there in the main report. We ask the committee members and Parliament to adopt the reports of PAC for FY 2016/17, 2017/18, 2018/19, 2019/20.

The PS/ST provides a Treasury Memorandum within 30 days for Parliament to audit and examine all the items as per Article 163(6). I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee and your members for that comprehensive report on the audited reports of the Auditor- General for Financial Years 2016/2017, 2017/2018, 2018/2019 and 2019/2020. Now, honourable members, as we indicated yesterday, we will just have a few comments.

12.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate and thank the chairperson for finally bringing these reports. 

However, I am just wondering whether the PAC report of Financial Year 2016/17 was brought recently; this is 2021. We also need to audit PAC. When did PAC receive these reports? Why are all these reports being brought at the same time and towards the end? These are very serious issues that have been raised by the PAC chairperson in these reports. 

This report should have been well debated and after the debate, clear recommendations given. However, we are going to rush through and it is like a ritual. I wonder whether really, this main opposition party with the former Leader of the Opposition and Chairperson PAC are really doing justice of being fair to us who are in the Executive.

That said, I have taken note of some of the issues that are being raised but I wonder whether we want to go back. Looking at the health sector for instance, there were challenges with the procurement of uniforms for the health workers. I remember we are the ones who insisted that this money should go to the National Medical Stores (NMS) so that it helps us with the procurement and the distribution because they have the network.

You want the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Health to procure uniforms and distribute them? There were bigger problems, Madam Speaker. I think there may be challenges but this may not be the right decision for us to revert to the Ministry of Health to handle the procurement.

Madam Speaker, that said, issues of prices of drugs remain an issue. However, we should know that the Uganda Cancer Institute is now an independent institution. Remember we passed the Uganda Cancer Institute Act in 2016 and therefore, it is now a self-accounting entity with its full mandate and they can actually procure and this is contained in the Act.

A lot of work needs to be done to make regional referral hospitals independent and have corporate status. I do not know how easy that may be because we all know that even the little money that has been sent to these health facilities - Is it being utilised? What happens when you send them money to procure drugs on their own? Will the money be utilised or will they be able to procure medicines for the population? I wonder whether we are not going to create bigger problems, Madam Speaker.

We all know that NMS has been sending drugs to the lower health facilities quarterly and to other health facilities like the regional and general hospitals; some monthly and some after every two months. Madam Speaker, you are aware that even the medicines that are taken there - I am not saying all health workers but some of the health workers have actually been taking away these drugs to their own pharmacies, drug shops and clinics. We all remember the undercover report where I also participated; there was a lot of stealing and stealing from the sick is still going on.

Madam Speaker, the challenges remain but my bigger problem is, I am not happy with the way the Committee on Public Accounts is handling these audit reports. Did all these reports come to you at the same time? Why have you now brought all of them and bundled them and we are simply going to rush, rubberstamp and we think we have done work. 

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

1.00
MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and members for the report. I have listened to it very well but I wish to suggest to Government that NMS be one of the first entities to be merged under the Ministry of Health. 

The procurements that we have given to NMS have given them a lot of power and liberty; we need close supervision of NMS. They do not own any factory that manufactures drugs. Why is it the monopoly to supply the country with drugs? Let it go under the Ministry of Health so that the ministry procures medicines and contracts are given out, probably to factories that manufacture. Give them to Quality Chemicals, Abacas and people we know manufacture drugs. Going through a lot of processes for procurement has brought a lot of inefficiencies and high costs of procurement.

Madam Speaker, the issues of procurement in Uganda are heart breaking. We need to review the laws pertaining to procurement. There is a lot of exaggeration in prices, not only on the medicines but throughout the country in all procurements. 

At one time, I remember when the President was making a speech. He said, why should you cost a kilogramme of sugar at Shs 10,000 when we know that on the open market, it is Shs 4,000? This is what is happening; procuring blood at a high expense. There is no free blood in Uganda; Ugandans are suffering. Women cry with children in hospitals but they have to pay money for blood. It is on very rare occasions that a person will get blood at a free cost. 

Most times, Ugandans have to pay for the blood that they get in hospitals and here is National Medical Stores (NMS) exaggerating the cost of blood using Government money. Madam Speaker, it is very hurting.

Our hospitals are in a very sorry state. I wish Government would come here requesting for a loan for a complete overhaul of all hospitals in Uganda; I am sure all of us, Members, would support them. We get loans everyday but our hospitals are in a sorry state.

The Committee on Government Assurances has been to Bugiri Hospital thrice. Madam Speaker, I have written to you but nothing has been done to that hospital and the hospital serves six districts and it is on a highway. It receives emergencies like accidents but nothing has been done. People are busy sharing COVID-19 money every day and getting loans every day for COVID-19 like we have got an excuse because COVID-19 has come. We acknowledge it is a pandemic but something needs to be done to prepare these hospitals to receive anybody who is affected by any pandemic. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, concerning the transfusion, recently, when we had the Malaria Day, the people of Uganda Blood Transfusion Services told me that they do not even have a vehicle to do any work in the country. 

1.05
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have to communicate to this country that we are really at war against corruption. Some people thought corruption was simple and it would leave us alive. From this report, I believe corruption is going with us; we are not remaining around. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to start from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which releases money so late that it cannot be used. If it is used, it is indeed misused because those people receive money late and they have to spend it. If they do not spend it, it has to go back to the consolidated fund and they have no explanation.
 
Personally, I do not know where that money goes when it goes back to the consolidated fund. When preparing the budget, we do not see the balance brought forward. Maybe I am ignorant but when I was studying, one of my lecturers told us that you should expose your ignorance in order to learn.

If the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can explain to us, and to the entire country, where that money goes when it is sent back to the Consolidated Fund such that we know where our balance brought forward ends up. That is a very big problem in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

On the issue of medicine, I must report that last year, Ntungamo District did not get drugs from September to December and they paid money to National Medical Stores. When I asked someone who was in charge, he told me that there was a computer problem; so, they did not get drugs. When I asked the Minister of Health, she told me that it can never happen.

I think we should investigate where the drugs were taken because the money is paid to NMS and they are supposed to deliver drugs. If they did not deliver drugs, what did they deliver? That is Uganda; something happens and they say, let it go. Any poured milk is no longer milk. That is, maybe a Ugandan proverb.

I support the committee’s recommendation that we should not allow NMS to take charge anymore or take charge as a monopoly of supplying drugs because they supply very expensive drugs yet Government allocates money to NMS. Now we do not have drugs in our hospitals and health centres. Why are we making our people to suffer? 

Madam Speaker, I must comment and everyone should know that as representatives of the people, if people suffer, we are suffering. If you go to the village and there are no drugs, what happens? You have to buy drugs, gloves and sometimes, we sponsor patients who are going to the hospital. What happens at the end? We get abused that Parliament spends a lot of money when we know the people who are misusing the money of this country.  

By the way, Parliament has been quiet and some people have been saying that money is being taken by Members of Parliament and our budget is known to the entire country and it is not classified. Yesterday, I met a watchman and when he saw an envelope of the Parliament of Uganda, he said, “You are the people who steal our money.”

I explained for about five minutes and by the time I left that gentleman, he was satisfied. I told him ours is not classified and indeed, he knew that it is not classified. I asked him: “How many Members of Parliament have you heard in your county or constituency who are rich?” He told me, “They are poor.”

I asked him what makes them poor and he had no answer.

As Parliament, we have to wake up and fight for our people who voted us to Parliament instead of being abused that we are the ones who take Government money when we do not know where it goes. We have to interest ourselves in where the money goes, starting from NMS because our people need medicine such that their health can be good and so that they can work and earn money. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

1.10
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Well, I also agree with the concern of the honourable Minister, Opendi. However, sometimes these reports come here because of our policies and procedures. 

On our part, I think we have tried to carry out our oversight mandate and the role of implementation should be the preserve of Government. I thank the chairperson and his team, for bringing out these issues, especially when they are trying to look for value for money for the taxpayers of Uganda. 

I do not agree with the fact that NMS should be the supplier of drugs, and yet we have a law in the Public Finance Management Act, Chapter 15(3) which reads: “An accounting officer shall commit the budget of a vote based on the annual cash flow plan issued under this section.” What happens is that NMS just delivers drugs that are about to expire at that. This means that by the time these drugs are delivered, especially those which have a short shelf life, you are depriving the people who would have consumed those drugs and you are creating another cost to Government to dispose of those drugs, if by the time they expire, they have not been utilised. 

I agree with the committee recommendation that NMS should just be a stockist, like any other pharmacies, so that the health centres are allowed to procure from the local sources. Actually, it is one way of spreading resources because if they are procuring medicines from NMS at a higher cost than the open market, then it does not make any sense. Probably, we should now look at the enforcement.

Secondly, I agree with the committee that every regional hospital must have a cancer institute. Having lost a grandmother to cancer and having seen the way we struggled to come to Mulago Referral Hospital, I vividly recall that day when we brought my grandmother to that hospital at the cancer institute. I found the mother-in-law to the honourable minister, Musa Ecweru, on the veranda at Mulago Cancer Institute Building. Imagine a minister’s mother looking after her sister on the veranda; what happens to these other ordinary Ugandans?

It means that the cancer institute is overstretched. If we decentralise those services to the regional referral hospitals, we shall have saved Ugandans a lot of inconveniences.

It is very visible that the National Medical Stores - even though some members are insinuating that we shall be increasing the problem of corruption - by allowing the health centres to procure their own drugs, it is worse with National Medical Stores.

National Medical Stores, National Drug Authority; their mandates are almost fused; they almost share the board because the chairperson of one is a member of the other yet one is supposed to supervise the other. They should be separated. I agree with the recommendation of the committee that they should be separated so that we have proper accountability especially in terms of the operations of these two entities.

Otherwise, I do not think we need the other because the Ministry of Health can also carry out that oversight mandate - the prequalified pharmacies to supply essential medicine to hospitals.

Sometimes in these health centres, you go and they tell you that they do not have Panadol, Fragyl because National Medical Stores has to not been able to supply essential drugs. So I totally agree with the recommendation of having prequalified pharmacies, as it is highlighted in this report. We can only strengthen it because we have oversight committees here in Parliament; they can carry out that mandate to reduce the burden.

I also want to propose that we should not wait for so many years to debate these reports because sometimes these recommendations have been overtaken by events and years later, probably it is a post-mortem. If we can put in place a mechanism of having them debated at least every six months, it would improve the situation. 

I have a letter here which was written by the President on 16 May 2020 about procurement of masks and he was writing to Mr Mitul Jobanputra, the Vice Chairman, Nyanza Textile Industries Limited (Nytil).

He was disagreeing with the National Medical Stores and he called them anti-Ugandan operation - if you allow me, I can read it. He said, “Production of masks and personal protective equipment; I have received your letter…” they were complaining about National Medical Stores on 13 May 2020 and he was assuring them, “…do not worry with those jokers. I have ordered the discontinuation of that anti-Ugandan operation by the National Medical Stores.

At the most, I will allow them maybe 15 per cent of what is required to cover the month of May and part of June, 2020 when your own factory starts. Just make sure that the quality is good. 

We shall need more of the ordinary reusable masks for the population because we shall make them compulsory. 

You have to share the orders with fine spinners as well as Uganda Industrial Research Institute. However, you will also export to other countries.”

This was promoting “Buy Uganda, Build Uganda” although there was some little bit of interference in the procurement process. Anyhow, I think National Medical Stores did not have to import masks. When we have our factories here and moreover the price for the masks that were being imported was far higher than the price for the ones that were being produced here locally.

So, if we want to promote industrialisation, it would be prudent that we localise our procurement processes to promote the Buy Uganda, build Uganda. I beg to move.

1.18
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative, National): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Through you, I would like to thank the chairperson and his team for bringing out a number of challenges facing us in the country. For example, he talked about non-titled public land.

This is a big problem because as a result of not having land titles for this pubic land, many schools and institutions have lost land but it is also strange if a district headquarter does not know its boundaries, yet they need to know the acreage and have evidence.

You find that schools have lost a lot of land to land grabbers; even here in Kampala, Nakasero was one of them, Kitante Hill School was another and many others all over. 

The Government has lost land because grabbers come and take portions but the people who are supposed to be the custodians like the Head teachers or heads of other institutions even at the district, cannot know the acreage that they own as an institution. So, because of that, the Government needs to do something about it.

Otherwise, it is very difficult to protect something that you do not know and do not have proof about. You heard about Kyambogo University. There was a conflict when the land was located by Kampala Land Board and they could not tell whether it is theirs or not because I heard the Vice Chancellor talking on television that the land is theirs but they lost the land title.

After a few days they said that the land title was there but a few other owners have come to claim the same land; something must be done. The Government should take up their responsibility and make sure that whatever is owned by Government has a land title because that would be the starting point before other individuals claim what is due to them. Thank you.

1.21
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the committee for the good report they have given. In history we learnt about Napoleon, the 1st Word War so that we understand what to do in future.

This report, in my opinion, is good. It does not matter how long it has been and we have been raising these matters for a long time. Unfortunately, some of them have not been attended to. That is the reason we bath every day; if you do not bath and you come to the public, you will have problems. People will be running away from you.

This is one way of making sure we are clean every day; so, this report is a way of making us clean as a country or Government. 

I have few things to raise. On the issue of domestic arrears; many people have supplied Government agencies, unfortunately they have not been paid. You can imagine from 2017 to 2018 there was something like Shs 3.3 trillion; this is a lot of money. From 2019 to 2020, it was Shs 3.8 trillion. This is why most of our companies in Uganda are collapsing. The worst thing now is now an element of COVID-19. With the effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic and non-payment of these domestic arrears, companies in Uganda are collapsing all the time.

My appeal to the Government is to look for ways to address this matter so that your suppliers are happy. In fact, the more you pay them, the more they grow. When they grow, the country benefits because they have to pay taxes and they have to employ people. However, with this arrangement, we are affecting the growth and development of business in Uganda.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, our health sector is an embarrassing situation. I remember one time in Soroti – the minister, hon. Sarah Opendi, knows it very well. She was there and a ceiling of a building, moreover a ward, collapsed on a patient. 

These are realities; we do not need to hide. This is why we are saying the dilapidated nature of some of these buildings is a problem. Look at Soroti Regional Referral Hospital. All the buildings were condemned –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR ABALA: Most of the buildings are condemned. Unfortunately, they are not being renovated. 

I remember one time, when I was with the minister, hon. Nabbanja in Soroti, one of the ceilings was leaking. She had to dip into her pocket and pool money to give those people to fix what was leaking at the hospital. That is her. How about others? These are issues I want the Government to know.

The final issue is the non-payment of pensioners. People are crying. These old men and women served this country with zeal and momentum   but up to now, they have not been paid. The answers are actually here.

I want to appeal to the Government to address the issue of the lists so that when somebody retires, he is paid his gratuity and pension and he goes once, instead of coming to Kampala. Imagine some of them die before getting their money. Many people have died here in this city, looking for their money yet they worked for many years. Unfortunately, they have not been paid. These things should not even be happening in this era.

Otherwise, I want to thank the committee for a job well done. I want to appeal to the Government to treat this report with a lot of momentum.  The report is telling us what we have failed to do. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

1.26
MR IGNATIUS WAMAKUYU (NRM, Elgon County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I also take this opportunity to thank the committee members for the report. 

Madam Speaker, we have been having a backlog of these reports, if you recall previous Parliaments. However, the committee has done a good job. They are not looking at ordinary policy reports but they are looking at figures.

The Auditor-General has raised an issue. They have to look into it and again, they also have to summon the witnesses. So, they have done a good job and they are timely.

On domestic arrears - the reason people inflate prices for goods and services is because the Government does not spend time. A person will get a contract; he has to borrow money where he pays interest and so, he has to factor that in. Until this issue of domestic arrears is addressed, the issue of pricing will not hold water.

I want the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to educate me; those days when we used to work in the Government, there was what we call a commitment control system forms. You cannot fill that form and balance it when the revenue and income does not tally. I do not know whether they have now abandoned the commitment control system. Is it still in place?

Second is the issue of inflated prices of drugs. The chairperson mentioned here that one dose, which Uganda Cancer Institute procures at Shs 1,000,000, they procure at Shs 6,000,000. The chairperson did not come out clearly on the sanctions that have been taken. That means you have denied five people treatment, just on one single dose. So, you have not come out clearly on what the sanctions are. Therefore, what can we do?

One time, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development wanted the National Medical Stores to enrol on the IFMS. However, they came here crying, saying, “No, we cannot be there”. This is how and why problems are coming. If they were controlled by the Government here on the Single Treasury System, some of these challenges would not arise. I think it was – 

Secondly, they are ignoring the “Buy Uganda, Build Uganda” strategy. Recently, I went to CIPLA. They are exporting much of the drugs. The orders they have from Uganda are very limited. They say they are not interested in their drugs. CIPLA is here in Luzira but NMS prefers buying drugs from abroad. 

I think there is a problem somewhere. When I asked one of the directors, he said, “No, we could not agree with their pricing”. Why can’t we promote our local industries for the “Buy Uganda, Build Uganda”?

Madam Speaker, out of stock drugs has been a challenge. We have been in elections but whenever you move around, they would talk about lack of drugs. For example, we have one Health Centre IV in Bulambuli. That centre is serving people of Bulambuli, Kween, Bukedea and part of Budadiri East. When they deliver drugs, they are exhausted in the first week. When you place another order, they say, “No, you have to wait until others also request”. When you now go to Bulambuli, you have to get money to buy drugs from outside. People are selling land, simply to treat patients, which is a shame.

I concur with the report but we need to see what will happen after they lay the Treasury Memorandum. We need to interrogate that. As the new Parliament comes in, we need to have another committee look into some of these issues, as we review the committees. When they lay the Treasury Memoranda, what do we do with it after? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

1.31
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. How I wish the Minister of Health and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development were here. Nonetheless, let us speak to ourselves, Madam Speaker.

Looking at this report here, I would have loved the Minister of Health to be here to answer why they take long to appoint Board members. Yesterday, we handled the issues of the Departed Asians Property Custodian Board. It was the same case, where the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development took 10 years, without a Board.

We are now looking at the Ministry of Health. Attorney-General, I think you need to up your game because some of these things border on illegalities, which you need to handle. There is no way we are going to operate like this. 

The proposals that are being made here - transfer money here or transfer money there - may also be the same thing. It is because some of the referral hospitals have taken years without the boards and management committees. Here we are today again.

I think the issue we should address is this inadequacy. People who fail to perform their roles should be told to leave offices. I even wonder how the President can just write a letter, instead of just ordering the sacking of these people. Who are these people? He is just saying, “Give me this month and I will shift this thing”. Why can’t the President bite? Why should he be lukewarm in addressing these issues?

We have talked here about the issues of infrastructure. We passed money in the last Parliament, when we got a loan to upgrade some Health Centres II to Health Centres III. Kasilo County was a beneficiary and Arapo Health Centre II was to be upgraded to Health Centre III and Kagwara Health Centre II was to be upgraded to Health Centre III. We had to stop the handing over of these facilities, which they were building, and yet the district wanted to receive them.

If you look at the level of the work, you would realise that the facilities cannot be theatres. I have brought this matter to the attention of the Minister of Health and the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Health. I think you need to go to the ground and see this for yourself. We cannot have money wasted in that form.

Even the proposal we are making here to send money down to the health centres - In fact, you are just decentralising the corruption. We would have spread corruption to all levels unless that is what you want. Can we deal with those people who have failed to manage the resources that are given to them? Why would people act outside the law and what is stipulated? 

I just read something here, which I wanted to ask the – How can NMS refuse to be part of IFMS under which all Government institutions are operating? Who is this Okurut who is masquerading to be from Serere, whom they used to go to court? If they went to court, what was the ruling? Who is that Okurut who was acting on behalf of the National Medical Stores? I think this needs to be followed to find out why -

Finally, on page 15, there was some money which was transferred. Before we get to that, how can the General Manager be a  member of NMS, be a member of the Board of NDA, and also the chairperson of the Committee on Finance, and vice versa? The boss of NDA is also a board member in NMS, and also the chairperson of the Committee on Finance. I would call this a strategic alliance. Please, I take the information, hon. Waluswaka.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank my senior colleague, hon. Okupa, for giving way. The information that I would like to give is that the syndicate between NDA and NMS is terrible. For example, since they are interlinked to each other, on 07 June 2018, NDA transferred money to NMS of Shs 350 million. On 08 June 2018, NMS withdrew cash from Standard Chartered Bank. 

You see, the other one from NMS is the chairperson of the finance committee in NDA and this one from NDA is a board member in NMS. That is how they do it. They send money and withdraw. That is the information. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you. I see that information on Page 15. I was about to say that NDA transferred Shs 1 billion for unclear reasons as follows:

    1. Shs 350,817,540 was transferred on 05 June 2018, and a withdrawal was done on 06 June 2018.

    2. On 03 March 2018, NDA transferred Shs 149,794,156 and on the 04 March 2018, the money was withdrawn.

    3. Shs 449,388,304 was transferred on 18 March 2019 and withdrawn on 19 March 2019.

The funds transferred to NMS were withdrawn in cash as soon as it arrived in NMS. The police and the IGG claimed they never saw this transaction because their eyes were closed. (Laughter) What do you mean by “their eyes were closed”? IGG and the police are admitting – I am reading what is here in the report. The chairperson can confirm to us; there is an annex to it. I do not know which annex because they are not numbered.

The chairperson should be able to clarify to us; did the IGG and police say their eyes were closed and they were not able to see these transactions? The committee and the Auditor-General were able to see the transactions. 

Madam Speaker, think this is terrible. One report after the other from the accountability committees is giving us glaring stealing and corruption with impunity, and nothing is being done. What happened to hakuna mchezo? (Laughter) That this time is for hakuna mchezo; what happened? 

I was in Tanzania and the late President Magufuli, may his soul rest in peace - When the National Housing Corporation started constructing apartments in Dar-es-Salaam and he read from the papers how much the construction was costing, he ordered for an investigation. He immediately ordered for the sacking of the board and the Executive Director. He told them to stop. That is the type of action we would want to see taking place.

If we are going to massage people who are stealing money, it will not help. 

As I conclude, if these reports were coming on time - if it were not for the backlog, possibly we would be able to address some of these things. That is why I made that proposal yesterday of reducing the entities handled by the committees in order to handle these works on a timely basis. This would allow Parliament to avail time on a timely basis for us to address these matters.

I hope I will get clarification from the chairperson of the committee on how the eyes of the IGG and Police were closed; and they could not see the Shs 1 billion transactions. Thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. As I invite hon. Keefa, honourable Members, I think there is a matter of concern about the CEO of NMS being part of the board of NDA, and vice versa. I am wondering whether they are there by law. Were they included in the law that this one must be part of the other’s entity or they were just appointed? We need someone to check what the NMS and NDA Acts say, so that something can be done about it. 

1.40
DR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I thank the committee for this very informative report. Thank you, honourable chairperson and your team.

Actually, you have confirmed what we have been complaining about all along. It is great that you have taken these issues, studied them and looked at them even deeper. Thank you for your recommendations, as well. 

I think the first problem is about the ministry not releasing the money allocated. Of course one of the problems is the unrealistic budget that we have to approve here. However, another problem, which is really baffling, is that entities are given certain money over a period of time. Then, at a certain point in time, they are asked to put in a request for a supplementary. For instance, an agency may have been allocated say, Shs 20 billion. Out of that money, the agency gets Shs 15 billion, and then it is asked to put in a supplementary request for another Shs 5 billion. This does not make sense.

As you have put it rightly, what is happening causes a lot of concern. Of course, there are issues of accumulated domestic arrears, which as you noted, are stifling the businesses in the country, at a time when the Government should be supporting these businesses so that they can revive the economy. It is baffling that it has been left to that. 

There is also a much more serious problem. If a budget allocation for a project was Shs 10 billion, that Shs 10 billion covers the activities, the output, the indicators, the implementation and the monitoring side of it. If, all of sudden, you decide that instead of Shs 10 billion, you will give it Shs 5 billion, how is that project then going to be monitored? How can you ensure that it achieves the same outputs, as you had earlier planned? Obviously, if something changes at that point in time, there has to also be a change in what was planned, which often does not happen. This just happens at the centre. 

However, honourable chairperson, in your presentation, there was one thing I was eager and waiting to hear from you. First of all, I wonder whether you interacted with the Ministry of Finance on these matters. The first question I am asking myself is why are they releasing that money late? What was their explanation for releasing it late? Did they make any commitment on how they are going to address these issues? 

You have mentioned the problem of recruitment by the Health Service Commission, the Education Service Commission, the Judicial Service Commission and others. I did not get the explanation as to why these commissions have problems with recruitment. However, there is a bigger problem coming up and it is already happening –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Dr Keefa for giving way. What you want to know is that you approve a plan - Let me read for you Section 15 of the PFMA; “After the approval of the annual budget by Parliament, the Secretary to Treasury shall issue the annual cash flow plan of Government based on the procurement plans, the work plans and recruitment plans approved by Parliament.” 

We are in the budget process and entities are bringing their plans for recruitment. When you approve the budget, it means those people are supposed to be recruited by the agencies and not the accounting officer. What they do is that they submit those plans and the agencies are supposed to give them staff.

DR KIWANUKA: Thank you for that clarification, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I would like to raise one issue on this: there are talks and information on mergers of agencies. Before this phase that they are talking about - previously, when they said it was going to happen in two years and it did not, many agencies suffered. Some agencies could not have the boards together because they were going through the merger process and they did not know whether the agency would remain or would be merged. Therefore, it would not require a board. 

Without the board, then, the approval within those entities of these recruitments or extension of staff contracts cannot happen. This is being talked about again and it has already started affecting a number of agencies. They are being told that they have to wait until they are clear on what is going to happen with their agencies. 

Madam Speaker, we need a serious debate on that. The impact of recruitment is already there but this is even going to be made worse by what is being proposed to happen. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

1.47 
MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (NRM, Workers Representative, National): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me also add my voice to those that have appreciated the chairperson, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for that good summary and recommendations.

It is very unfortunate that very many good recommendations have been made here for almost two hours and the people concerned were not in this House. I can see that the Minister of Finance has just entered; he kept coming in and getting out. There is another minister that got out while we looked on. 

The Minister of Public Service is also not around and yet they talked about the issue of pensioners. These are senior citizens that have served this country. They were on the payroll and after reaching a certain age, the only way we can appreciate them is by tossing them left and right and some end up dead without getting their pension. We need to look into this issue. Let me pray that the next Parliament seriously looks at this. 

There was an issue mentioned on the budget performance of the previous year. I think that is where we go wrong. We continue approving things without looking at how the previous budgets have performed; this also applies to the loans. We have been approving loans here but we do not bother to ask how the previous loans performed. We are repeating the same mistakes. The people concerned are not taking note of this. 

Dr Keefa asked a question; what is the use of budgeting for an issue of Shs 20 million and you give him Shs 5 million? What is he going to do about it? We shall be promoting corruption. At the end of the day, there is nothing going to be done. 

We passed the Parish Development Model recently. They told us how good it is and the billions of shillings required but we instead passed half a billion shillings, without even doing any pilot study. Do we expect wonders with that half amount? 

Madam Speaker, it is high time we looked at some of these issues very seriously. The ministries concerned should be summoned. I know papers have been laid but the recommendations of hon. Nandala-Mafabi have not been noted. It is as if we have been listening to news or music. I think we need to take note of this because it is a serious issue. 

I have heard about the procurement. If you do not quote the figure that they have told you, what you are bringing is of no value; so you either quote something high or the figure they have given you. Anything less than that – however good it is – that is not correct. We need to change from that mode, Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Conclude. 

MR BAKKABULINDI: The report talked about advances given to people but not accounted for. If we are to continue like that – and the law is clear that within 60 days, you have to account for it. We need to come with some new measures in the new Parliament on how to deal with such behaviour. I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you for your contributions. Let us hear from the Minister of Local Government. 

1.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been standing in for the Minister of Finance and I have passed on the issues for him to respond.

Nonetheless, I would like to use this opportunity to thank the chairperson of the committee and all the committee members for raising pertinent issues; for instance, the issue of Government land. Previously, the elders were generous and they donated land for the establishment of Government institutions like schools, health facilities, and administrative units. Now we have a challenge where the grandchildren are rising up to evict these institutions. Therefore, I support the idea of Government planning to title this land so that we can secure it.

On the issue of recruitment, we have had challenges especially in local government where many times the ministry of finance sends money but the District Service Commissions do no recruit. When we investigate further, we are told there is a lot of political interference where some leaders want to wait for their children to graduate so that they take up those jobs. 

They keep people in acting positions and they delay to recruit so the money comes back to the Ministry of Finance. I believe, as Parliament, we need to find a way of intervening.

Lastly, about half of the districts of this country do not have hospitals and yet when you look at the health centres at whatever level, there are limits on the kind of drugs they are supposed to have. For example, many of the drugs for non-communicable diseases are not administered at Health Centres III and yet the population, especially the older persons, are suffering from those diseases; diabetes, pressure, cancer and so no. Therefore, again we should plan to have the hospitals for all the districts so that they can be able to get sizable quantities of drugs to cater for the population.

Madam Speaker, I want to end by thanking the committee, Parliament and you, specifically, for giving us an opportunity to respond to the issues raised. These are pertinent issues; we must fight corruption together as legislators and Government.

1.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of State for Local Government for standing in for us. I have three issues to respond to before we take a vote on the report. First, to thank Hon. Nandala-Mafabi for the good job he is doing in PAC. The second is the issue of delayed releases by the Ministry of Finance. 

I wanted to confirm to you, Madam Speaker and colleagues, that we release money every 10th of every first month of the quarter. Therefore, for the first quarter, it is by 10th July. Now when we release the cash limits, it is up to the entity to warrantee this money and tell us how they want to use it and access it. 

Therefore, the delay is actually not on the Ministry of Finance but on the receiving entities - I wanted to clear that. We do not delay releases of money to institutions. We actually release money on time and anybody who cannot pay salaries on time of any month, it would be their fault but not the Ministry of Finance and we should take action on them.

The second issue on the unit cost for drugs, I think the Ministry of Health will be able to respond to that maybe on Treasury Memorandum of this report.

The third is the commitment control system, which comes up with the domestic arrears. Madam Speaker, domestic arrears are an issue that we are handling squarely. It has a lot of challenges but we are handling them. For example, as we speak, we have domestic arrears of 2.4 trillion. Out of this, 800 billion is actually for court awards and the Judiciary. 

However, we went deep into this area. One time when we appointed Ernst and Young to audit these domestic arrears, we found out that out of Shs 1.7 trillion, only Shs 1.2 trillion could be said was genuine; the Shs 400 billion was not.

Therefore, people have defaulted and want to say that we are coming up with measures; maybe accounting officers who do not comply with the commitment control system should not be re-appointed because at the end of the financial year, we have seen people accumulate domestic arrears where some are genuine because of the lack of resources but others are used as a channel for corruption and that is why out of the Shs 1.7 trillion, we actually discovered ourselves that Shs 400 billion was not genuine. 

We are coming up with a policy to see that we cut down on these domestic arrears and enforce commitment control system, which is in place and says you should not be able to purchase unless you are sure of the money.

I would like to thank PAC –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, in the report, now that the Minister of Finance is here, National Medical Stores has refused to operate the IFMS. How can that be when all other Government institutions are using it?

You have also said that these accounting officers should be reappointed but you are the one who submits their names. Now can you do us a favour and not re-appoint them? However, explain more on the issue of the National Medical Stores refusing to operate the IFMS -

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, to handle that issue comprehensively, we are coming up with an amendment to the Public Finance Management Act because there are a number of institutions operating off budget resources. It is not only National Medical Stores but also Ministry of Health and a number of other ministries and these resources are not actually captured during appropriation by Parliament. 

We are coming up with an amendment to the law to ensure that even these off-budget resources should be appropriated by Parliament. That is one of the ways. Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable minister. I have just two comments. Yesterday, we had a report where it was clear that the governance issues were not being addressed well. An institution going without a board of directors for 11 years, we have heard the same thing in these reports that referral hospitals do not have management committees and there are a lot of vacuums. I think that is an area where the Government needs to wake up and ensure that the governance area is well handled.

The second one concerns Government land. I think it is clear that Government does not listen to Parliament. In 1991, when we were here in the NRC, we carried out a land inquiry. I was one of the members and at that time, we recommended that Government should take steps urgently to title its land. Now we are here in 2021, nothing has been done.

Anyway, I now put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the reports of the Committee on Public Accounts for 30 June 2018 and for 30 June 2019 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your indulgence and I also want to thank the minister of finance.

There were some issues raised but before I comment, I would like to thank my committee members for the work done. Madam Speaker, when you were adopting, you forgot 2019/2020. We are up to date. I was trying to remind you so that you do not forget.

Secondly, I had my staff who consisted of Mike, Micah, Mao, Alex Anyango, Lillian Najjuma, Akena and my Vice-Chairperson, P.P Okin. My members, thank you very much. 

The reason I am saying this - Minister Opendi asked, “What have you done?” We came in 2019 and after a short time, COVID-19 came in. Madam Speaker, we have been in an election. Minister Opendi should have really thanked us that in this short period of time, we have managed to clear everything and hand over to the next Parliament with no backlog. I think she should have clapped for us. Hon. Bahati should also clap for me. (Laughter)

All we have raised are issues. What hon. Bahati raised off budget issues that have already been put there because we discovered that Government was not coming up. A ministry gets Shs 10 billion, 20 billion or 30 billion and you do not see it in Parliament, yet, they have spent it. Under the PFM, the law is already there and the ministry of finance signs on every shilling, which comes in this country. He cannot tell us that he does not know. 

That is why we have said that all the money off budget, whether it has come when the financial year is ending tomorrow, should come to Parliament to be voted as a supplementary. Madam Speaker, we should not vote supplementary for only expenditure but we should also have supplementary for incomes. We have been very clear on that.

Madam Speaker, another thing, which I want to leave so that you know very well - the governance issue in Government is serious and we need to amend the laws. We need to know how best these boards can be managed. A supervisor cannot be on the board of the person he is supervising and a person he is supervising cannot be on the board of the boss of the supervisor. It is dangerous.

There is no way, even in good governance, a person initiates a process, procures, executes, stores, distributes and accounts. No, there must be a system of control. All these inefficiencies we are talking about and theft are basically because of lack of controls. The moment we install controls, we shall just be there and sit.

My colleague, hon. Okupa said – Madam Speaker, the issue of National Drug Authority, which he raised of Shs 1 billion, which was transferred and how the money was shared - A staff told us in the committee that the matter was taken to IGG and police but there was no action. It means police and IGG never realized this. Therefore, it is only PAC, which saw and that is why we reported. The IGG and police never had the eyes to see but Parliament, the owner of the money, has seen this.

Finally, you do not need to make organisations corporate like Uganda Cancer Institute. This law is already enough. The ministry of finance has a vote. The vote holder is the accounting officer and he knows how to manage. What we are saying is, you do not need to make Soroti Hospital a corporate entity on its own. It will remain but under this law, it has its vote and must control it. That is why I thank my younger honourable colleague. 

Section 15 reads: “An accounting officer shall commit the budget of a vote based on the annual cash flow plan issued under this section.” This means that if I have my money for medicine, I say, “I will buy this amount of medicine, these are the quantities I would need and I need to buy them as per this plan.” So, I control my money because I am the vote holder but not to give somebody to control for you and they bring you the money.

Madam Speaker, I know you are still around. Do investigation by walking there. Hospital staff told us that drugs are delivered at 5.00 p.m. or after 5.00 p.m. They get the askari and say, “Sign here quickly, we are going.” Who ordered that? They say, “No.” and they sign. When they sign, some boxes are not full. These are the issues and when they complain, there are threated and these are the things we are begging you, Madam Speaker, that since you are still around, please, help this country.

My conclusion is that minister of finance, you are responsible for domestic arrears and you will be held liable personally. Why give a wrong budget and give little money? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Timuzigu, something is burning you. 

MR TIMUZIGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Earlier in my submission, I declared that I was ignorant about how we handle the balance brought forward. Is the money that goes back to the Consolidated Fund declared? The minister of finance is here and it would be very good if we were educated. Where does that money go? Is it declared or it disappears? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and hon. Timuzigu for raising this important issue. That was an issue when Government departments used to hold different accounts in different banks. 

As you recall now, we operate what we call a Single Treasury Accounting System. Therefore, we are all drawing our money from the same Consolidated Fund. At the end of June, if you have not used the money that we have given you on the Government system, that money remains with us and is declared as a saving. If it is not there, that is also indicated. Therefore, we know how much we get at the end of the financial year. 

At the end of the financial year, we prepare consolidated accounts of Government and every year, the Auditor-General’s report, reports on that amount. 

Therefore, it is there and simple. Madam Speaker, we operate one system. If you have not spent by end of June, it is still with us and not with you technically. So, it is declared and we know how much it is.

Tomorrow, I can lay information on how much we have been saving for the last three years or how much it was at the end of the year for the last three years. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, with regard to the Public Accounts Committee, I was misled by the Order Paper, which had reflected two financial years. However, the honourable Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee, hon. Nandala-Mafabi actually laid reports for the following years: 2016/2017, 2017/2018, 2018/2019 and 2019/2020. The resolution should be amended to reflect all those. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, I think we could use the next one hour to do some work. Hon. Wejuli, let us go to Committee on Human Rights and then, we can break at 3 p.m.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is, I think the minister of finance does not read his laws and that is why I like my colleague who raised that issue. 

Under section 17(1), appropriation expires on 30th June. Section 17(2) says, “A vote that does not expend money that was appropriated to the vote for the financial year shall, at the close of the financial year, repay the money to the Consolidated Fund.” 

It goes ahead to say, “A Vote that repays money under sub-section (2) shall revise its annual work plan, procurement plan and recruitment plan to take into account the unexpended money and the minister responsible for the vote shall submit, as part of the budget for the preceding year, the revised plan, procurement plan and recruitment plan, to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.”

Since we are passing a Budget today, the accounting officer of ministry of water will not be able to know how much has not been expended. This means that hon. Bahati who is always present here should every July be coming to the House with a revised work plan to consume the resources, which were planned and taken back because an entity never spent it - and that is not your saving.

Is the minister procedurally right to say that unexpended money is a saving?

MR BAHATI: Yes, it is coming but you can see what is happening in the House. Hon. Nandala, the minister of finance is the head of the treasury and so, all money of Government whether in which department is handled and managed by the ministry of finance. 
It is important that when you are explaining to the representatives of the people, you explain to them in a simple manner that they can understand properly.

Therefore, if you talk about re-voting, re-planning - I tried to use the simplest language that I can get so that everybody understands. If it is not used, this money belongs to Government, whether it is a department or a ministry. That is the point I was making. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR TIMUZIGU: Madam Speaker, this is a very fundamental issue because when the minister said that it remains as savings, we expect to see savings in our budget. If the money was saved, it is supposed to be part of our budget such that we know that we saved Shs 1 trillion and when we have a budget of Shs 41 trillion, we shall look for only Shs 40 trillion.

My understanding as far as finance is limited but it does not have to remain limited because we have people who can explain. Since at the moment, I might not understand the circumstances under which that money is handled, that means around 90 per cent do not understand because I do not think I am the worst as far as matters of finance are concerned.

We need to see that money in the budget and if it is not there, then we should see it somewhere else such that Ugandans are satisfied.
Otherwise, at the moment, Ugandans think that when that money goes back to the Consolidated Fund, it is misused by the big shots in this country. Thank you.

MR OKIN OJARA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you for allowing me to give this information. When we look at the report presented by the chairperson, we are not talking about small money. He has been listing exactly - per year, how much money we have not been able to absorb and it is in terms of trillions of shillings. 

The minister should have been able to tell us exactly if these monies were really being saved and should be captured somewhere. When you look at the budget, it is completely not captured anywhere, the money disappears in trillions. Thank you.

2.15
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, now that hon. Nandala-Mafabi read to us what is provided for, can the minister prepare to lay on the Floor of Parliament all the resources that have been rolled over with the work plans such that we can continue to expend them as per the work plans that were not achieved.

That would be good for all of us here and the accounting officers are held responsible for under absorption but many times we have asked, what is the opening balance now that we have the budget here; can we look at it so that we know the closing balance of the last financial year? 

There is a problem but the law is very clear. Let these activities that have not been managed be rolled over to the next financial year then we shall solve the issue of under absorption once and for all. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, let us go to item No.19 but in the meantime, I shall alter the Order Paper to allow the first reading of two Bills, the Market Bill and the pensions (Amendment) Bill, 2021 during the course of our sitting.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS ON THE ALLEGATIONS OF SEXUAL ABUSE AND VIOLATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS BY MR BRIAN KIRUMIRA AGAINST MISS STELLA NANDAWULA AND OTHER WOMEN

2.17
MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on Human Rights on the allegations of sexual abuse and violation of human rights by Mr Brian Kirumira against Ms Stella Nandawula and other women.

The Committee on Human Rights considered the allegations of sexual abuse and violation of human rights by Mr Brian Kirumira against Ms Stella Nandawula and other women in accordance with its mandate derived from rule 182(d) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

On 14 May 2020, the Committee on Human Rights was directed by the House to consider a matter raised by hon. Henry Kibalya about the sexual abuse and violation of the rights of a one, Stella Nandawula and other women by Mr Brian Kirumira also known as Brian white.

The concern arose out of a television programme called Uncut, which was held on NBS television on 13 May, 2020 highlighting the above.

The allegations on sexual abuse were made by Ms Nandawula in recordings on social media and by Ms Vivian Mutanda interviewed on NBS television.

Similar allegations were made by a one Leticia Nabulime living in Germany and Miss Moon Tekasha living in Dubai. All the above mentioned ladies claimed to have been violated sexually while working for Mr Kirumira under the umbrella of the Brian White Foundation, a local NGO.

The committee sought to establish the truth, seek justice for the victims, protect other women whose rights could have been violated and help to prevent the occurrence of similar acts of gender violence.
That is the background of the sexual abuse - we have the legal provision on sexual abuse. Since we have the report uploaded, I will go to the terms of refence.

The committee adopted the following terms of reference to establish the legal status of the Brian White Foundation, to establish the violation of human rights as alleged in particular, sexual violence and abuse; then we have recommendations and way forward. 

Madam Speaker, we had the following witnesses, the committee met and interacted with the following; 

    1. Hon. Henry Kibakya, 
    2. Ms Vivian Mutanda, 
    3. Ms Namutebi mother of Ms Stella Nandawula, 
    4. Ms Esther Ndaula, sister of Ms Stella Nandawula, 
    5. Ms Joyce Namirembe mother of Ms Leticia Nabulime,
    6. Mr Charles Oleny, Chairperson of the Directors of NGO Bureau, 
    7. Mr Stephen Okello acting ED NGO Bureau, 
    8. Ms Rhona Babwetera, Head of Gender Equality and Counsellor to UGANET,
    9. Hon. Peace Mutuuzo, Minister of State for Gender, Labour and Social Development,
    10. Ms Maggie Komukama – Assistant Commissioner for Gender and Women Affairs,
    11. Mr Ramadhan Mbago, Head of Operations - Next Media, NBS,
    12. Mr Peter Kafuko – NBS,
    13. Mr Kevin Kaija Kyomuhendo, the Producer of Uncut, NBS.
    14. AIGP Asan Kasingye, AIGP, on behalf of the Inspector General of Police.

We shall go briefly to the findings. 

Committee findings

To establish the legal status of the Bryan White Foundation

The committee notes that the allegations of human rights violations were made against Mr Brian Kirumira the individual. However, given that the accusers were employed by the Bryan White Foundation, it was important to establish the legal basis of the organisation that purportedly employed the girls. 

A brief by the NGO Bureau 

The NGO Bureau told the committee that the Bryan White Foundation was registered purposely:

    i) To empower and look after abandoned children, abandoned orphans and street children, relieving them of their suffering and supporting them through difficult times.
    ii) To promote education, health and general development of the communities.
    iii) To fulfil the basic needs of children through accommodation, food, clothing and education.

The Foundation was registered to operate countrywide and not only in one location. The physical area of operation is at Musajja Alumbwa Road, Kampala. The founders were Mr Brian Kirumira and Mr Moses Sebalu. 

However, the committee notes that when there was a validation exercise for all NGOs, which was directed by the Minister of Internal Affairs, the Bryan White Foundation did not validate.

Madam Speaker, regarding our interaction with the ministry of gender, the committee learnt that the Bryan White Foundation was never registered as a charity organisation related to gender and its works were not clear to the ministry.

The minister further informed the committee that there were violations, more especially during the period of the COVID-19 pandemic.

The minister informed the committee that in Kamuli, 673 girls reported cases of rape in 2019 but those that were brought to conclusion were only four. She attributed this to failure of the victims to avail themselves to conclude the cases. 

She informed the committee that Ms Stella Nandawula was rescued and taken to a shelter, which had about 35 women, noting that survivors of GBV are not treated like criminals and they are allowed to move.
We also note that Uganda has 13 shelters for women in the entire country, which are in the hands of the private sector and can only accommodate up to 50 women at a time. 

Madam Speaker, I will go to the challenges.

The minister informed the committee that challenges in the fight against GBV are not because of the law but where men override the powers of females, superiority, unequal powers of distribution of wealth, poverty, unemployment and cultural norms that discriminate against women. 

All these factors make women vulnerable to their tormentors and they fail to avail information, which would bring their tormentors to book.

The minister noted that there were other people in the line of duty that were facilitating repeated abortions by the girls that were allegedly sexually abused by Mr Kirumira and all these should be brought to book. 

She appealed to Ms Nandawula and others who had suffered human rights violations to stand their ground and support the agencies of Government to ensure that this matter is concluded.

Observations 

    1. The committee concluded that the Bryan White Foundation is operational without any legal mandate, in accordance with the NGO Act, 2016. 

    2. The NGO Bureau is understaffed with four technical staff and six support staff, thus unable to carry out its monitoring function effectively. 

    3. The committee was concerned that only a dismal number of cases on GBV were concluded in 2019 and that the ministry of gender had not put in place measures to ensure that more cases could be concluded, in order to provide justice to the victims.

    4. The committee established that the NGO Bureau is underfunded with a budget of Shs 3 billion, in comparison with Shs 21 billion that it requires to e efficiently carry out its functions. 

    5. Out of the 14,207 registered NGOs on record, only 2,118 had validated at the end of one-month registration period that had been provided between August and September 2019.

Recommendations

    1. The NGO Bureau should shut down all NGOs that have not been validated, long after the period of grace elapsed. Madam Speaker, I wish to note that later, the NGO Bureau actually revoked the permit of the Bryan White Foundation. I have a copy of the letter that I will lay on the Table.

    2. The NGO Bureau should be adequately funded and ought to be saved, not merged or scrapped, in order to effectively carry out its mandate. 

    3. The NGO Bureau should strengthen its monitoring function, so that the functions of NGOs are streamlined in line with what they were registered to do. If you note on the purpose of the Bryan White Foundation; what the Foundation was doing was totally different later and even changed location without the knowledge of the NGO Bureau. Nobody knew where the NGO was operating from.
    4. Government should set up its own shelters for women whose rights had been have been violated, noting that out of ten cases reported at police, over six of are on Gender Based Violence.

On whether to establish whether there was a violation of human rights, we have a submission from hon. Kibalya there, a discussion with NBS Television and an interaction with Rhona Babwetera from UGANET. We met with Nandawula, Mutanda, Nabulime, who all all submitted interacted with the Police.

I will now go to the observations and recommendations, Madam Speaker.

The committee made the following observations:

    1) The committee concludes that there was a violation of human rights by Mr Kirumira against Ms Nandawula, Ms Mutanda, Ms Nabulime and others, from the testimonies given by hon. Kibalya, Ms Babwetera, Ms Namutebi, Ms Ndaula and corroborated by Ms Mutanda, one of the victims of the violations. 

We were not able to interact with Mr Kirumira because all the time that we invited him, he was hospitalised. The last time we invited him, we actually sent there our Commandant to hospital to verify whether he was indisposed to appear before the committee. He found him in Nakasero Hospital on oxygen and in a very bad health condition. So, we concluded the report without interacting with Mr Kirumira. 

Also, we note that when we started the investigation, the main complainant was Ms Nandawula. We carried out the investigation without interacting with her because we suspect she went back to Mr Brian White’s home due to the threats that were used against her. 

Honourable members, it is true no one interacted with her but if you have read the report, there is evidence that shows she was sexually abused, including all the other women.

The committee further concludes that Ms Nabulime, having been below 8 years, was defiled by Mr Kirumira. 

Mr Kirumira used and manipulated security agencies and operatives to ensure that his victims were kept in confinement. If you go through the ordeal that the lawyer from UGANET shared with us, they were blocked several times by the security that was at Kirumira’s place. It took them a day to secure Nandawula out of the home of Mr Kirumira. Even after securing Nandawula, they were followed by a car. They had to maneuver through the city to a hiding place. Until they reached a nearby police station, that is when they felt secure. All that time, they were working with AIGP Asan Kasingye. So, Mr Kirumira really manipulated the security agencies. He was guarded like a VIP. 

Mr Kirumira threatened and blackmailed the victims, their families and anyone who attempted to give them assistance. One wonders why these girls kept on staying with Mr Kirumira for such a long time, even when they were sexually abused. 

The interaction with those girls shows how Mr Kirumira continuously threatened them and told them that he was an agent of the State. The high security that was at his home would escort them to the supermarket, salon or wherever they would go. They did not have any way of communication because they did not have any phones. In fact, for the information to go out, they had to use his phone and they communicated in a way that he did not understand. That is how they were able to let out the information. Mr Kirumira denied his victims the right to communicate with their families.

Mr Kirumira grossly sexually abused his victims to the extent that they had to carry out frequent abortions. Mr Kirumira facilitated the abortions that were carried out by the girls as he would pay the required amount and provide transport and police escorts to them. He did not tolerate any pregnancies. The committee notes that this contravened section 141 of the Penal Code Act. 

The victims lived in fear and desisted from contacting Police given that Mr Kirumira appeared to have influence over the actions of the security agencies. The committee is grateful to UGANET and applauds Ms Babwetera for her bravery and persistence to rescue Ms Nandawula from her tormentor. 

The committee commended NBS Television for bringing up issues that negatively affect the community and encouraged media houses to identify more issues that affect the society to enhance awareness. 

I have often listened to radios and viewed televisions but most of the time, when you have an issue that is important, the media houses will charge you. Yet, when there are issues with sports, they can play music for many hours. You wonder why, out of all the issues that we have in our country, they can instead start relaying the transfer of the Super League in the UK. We thank NBS and we request that the media houses give time to important issues that affect our society. 

Despite the efforts meant to rescue Ms Nandawula, the committee noted with concern that under the threats from the accused, Ms Nandawula returned to Ms Kirumira’s home. 

The committee observed that the ministry of gender did not make adequate effort to trace Ms Nandawula, after she returned to Mr Kirumira’s home. The Kabalagala Police did not act professionally while handling the matter. They appeared to be compromised, when they failed to prevail over Mr Kirumira, a suspect, when he was summoned and responded candidly that he was not available.

Mr Kirumira was a friend, commonly referred to as, a “buddy” of the Kabalagala Police. That is what the witnesses said. They followed his instructions. It was like he had taken over the police and he gave them the instructions. Whatever he said was what they did. 

The young girls were confined in Mr Kirumira’s house for over a year, and this was not picked up by the police and all the relevant agencies. This pointed to a new wave of sexual molestation of girls under the guise of employment. 

No person in this country, we note, should, under the guise of being protected, commit heinous offences like unlawfully confining people against their will. Worse still, in this case, this happened when the alleged perpetrator was guarded by uniformed security. 

The witnesses tried to report their cases several times to the police but they made no headway because the police were very friendly to Brian White. At one time, they attempted to report but they were accused of theft. 

The committee commended AIGP Asan Kasingye, given that he expeditiously took up the matter after it was reported. It was observed that the people who seemed to be close to these women are the ones who inflict violence on them. 

Recommendations 

    1. Police should issue restraining orders to prevent Mr Kirumira from contacting Namuli, Ms Nandawula, Ms Mutanda, Ms Leticia Nabulime and Ms Moon Tekisha and their families whose rights were allegedly violated by him.

    2. Mr Brian Kirumira should be charged with defilement of Ms Nabulime, a 17-year-old, at the time he raped her and got her pregnant. This is in accordance with section 129 of the Penal Code Act.  
    3. Mr Kirumira should be charged with trafficking in persons in accordance with section 2 of the Trafficking in Persons Act, 2009.

    4. Mr Kirumira should immediately be arrested and charged for all the sexual offences committed as outlined in this report, given that justice delayed is justice denied. 

    5. The Government, through its security agencies, should trace and produce Ms Nandawula. 

    6. The Uganda Police should expeditiously investigate the allegations of sexual abuse as outlined above and the culprit should be prosecuted. 

    7. The ministry of gender should provide counselling services and psycho-social support for the girls whose rights were grossly violated by Mr Kirumira.

    8. Lastly, the Inspector General of Police should take disciplinary action against the OC CID and the OC Kabalagala Police Station at the time for their display of lack of impartiality and relaxed way of handling this case. 

Conclusion

The committee observes that while the above case was aired in the media, thus drawing the attention of the public, it was an eye opener on the untold human rights violations that happen behind closed doors in our society. 

The committee notes that those violating the victims have power and that they use this power to try and influence the investigation process. 

The committee calls upon victims of such violations to seek the assistance of human rights agencies, in order to bring their tormentors to book, in accordance with the law.

The Government of Uganda must ensure that all human rights are respected, protected and fulfilled. It is Government’s cardinal responsibility to intervene and prosecute those liable for violations. Government should, therefore, hold everyone and itself accountable.

I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the report; copies of the minutes for the meetings that we held during the inquiry; a copy of the letter of revocation of the NGO permit and the cancellation of the NGO certificate of registration of the Brian White Foundation. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the Committee on Human Rights for your report. Can we have a few comments, each taking three minutes, please?   

2.43
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their report. That is just an eye opener, when we talk about Kirumira. There are many things that happen to women and children. I would like to appreciate that we have just passed the law on sexual harassment and we hope it will be assented to. 

What the committee has brought out about the harassment of young girls happens in very many institutions. Every time I look at these girls being exported for labour – they claim to have jobs. However, many of them go through a lot of things to get to that level. We have heard of sexual harassment stories. When they eventually get out of those jobs - we are going to have a generation of depressed people.

As the chairperson made her presentation, I kept picturing the work of the NGO bureau. After giving that certificate, do they monitor these NGOs? Do they get annual reports of every NGO? Or do we just give a certificate and leave it at that? 

Mr Brian White was supposed to give charity to some of these poor families. The mother of the defiled girl took her to his foundation thinking she was going to get educated but she instead ended up being defiled to the level of getting pregnant. 

The NGO Bureau should help Ugandans to look for these people because there is nobody above the law, even those that move with very many people around them. These girls that are not at the level of having security should be supported, because they are Ugandan citizens. Whatever comes out of it is not good. 

Even these people guarding this man and know what happens behind those walls should be held culpable. We are only looking at Kirumira but what of the people that knew what was happening? Let us also look at those people that escorted the girls to the supermarkets and where they wanted to go but did not report the issues. This has to be handled. 

The NGO bureau looks at certain NGOs and stops them but it was unable to stop this one, which was abusing the rights of people. I am happy that they have revoked the certificate but I think there is a lot to be seen behind the walls. 

In some countries, technology is very critical. Somebody knows what –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you hon. Asamo.

2.47 
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Human Rights. The issue of sexual abuse in this country has been happening forever but we let the money lead us. The law should work, like the committee has stated. 

With the Corona virus pandemic going on, sexual abuse is on the increase. There are a number of women and children crying and they say that their voices are not heard. I ask the Government to ensure that this law works. 

If you look at the number of children born in this country, you will notice that they do not have parents because of sexual abuse. Some were born out of defilement. The person who did this does not take care for the children or the women that they abuse. In order for our people to be helped, I think we need to ensure that the law takes its course. 

It is also very difficult when you go to report these cases at the police station. They ask for some money before you make a statement. Imagine somebody from a poor place - how can he pay Shs 50,000 to make a statement? This is what bothers me and I would like to thank the committee for their wonderful work.  

2.49 
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me thank the committee chairperson and the entire committee, because they did a very good job under very difficult circumstances, when the police was on the culprit’s side and he enjoyed impunity. 

I support the idea of empowering any NGO Bureau because we understand it is not well funded. There are very many NGOs in this country. Uganda being a developing country, we have very many NGOs working to help Ugandans. Unfortunately, some NGOs come to do wrong things and are covered by the Uganda Police Force. When hon. Abala says, “Otyo”, which is not an English word in this House, we understand him. He simply means, “Now, don’t you see?” I think that is the translation. Now we have seen because Brian is a VIP in this country. However, if you see the Order of Precedence of this country, I tried to look around but I did not see his name neither did I see his position.

Before, Bryan, I could not see the position of Mr Kitatta who had also controlled Uganda Police. Now Bryan has control of Uganda Police and has even controlled other senior officials to the extent that he tells Ugandans that he is a State House agent and the State House does not come out even to refute that. This means he is very connected to the level of damaging Ugandans and he remains intact.

I am worried about Nandawula who is now under that “safe house” because nobody is allowed to  go there and even see what is happening there because the house is protected by Uganda Police.

Now that she has gone back to the “safe house”, we are worried she might be suffering more than she used to because it means that she has been compromised and her parents as well. This means that more girls are suffering in that house and other houses in this country.

This means that we have very many people who have created their own state of terror within this democratic state of Uganda. We have to talk to Police. We seek your support in this issue as the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda. If the Police cannot protect those ladies in Kampala City, what about those in the villages? Parliament has to work very hard and protect the people whom we represent.

Otherwise, if we do not work very hard and talk seriously about these issues, nobody is going to protect these girls. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.53
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the chairperson was presenting the report, I was hesitant to ask for clarification on the identity of “Brian White” or Mr Kirumira because in this country, I had the opportunity to watch on television somebody with same name seated with the President of this country not once or twice. Even when an accident happened in one of our boats on the lake, we saw somebody by that same name.

I wanted the chairperson of the committee to first confirm whether this “Brain White” or Mr Kirumira is the same person who sits with President Museveni in various functions. If that is the case, then we have a big problem in this country.

First, the report says that this man is protected by the Presidential Guard Police - the police force that is a specialised unit that is supposed to protect the Presidency is now protecting a criminal.

Even the entire institution of the Police with counter terrorism, commandos who can do this and that cannot arrest this man and he is there going scot-free. 

This is a very serious matter. In the past, one of the late musicians died and there were allegations of the same. He would do anything to any girl or woman and it went unpunished until he died. Now that we know that this Bryan is still alive - I am a bit disappointed that the committee also heard that he was sick in Nakasero and they stopped there; from May 2020 and you reported in February 2021, the committee could not establish that he has now left Nakasero Hospital? Is he so powerful that even the committee could not try to get to him?

Madam Speaker, I think this report must be amended; first, the entire police institution has a very big indictment on their head. I hope the new administration can take charge. We have seen an honourable Member of Parliament - Hon. Odonga Otto arrested for crimes he allegedly committed in 2018; why can’t the Police take action now on this?

This woman who is missing may actually be dead. It will be very disappointing for the country to wake one day and hear that this lady has died well aware that the person responsible for these allegations is still moving freely.

I will conclude by saying that the creation of power centres in this country where every Tom, Dick and Harry moves around town, fully protected - even hon. David Bahati who controls our finances does not have such protection.

However, there are others that are heavily protected, not even Madam Speaker is protected to that level. They are moving in town, pushing away people in traffic jam and sitting on the high table of this country negotiating deals - this must stop. 

I beg to amend that this report be adopted but with instructions to police to take immediate action and report to this Parliament on how far the investigations have gone. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.57
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson for the report. Our hearts break for these young girls and women who are taken advantage of like this and we just look on.

I would like to support the recommendations of the committee. I am not blaming anyone but we all know that we have powerful laws in this nation. Other countries even come to understudy the laws that we have, implement them and do well.

To have a police force that, instead of implementing the maintenance of law and order, are the ones who abuse the law - is so absurd.

I think these recommendations need to be made stronger - that the Police should take responsibility for the recommendations and be able to apprehend this Kirumira because he is the owner of the institution. He should be apprehended and he should be answerable for all these. It is not only one woman that he defiled. He must have done it to many others. We need a police that is active and that enforces the law in place.

We need the necessary funding. For example, the committee says that the NGO Bureau is not adequately staffed and funded. We are in the business of licensing organisations to go and work and we do not monitor and follow them up.

If you have licensed a company especially dealing with human rights issues, you must be able to follow up and make sure that the company is doing exactly what they undertook to do. However, just licensing and maybe get fees and taxes and let people abuse Ugandans is not proper.

Sometimes, we get emotional but this report is timely and we urge Government to act on these recommendations; to make sure that those who license companies are given sufficient resources to follow up and monitor and bring reports. The problem also is that they are not accountable because they do not make reports anywhere.

I want to make a correction on page 27. The recommendation says, "police should issue restraining orders to prevent Mr Kirumira…”

I do not know if the police can do this because I think this is for the courts of law. 

Therefore, whatever action needs to be taken here, the right institution should be identified to issue these restraining orders. However, this institution should be closed and those who operate it should be apprehended.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, it is really interesting in this country how criminals get access to very important places and thereby, get benefits. You would not know how many criminals are escorted around this country. Many criminals are escorted by the security agencies. 

On this one specifically, I think what hon. Wejuli did not mention is that for even the mother to come and give evidence, they had to bring her to my office, to give her assurance that she will be safe. Then I had to go to police to accompany her and – therefore, people who are suffering this vice are really terrified, terrorised and traumatised.

Honourable members, I do not know whether the Government wants to say something about this? I do not see the Minister of Internal Affairs here but – 

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, we have been talking of these shelters to protect women. When a woman has a problem with her husband and she goes and reports to the police, she cannot go back home immediately because the man will kill her. The same applies to the girls. 

This woman was a whistle-blower; she went back to Kirumira’s house and now, she cannot be traced. If she had brought that information and then she was put in such shelters, she would be safe and we would know where she is and we would get more information from her. 

Can Government make it a point to provide these shelters, however few they may be? Let us start with a few but provide these shelters for the women.

THE SPEAKER: Can we hear from the Government. Hon. Kibalya was a whistle blower.

3.03
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We need to thank the committee that through all, they have tried to make a report. It has not been easy.

In the same spirit, honourable colleagues have talked about impunity in this country. It is good we have generals seated inside here and we have the Prime Minister. It is very unfortunate that the Minister of Internal Affairs is not here. Out of the million people that are suffering, it is one case that can come up. By the time the case of Bryan White came up, many had suffered through the same cases and many are still suffering, Madam Speaker. We do not know what we have to do to save the voiceless; those who cannot come here to be helped.

Madam speaker, you heard the report from the committee that they could not have Kirumira come and testify because he was in hospital. However, in some instances, some people are brought handcuffed to testify. As we discussed yesterday, when you are realigning some of these committees and their powers, I think we need to have other powers beyond us.

The police that is protecting Bryan White, is the same police we are requesting to produce Kirumira or to arrest him. That is not possible. The police we know in Uganda – unless there is another police but if it is the police of Uganda, they cannot handle such cases. The laws that govern the police of Uganda are like that of flies. When a cockroach comes, it can even go with the whole web. Therefore, it is the same story that we are in - the laws in this police can only handle the disadvantaged. The big ones, have no laws that can arrest them.  

We need the Prime Minister to come and tell this country who are those that operate with impunity, those above the law, protected by SFC. You see men, who are not even in police or military uniforms but with pistols and guns; they terrorise everybody and they are untouchable and they live in this country called Uganda. Who are those people really? Do we have another arm somewhere? Are they governed by different laws that are different from the ones that Parliament of Uganda is supposed to make? We need to know. 

As colleagues said, we need to have police produce Kirumira to account for his sins in this country. Normally, laws are put in place to either act as a lesson for others or prevent something that may come up. Otherwise, if we just have to produce a report and they say this one cannot be traced, others are disappearing and others are not there. The other day, we saw somebody who was killed and when the other one went to pick the children, he was also gunned down.

Two days ago, they went to the father, wishing to gun him down as well. This is the country we are living in; man-handled, owned and ruled by generals.

Madam Speaker, we need to bring an end to this impunity and help this country to have Ugandans enjoy the country they call their mother land. Thank you.

3.07
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the committee for the good report, although with challenges. Being a leader, you must carry all the challenges and accept the facts, whether they are being loved or hated. I would like to thank the committee because that report is showing us the Uganda that we have.

There are two things which I want to say:

(i) 	This NGO Bureau registers NGOs. When they register the NGOs –(Interjections)–  I get shocked as if some people are above the law. We must condemn this kind of impunity. We should not tolerate, we should not keep quiet and we should not entertain it; it is very bad. It is destroying the principles of patriotism in this country, because we must be patriotic. I do not know whether this type of thing is being patriotic. 

Parliament should condemn it and say what has happened should not be allowed to continue. I would like to appeal to Government to make sure that this type of impunity does not continue and it is not good. 

At the same time, it is very bad for the police to kind of shield suspects and threaten others. I do not agree with that. It appears like some people are the owners of Uganda and others are not. As if some people are passing here and others are remaining here. As if some people are visitors and others are not. It is very bad.

I would like to appeal to Government that the issue of human rights protection should be – in the principles of administration and management.

Secondly, I also want to appeal to the Ministry of Internal Affairs and it is good that it is the one that registers NGOs. In my opinion, their contracts or certificates should be withdrawn because it is destroying the image of Ugandans. They are treated like they are not Ugandans, as if they are aliens and I do not support it.

As we continue, I would like to pray that those people should be supported and the criminals must be brought to book wherever they are.

Madam Speaker, since all of us are Ugandans, they must be brought to book. That is why some of us are being attacked and hated. I have said it and I am not worried because of what is going on. That is a fact and what is important is that it is very bad and I want to condemn it to the highest level.

THE SPEAKER: You have taken more than three minutes. Please, conclude.

MR ABALA: The motto of Uganda says “For God and My Country” but when you look at this thing, I do not know where “God and my country” is located in that case.

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, it is very sad that some young girls are suffering under the wrath of a one Kirumira. It is not true that some Generals are above the law; Generals in this country have been prosecuted, fired and transferred.

We need to differentiate between crime and the Forces. I have listened very carefully and feel very touched. I am going to ask my senior colleague, Gen. Jeje, to come here tomorrow and explain about this Kirumira who is bringing a lot of issues and he is untouched.

It is our duty, as leaders, to protect the rights of these citizens and especially when it comes to young girls. Everybody should join arms and make sure that the situation is brought to normalcy.

I pledge to convey the message and to request my senior colleague to come and explain these allegations and if they are true, we should all rise up in arms, whether you are in Government or in the Opposition. This is a very serious matter. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Does hon. Bahati still want to say something? 

3.13
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I would like to join my colleagues to condemn abuse of human rights anywhere in the country against anybody and by any Ugandan. Defence of human rights and protection of Ugandans; the rule of law was one of the cardinal reasons why His Excellency President Yoweri Museveni and his colleagues got guns and went to the bush to fight to liberate Ugandans.

It is wrong that this can happen and as Lt Col Rwamira said, the Minister for Internal Affairs will be coming to make clarification on these things and follow up on what happened. We condemn the abuse of human rights, especially for the young girls that were sexually abused. I thank you.

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am not happy with the report because they mention IGP Kasingye as one who helped them. If the IGP could help them get these ladies to give their testimonies and even when they came here, there was police that assisted you with the mother of the victim - In the report they are saying that the criminal was in hospital in Nakasero and because he was unwell and they could not interrogate him.

There is a bit of laxity in what they did because even as a citizen, you have a right to arrest. You have a case of defilement; abuse of young ladies and they go back to the same abuse? How? Why didn’t AIGP Kasingye arrest - because even when you are in hospital, you can be guarded for the future but the criminal was in hospital. She says he was on oxygen, maybe because of his sins and he is not arrested. We should have more power, as citizens of this country, to bring the criminals to book.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House should adopt the report of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I am delighted that the Minister of Internal Affairs will be coming here to respond to these serious allegations but as we say that, Lt Col Rwamirama, I consider the Special Forces Command to be a preserve of the Fountain of Honour. Why are they desecrating the image?

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, we need to be clear. In one instance, they are saying police; now, they are saying Special Forces Command. We need to understand which is which so that we address the criminal appropriately.

PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, I would like to give information to the minister that on this Floor of Parliament, you have heard how Uganda came to know about Kirumira. You know how he used to move with the President, how he was mobilising for the NRM, how he has been roaming around this country and the report has indicated he is highly protected.

Members have come up to say, not even by police but by Special Forces Command that are meant for the President. Honourable minister, kindly, take that information.

As you have requested that you want to inform the Minister of Internal Affairs, please, tell him to come here and inform this House how a commoner, Bryan White from Mityana, becomes that highly protected. Under which law? He should explain so that we deal with impunity once and for all.

MR KIBALYA: The minister was interested in knowing because to him, it is news that Special Forces Command is not only with the President. He is just coming to know that the SFC is also somewhere else.

I am inviting the minister to spend a day at Parliament, he will see some MPs guarded by Special Forces Command. As the Speaker said, originally, when we were coming up, we thought it was only a protection unit for the Head of State but you will find them on a vehicle somewhere protecting some people in private cars.

We are using Bryan White just as an example. You have seen on TV when Bryan White is in Arua going to distribute money and he is protected by Special Forces Command. When they went to arrest him, it is the SFC that prevented the police.

Therefore, they are everywhere now. It is no longer a protection unit for the President but rather for a group that we do not know, maybe the minister can tell us since he is also a General. (Interruption) 

MS TAAKA: Honourable minister, the information I would like to give you is that there were two issues here – the police and SFC. The police were not doing its duty. However, during our interaction with the AIGP Asan Kasingye on page 23 of the report, he told us that Kirumira’s security officers were dressed in police uniform of the Presidential Police Guard and that they had their own unit of command. That is the information I wanted to give you.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, first of all, when I want to clarify on Presidential Protection security. You know, we lost one of our Members here, hon. Abiriga. It was resolved by the Security Committee that we should not have another incident and people were given protection. However, nobody should use that protection to create crime. I want to be on record of this House that even the Rt Hon. Speaker, with her security, cannot use it to commit crimes and get away with it.

The point I want us to develop is to go to the criminal. If he was given protection for his life, it should be separated from the acts of criminality. I want to assure the House that I am going to take this matter to the powers that be. They should come here and explain. If this man has committed crimes, he should be apprehended and prosecuted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we had indicated, we need to take a break. So, we suspend House for one hour. We shall reconvene at 4.30 p.m. Thank you. (Ms Taaka rose) Did you want to thank us?

MS TAAKA: Madam Speaker, it would be of injustice for me to leave this place without thanking the members of the committee. Amidst the pandemic that had just manifested in the country when we got the assignment, Members committed themselves to the work.

I thank the staff of Parliament – Ms Martha Kaganzi, our Clerk, Ms Catherine Nagutta, the researcher, Ms Esther Apolat from the Department of Litigation and Compliance, Ms Adrine Natukunda from the Department of Legislative and Procedural Services, the staff from the office of the Chief Whip, the security personnel – for the efforts that they made.

On the issue of us not interacting with Bryan White, we had been given a few days to handle the matter. We concluded the matter when Bryan was still on oxygen in hospital. We only delayed to report to the House because later after that, we went into elections and the matter has been on the Order Paper for a long time.

Madam Speaker, the police should handle the matter because it is the only police that we have. We do not have any other police in this country. I believe that those that did not act was their personal responsibility and they should be held accountable for it. Otherwise, we cannot say that we shall look for any other police and stay resigned that we do not have a force.

I did not mention the fear that gripped the witnesses and media team - as you said – but it was too much; indicating how Bryan was connected to the security agencies. I thank the minister for the commitment. I thank you, Members, for all your submissions. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, House is suspended until 4.30 p.m.

(The House was suspended at 3.25 p.m.)

(On resumption at 4.37 p.m., the Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, presiding_)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF PROPERTY BELONGING TO THE LATE FORMER PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA, HIS EXCELLENCY, FIELD MARSHAL, IDI AMIN DADA, AT PLOT 10, PRINCE CHARLES’ DRIVE KOLOLO AND BUILDINGS IN KAWEMPE

THE SPEAKER: Can we take the first reading of the Markets Bill, 2021 as we wait for the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to respond to item No. 3? 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE MARKETS BILL, 2021

4.38
MS MARGARET RWOBUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Markets Bill, 2021” be read for the first time. I beg to lay on Table, the certificate of financial implications. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I indicated earlier, the committees of the House will expire by earlier next week. Nevertheless, we commit the same to the committee. It will be saved when we prorogue the House but to be considered in the Eleventh Parliament. 

I do not know whether the Pensions Bill is here.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE PENSIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Terence Achia is not available. Let us go to item No. 13.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (COSASE) ON THE AUDITED PUBLIC ACCOUNTS OF SELECTED STATUTORY CORPORATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEARS 2013/2014 TO 2015/2016

4.40
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Mubarak Munyagwa): Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity to present the report of the said selected entities that were audited in the financial years 2013/2014 to 2015/2016. 

Before I proceed, with your permission, allow me to place two facts on record. The first is that I was informed by the Clerk to Parliament that the record of the entire procedure was laid before this House by hon. Anita Among. Secondly, I was also informed that the report is already uploaded on Members’ iPads. 

With me here is a synopsis of the main report that clearly covers the observations of the committee and recommendations. With your permission, let me go through the synopsis.

TEH SPEAKER: Please, do. 

MR MUNYAGWA: Since Members have the report on their iPads, I also request you to permit me skip the Executive Summary and go to the gist of the report. 

The COSASE audited public accounts of selected statutory corporations for the financial years 2013/2014 to 2015/2016. The audited entities are:

    1. Kampala Capital City Authority;
    2. National Information Technology Authority Uganda (NITA-U);
    3. Bank of Uganda;
    4. Parliamentary Commission; 
    5. Uganda Communications Commission;
    6. Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited;
    7. Rural Electrification; 
    8. National Agriculture Advisory Services; and
    9. National Council of Sports.

I will start with Kampala Capital City Authority.

    1. Outstanding Receivables 

For the period under review, KCCA failed to recover its outstanding dues for three consecutive financial years including 2013/2014, 2014/2015 and 2015/2016 financial years, totalling to a whopping sum of Shs 53.014 billion.

The uncollected outstanding receivables eventually would necessitate writing off of debts, thus causing a financial loss to the Authority. 

The committee observes that the delays in the collection of funds held by the debtors have led to cash flow problems and ultimately, affected the implementation of the planned activities. Some officials in the Authority may be benefiting from this inefficiency, hence affecting the cash flow targets. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Authority be put to task to put in place robust credit policies to ensure any uncollected debts are followed up for better liquidity and implementation of planned projects. 

The companies/persons who do not meet their financial obligations in time should be blacklisted and legal action taken against them. The KCCA should also take disciplinary action against its officials who fail to perform their duties. 

    2. Nugatory Expenditure-Compensation for Lost Businesses

It was noted in the audit report that a sum of Shs 151.372 million had been paid out to a firm, as compensation, for a contract that was terminated due to negligence on the part of the procurement unit of KCCA. 

The committee observed that the procurement process initiating this project was started late at the end of the financial year and by the time the documentation went through the required approvals, the new financial year had already begun and the funds that had been earmarked to finance the project had been returned to the Consolidated Fund as required by law.

Compensation for undelivered goods or services is wasteful expenditure and affects service delivery. The committee recommends that recovery of the funds and further investigation is made to ascertain the ownership of the company and establish whether there was any collusion.

The officers who delayed the procurement process for this item should be held personally responsible for the financial loss, especially the accounting officer, who authorised the process two weeks to the end of the financial year. 

Kampala District Land Board Operations

The Kampala District Land Board was and is not adequately facilitated to carry out its mandate. Whereas KCCA is duly resourced with appropriate staff in the District Land Office, the District Land Board does not utilise the personnel in the discharge of its functions. This has greatly affected KCCA and has resulted into the following challenges:

    i)  Allocation of the same piece of land to more than one individual; 
    ii) Retrospective Ground Rent revisions;
    iii) Creation of plots in existing roads and carriageways; 
    iv) Conversion of lease into freehold and changes of user.

The committee was also concerned about the leasing out of KCCA land by the Uganda Land Commission without notification and consent from KCCA management. This has partly contributed to cases of double allocation. It was also noted the Kampala District Land Board did not have an updated list of their inventory of land.

Recommendations:

    i) Kampala District Land Board should be adequately facilitated to operate independently from KCCA for better performance and in accordance with the law.

    ii) Kampala District Land Board should put in place an updated inventory of land to avoid double allocations and should work in consultation with the Uganda Land Commission. 

    iii) The committee recommends that KCCA (Land Management Unit) does periodical reconciliations with the District Land Board to avoid irregular and double land allocations within the city.  

Shortfall in the Government Grant 

The Authority estimated to receive Shs l18.409 billion as grants from the Central Government. However, only Shs 116.836 billion was released creating a short fall of Shs 1.87 billion. 

Management stated that it appealed to the Government to release all budgeted funds in order to fully implement the approved work plan.

Observation

The committee observed that failure by the Government to release all budgeted funds to the Authority stalled implementation of some programmes, thereby denying services to the beneficiary communities.

Recommendation

    i) The KCCA should enhance revenue collection efforts to realise their targets and implement their programmes as scheduled.

    ii) The ministry of finance should also ensure adequate and timely release of all budgeted funds to meet the needs for which they are allocated. 

Delay in completion of road works

During the year under review, a sum of Shs 189.685 million was paid to the contractor for certified works on Mbogo Road and Shs 970.158 million for upgrading of drainage black spots.

The Auditor-General reviewed the documentation related to this payment and noted that KCCA entered into contractual obligations with a local construction firm to construct Mbogo Road, which is (2.08 km) in Makindye Division and upgrade of drainage black spots in Kampala at contract sums of Shs 2,521,131 billion and Shs 4,181,073 billion respectively. 

The contract start date for Mbogo Road was 29 May 2013 and the expected completion date was 29 November 2013. The completion date was extended to 4 February 2014. Despite the extension, the contractor failed to rectify the defective works and also failed to perform the works within the maximum liquidated time of 100 days.

The KCCA subsequently terminated the contract in July 2014 and declined to pay for the works done. The value of the uncompleted works was assessed at Shs 1.595 billion. 

Observations

The committee observed that delayed works affect performance of the Authority.
 
There was negligence on the part of the Authority, as no proper due diligence was done before the award of this contract. 

Management explained that despite the adequate supervision of the two projects, the contractor failed to deliver as expected thus the termination of the contracts. 

Further, subsequent review revealed that the adjudication process was undertaken but ended without agreement and the issue is before an arbitrator.

Recommendations

    i) The accounting officer should ensure that there are mechanisms to expedite the outcome of the arbitration process.

    ii) Management should always procure supervision consultants, prior to commencement of works, to enable timely review of designs and thereby, avoid delays in contract implementation and the attendant cost overruns.

Madam Speaker, on this issue of the contracts committee in KCCA, there is a lacuna in the KCCA Act. This Parliament, sometime back, repealed a provision that catered for the Kampala City Council contracts committee. Now, there is no law that talks of how the contracts committee can be formulated or who should be part of the contracts committee. That provision was repealed and a gap was left. 

Contracts are just awarded by members selected by the Executive Director. The same Executive Director assents to the contracts. You can simply say that the Executive Director of KCCA is the contracts committee. In case of any fault, we would fail to hold anyone accountable.  

Failure to create a metropolitan police force

KCCA has not formed a Metropolitan Police Force for the Capital City since its inception, which is contrary to the KCCA Act. The Authority has continued to rely on services of the Uganda Police Force who are not directly accountable to the authority. 

Management informed the committee that they have also employed enforcement officers to manage the enforcement component. However, they are not trained and competent enough to keep law and order in the city. This explains the rampant chaos and deaths in the city whenever enforcement exercises are done.

The committee recommends that KCCA should expedite the process of making the proposals to enable the amendment of provisions in the Kampala Capital City Act, in order to rectify the issue of the metropolitan police force. These should be recruited in liaison with the Uganda Police Force and go through training. 

Schools under KCCA

During inspection, it was noted that a number of schools funded by the Authority had land disputes, which meant that the Authority risked losing its investment in the schools in case the land was sold. For example, in the case of Nabagereka Primary School, which is no longer in existence, where the registered owner of the land sold off the land, the school was demolished yet KCCA had invested over Shs 50 million on renovation of the school in the prior year and capitalised the investment in the fixed asset register, for the year under review.

Management explained that apart from the land of four schools namely; Kisaasi Primary School, Bukasa Primary School, Mirembe Primary School and Kamokya Primary School, that is owned by KCCA, other schools' land is owned by the Uganda Land Commission, Kampala District Land Board, Faith Based Organisations like churches and Muslim organisations and Buganda Land Board.

Apart from those four schools, the rest are owned by those mentioned entities.
Management further explained that KCCA has been negotiating with the aforementioned stakeholders to obtain lease or Memorandum of Understanding that can allow the Authority to make long-term investments on the land and sustain service delivery in the city.

The committee observes that with such disputes over land, the KCCA risks losing its investment in the schools.

The following are the observations made in the schools inspected;

    a) Kitebi primary school lacked furniture in its school libraries
    b) Namuwongo Kigube's land had been encroached on by neighbours.
    c) Nakasero, Buganda Road and Murchison Bay Primary Schools had a high number of classrooms per pupil ratio and there is need for more classrooms.
    d) Naguru Katale Primary School lacked a school fence to safeguard school property.
    e) Kawempe Muslim Primary School was experiencing water shortages that affected school sanitation.

The committee, therefore, recommends that management should continue liaising with the relevant stakeholders including the Uganda Land Commission and ministry of education, to ensure that school land and buildings are safeguarded.

There should be adequate planning and funding to improve the delivery of education as an essential service.

Bank of Uganda (BOU)

The first issue was about payments from Government accounts with insufficient funds: 

    1. During the period under review, a deficit of Shs 1,711,351,844 was noted in BOU, because some of the ministry of finance accounts held by Bank of Uganda that were debited for these payments, had no funds. This could only be undertaken because the ministry of finance payment files were uploaded manually into their system.

    2. Payments from Government accounts without sufficient funds may be interpreted as offering temporary advance to Government.

    3. The committee observed that there was lack of interest earned from the said temporary overdraft. 

Recommendations:

    i) Management should carry out a review of systems to minimise the manual interventions in the processing of payments to provide evidence of interest, earned from such overdrafts.

    ii) The committee also recommended that overdrafts attracted interests as per the law.

    iii) In case of such manual interventions, there should be express approval by the Governor to avoid abuse of office or otherwise.

The second issue on BOU was the dormant Government of Uganda accounts opened in foreign bank accounts. During the audit, it was noted that an amount of €3,354,980 confirmed by Deutsche Bank Frankfurt in the names of BOU, was not recorded on the BOU general ledger. 

The committee was further informed of three other dormant foreign accounts. The committee was concerned about such idle monies lying on foreign accounts without being utilised and; whether it was necessary for Government to have an account with such amounts on a foreign account.

The committee tasked the management to provide evidence of certificate of balances on those accounts with their respective interests earned from these account since 2003 and plans for managements of those foreign accounts to the Auditor General. 

The committee recommends that management should continue to follow up with the respective stakeholders to ensure that appropriate entries are recorded for these funds.

Kabale Currency Centre

The committee noted with concern the issues raised by the internal auditor on the procurement of the structures in Kabale Currency centre both, Phase I and II. 

Phase one I included the construction of the currency Centre building itself. The committee was informed that during the construction of the building, the vibration by the heavy machinery weakened the rock in the vicinity, hence the hill started crumbling threatening the whole new structure.

It was, therefore, imperative to put in place a mechanism to safe guard the structure. The first attempt did not meet the expectations and it also started breaking up. The contractor, Pearl Construction, was handed over the project after the defects liability period though it weakened further thereafter.

To rectify the defects, Roko Construction was hired at a fee of Shs 12 billion, under emergency procurement.

It was noted that there was professional negligence by Pearl Contractors, because they did not provide for the water flows from the hill, near the structure.

The BoU engineering team also never supervised the works at the site, thus additional costs incurred due to negligence, which could have been avoided.

It is also evident, that BoU team responsible for the estates was supposed to do due diligence on Pearl Constriction Company which they did not; thus, it must take the responsibility.

Roko construction did the work and the premises are well secured with a new retention wall – at a cost of Shs 12 billion.

The committee, however, noted that this cost would have been avoided if there was sufficient supervision from the Bank to provide for running water by Pearl Engineering.

It was further noted that the Bank could have procured a better preemies for the site, to avoid such high costs.

The Bank had a secure currency centre in use in Kabale, which would have been maintained. There was no need for such huge structure, which is underutilised.

Recommendations

    1. The BoU should take action against the contractor who did the shoddy work with the view of recovering the extra funds incurred to rectify the same.

    2. The BoU officials who did not supervise the work and left it to outsiders should also be disciplined, accordingly.

    3. Pearl Contractors should be blacklisted for any construction works with BoU and other Government agencies after consultation with PPDA.

Management of BoU should desist from extravagant expenditure on unnecessary ivory towers at the expense of government priorities.

Multiple network sessions allowed

It was noted that users are allowed multiple sessions on the network; IFS, CSD and FERMS systems meaning that one user can sign onto the network on more than one machine at the same time, with the same user ID and password. Allowing multiple sessions on the networks using the same username and password may result into unauthorised access. 

Management explained that this was implemented at the network level. However, some applications would no longer function correctly and so, it was reversed. This measure was to be implemented at application level, for those applications that support the functionality by December 2015.

Observations

The committee observed that such multiple system access and unauthorised access increases the risk of security breaches on the network and unauthorised users gaining access to the network. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that multiple sessions on the network should be eliminated to avoid unauthorised access. This will reduce the risk of security breaches on the network. 

The committee further recommends that there should be regular system audit trail to avoid such system errors like on passwords, privileges, and approval level as well as access rights.

Madam Speaker, the last issue on BoU is delays in conversion of leasehold land into freehold land. 

It was noted that the Bank had ceased the amortisation of leasehold land as it had commenced the conversion of the leasehold land into freehold land. However, the conversion of the land to freehold had not been completed. 

The committee noted with concern, holding land as leasehold means holding land for a limited period of time and even if it is renewed, it can be done on different conditions, thus Bank of Uganda risks losing its properties. 

The committee observed that on a mere search of lands belonging to BoU, instructions were given to the external lawyers yet the Legal Directorate had nine practising advocates, who could do the work. This is a cost, which should have been avoided. This exorbitant external legal cost is what prompted the committee to ask for a forensic audit on the funds spent in the liquidation process of the defunct commercial banks. 

The committee recommended that since this is dealing between Government institutions that does not affect the Government income arising out of the conversion from leasehold to freehold, the bank should expedite the conversion process and makes a follow-up with authorities to ensure that the process is finalised.

The committee also recommended that the legal costs by the Bank to the external lawyers should be avoided or minimised, where possible by using internal lawyers.

National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS)

Supplies of tea seedlings

During the period under review, Shs 18,555,353,908 was incurred on the purchase and distribution of 38,168,367 tea seedlings. However, the auditor was unable to confirm the expenditure as it lacked information of actual acreage planted. Further, discrepancies were noted in the availed delivery/distribution records. 

The committee recommends that management should streamline the delivery and distribution chains as it creates room for irregularities like non-delivery and falsification of deliveries. The accounting officer should be cautioned against this laxity in the NAADS operations with unsupported expenditure.

The Secretariat incurred another Shs 3,953,424,825 on the purchase and distribution of farm inputs to farmers that were not supported by evidence of receipt by the beneficiary farmers.

Further still, the auditor was not provided with accountability for both the Shs 499,088,000 and Shs 7,913,477,134 in districts and subcounties, thus unable to confirm that the funds in this respect were put to intended use. 

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should recover the Shs 499,088,000 from the persons responsible for the loss.

Lead agencies

The tea intervention in Kigezi area is implemented in collaboration with three lead agencies. These companies signed memoranda of understanding (MOUs) with NAADS to provide services such as mobilising farmers, provide market outlets, training and field extension services, identify nursery operators, transport and distribution of plantlets and to facilitate farmers to form cooperatives. 

The committee, however, noted with concern the way these lead agencies are engaged. There is a possibility of compromising on the quality of the seedlings given out. Therefore, these lead agencies should be subjected to the PPDA rules to ensure that only reputable companies are engaged for that purpose. 

Misstatements in the financial statements 

Management did not properly maintain accounting records. Payments made from the NAADS basket account amounting to Shs 32 billion were not coded, posted to the accounting ledgers and the comparative figures for 2013/2014 Financial Year did not include the cash and bank balances of Shs 1,308,055,000 that existed as at 30th June, 2014. The cash and bank balances disclosed in the financial statements are misstated. 

The committee observed that the misstatements in the financial statements do not portray a true financial position, which may lead to under/over declaration of the financial position.

Misclassification of expenditure

It was noted that there was misclassification of expenditure on the account code for medical and agricultural supplies to a tune of Shs 5,912,977,609. The expenditure did not relate to agricultural supplies and as such, the expenditure on provision of inputs is overstated. 

This practice abuses the budgeting process and any mischarge requires the authority of the Permanent Secretary, Secretary to the Treasury (PSST).

Unsupported Expenditure

It was noted that there was unsupported expenditure amounting to Shs 15.618 billion, this was in respect of the supply of tea seedlings.

Unsupported other payments were Shs 1,958,207,000, Secretariat expenses Shs 331.8 million and the district expenditure of Shs 1.513 billion. As such, the auditor was unable to confirm that the expenditure was for intended purposes. 

Relationship between NAADS and Operation Wealth Creation; there were gaps in NAADS operations that warranted support; that is why Operation Wealth Creation came in to give that support.

However, the operations of Operation Wealth Creation are not linked to the NAADS Act and their budget is not clearly linked to any vote.

The committee observed that amendments to the NAADS Act should have been made to incorporate Operation Wealth Creation operations. Otherwise, these operations now are illegal till there is legislation backing the actions put in place.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the NAADS Act should be amended if Operation Wealth Creation operations are to be legally binding.

Wastage and negligence concerning tea seedlings; an inspection of various farmers’ gardens revealed that tea plantations were not properly maintained contrary to proven scientific maintenance models.
In some cases, some big sections of the tea plantations required gaps filing but this had not been carried out by the time of the inspections.

Furthermore, an inspection of various farmer gardens revealed several acreage of grown-up tea plantations, which had not been plucked and tea sold contrary to the objectives of the interventions that are meant to benefit farmers by improving household incomes through the OWC model.

The District Local Government together with other beneficiaries might not have benefited from that tea as a result of not selling the tealeaves. Continuous supply of tea seedlings without subsequent sales is wastage of Government resources. 

The committee recommended that there should be adequate supervision of farming practices by NAADS and local Government.

With your permission, the next entity is NITA-Uganda; the first issue under NITA Uganda was mischarge. The audit report noted that a review of the NITA-Uganda treasury single account cashbook revealed that an entity charged wrong expenditure codes to a tune Shs 94.045 million.

This practice undermined the importance of the budgeting process as well as intentions of the appropriation authority and leads to misleading reporting.

Management explained that this was due to the fact that some account codes were not allocated sufficient funds during budgeting process and non-utilisation of non-tax revenue.

Management further stated that the budgeting process has since then been streamlined starting with the Financial Year 2015/2016; in accordance with the new Public Finance Management Act of 2015 to ensure that correct codes are used during budgeting.

Budget workshops have also been held to sensitise staff on the budgeting process and provisions of the Public Finance Management Act of 2015.

The committee observed that permissions to carry out the mischarge was not sought from the Permanent Secretary, Secretary to the Treasury (PSST) and the board too was not involved in the process.

It was thus concluded that the accounting officer acted on his own in authorising the mischarge which is illegal. The committee further observed that NITA Uganda board and the Minister of Information did not take any serious disciplinary action against the Executive Director for carrying out the mischarge without consulting the board.

The recommendation of the committee was and is that the Executive Director Mr James Sakka, who is also the accounting officer should refund the mischarge funds to the respective accounts.

The committee further recommends that the board of NITA-Uganda should take disciplinary action against staff if there is a repetition of this nature.

The next issue under NITA-Uganda is commercialisation of the national backbone infrastructure. Unsupported payments to a contractor called MS Soliton Telmec Ltd.

The audit report noted that the provision of the contract between NITA Uganda and MS Soliton Telmec (U) Ltd. requires that revenue is effected after submissions and review of the revenue collection and certificate issued.

The report also stated that the review of the dollar account opened for collection and banking revealed an offset of $169,000. There were no reconciliations made and formal clearance from NITA Uganda to effect such transaction.

These unauthorised transactions to ensure that certificates and reconciliations could lead to revenue loss. The secretariat stated that reconciliations had been completed.

They also stated that reconciliation certificates in regard to the authority for transferring the above-mentioned fee of $169,315 to the managing company MS Soliton Telmec (U) Ltd. were available.

The recommendation of the committee is that review and reconciliations be made between NITA Uganda and the office of the Auditor-general and the reconciliation certificate be represented.

Requisition invoices of all the monies and present percentage agreements between NITA Uganda and MS Soliton Telmec (U) Ltd. also be reviewed.

Delayed signing of a revised contract between NITA Uganda and MS Soliton Telmec (U)Limited. The audit report revealed that NITA Uganda entered into an agreement with MS Soliton Telmec (U) Ltd. for the commercialisation of the National Data Transmission Backbone Infrastructure (NBI) and e-Government Infrastructure (EGI).

The revenue generated was to be shared on a 50 per cent basis between the provider and the client. The contract also stipulated that the client had to notify the provider for its failure to meet the minimum revenue collection, discuss the provider’s report on failure and institute measures to improve the provider’s performance.

The client NTIA Uganda would then give the provider 12 months to improve on agreed measures and later terminate the contract at no cost upon failure to achieve the agreed measures.

A review of the collections revealed that the year under review 2015/2016 had brought in the highest contribution this far of Shs 8,635,521,672 representing 10 per cent of the projected revenue, being the fourth year of implementation. 

The delay in signing a revised contract with the service provider affected the Authority’s budget performance and rendered achievements of the strategic objectives of the entity difficult. 

Management of NITA-U informed the committee that the contract between NITA-U and M/S Soliton Telmec (U) Limited had been finalised after being cleared by the Solicitor-General.

The committee observed that the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance gave its recommendation, in writing, for a contract extension of four to five years. This directive was however disregarded by the Board of NITA-U who extended the contract by 10 years, yet the extension was supposed to be based on performance and it was evident their performance was not satisfactory. 

The committee also observes that there is no independent monitoring strategy by NITA-U of the Soliton Telmec (U) Limited activities.

The committee further observes that contracts with private consumers of the NITA-U service were done solely with Soliton Telmec (U) Limited and thus, NITA-U has limited control over these dealings.

The committee also noted that there was concealment of information to the Solicitor-General on the time that was stipulated in the strategic plan from the ministry and also the requirements of the performance that misled the Solicitor-General to approve the extension for l0 years, which could have been deliberate.

The committee further observes that there are no clauses for legal redress against Soliton Telmec (U) Limited by NITA-U. This makes it difficult for recoveries, in case of default.

Recommendations:

        i) The contracts between Soliton Telmec (U) Limited and private consumers be reviewed to give NITA-U authority over these contracts. 

        ii) The extension for the commercialisation contract between NITA-U and Soliton Telmec (U) Limited be reviewed with guidance of the Solicitor-General, after full disclosure of information on the performance and strategic plan from the ministry in that regard

National Council of Sports

National Council of Sports is responsible for the development and maintaining of sports in the country; where Akii Bua Stadium is part of their mandate.

The project was given funds; Shs 1.2 billion, for the construction of the Akii Bua Stadium in Lira District. However, the committee noted that there is little development to show, given the funds advanced through the Ministry of Education and Sports.

The committee was informed that funds were sent directly to Lira District Local Government to implement the project.

Recommendations
Given the above background, the committee recommends that a forensic Audit Team be dispatched to verify the activities on the ground vis-a-vis the expenditure.

The second issue is untitled land. Management reported, in the executive summary, that they had finalised acquiring a land title for the Lugogo Sports Complex on Plot 2-10, Coronation Avenue. 

However, review of the valuation report revealed that the upper plots 10, 12, 14, 66 and 68, measuring 9,163 square metres and valued at Shs 2,593,545,000 with the developments thereon, lie outside the boundaries of the title acquired by the National Council of Sports. 

The committee therefore observed that NCS land has been encroached on due to lack of titles and some unscrupulous people have taken advantage of the situation. The land in Lugogo is prime and should not have taken this long without a title deed. 

This should apply to all other property, which calls for the management of NCS to be aggressive in securing all the property, due to their prime location.

The committee, therefore, recommended that management should expedite the process of securing land titles to safeguard the land from being grabbed. The Auditor-General should carry out a forensic audit of all the property of the NCS, as a matter of urgency, given their location, nature and use.

The next issue under NCS is non-deduction of six per cent withholding tax. Section 119 of the Income Tax Act, 1997, requires a withholding agent to deduct withholding tax from payments to suppliers for goods and services in excess of Shs 1 million. 

However, it was noted that payments were made to different service providers without deducting withholding tax of six per cent amounting to Shs 2l,767,327. 

The committee further observed that this has been recurring in the previous financial years, implying that the accounting officer is either reluctant to implement the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 or the officers handling the tasks are incompetent.

The committee recommends that the accountant be held responsible for the loss of Shs 21,767,327. 

The committee further recommends that the PS/ST holds the decision of granting NCS its independent vote until he or she is satisfied that it is competent enough to run its affairs.

Madam Speaker, the next issue is high loan financing costs. The Council was financing two mortgage loan facilities amounting to Shs 762,500,000 comprising of Demand Loan 1 of Shs 312,500,000 and Demand Loan 2 of Shs 450,000,000, one sanctioned for part repairing of the office building and the other for preparation of Commonwealth games respectively. During the year under review, interest expenses of Shs 127,761,916 were incurred on the two loans and this has the effect of escalating operational costs of the Council. 

The committee observed that borrowing of these loans and giving the land title as security of the land belonging to Government were sanctioned by the Minister of State for Sports, contrary to the requirement of the law. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Minister of State for Sports takes responsibility for his actions, which he undertook without approval of the minister of finance as per the provisions of the law. 

The committee further recommends urgent and early retirement of the loan to recover the mortgaged title.

Madam Speaker, that is the report of the audited selected statutory corporations for financial years 2013/2014 to 2015/2016.

It is my prayer that this report be adopted in its entirety, Madam Speaker. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson and members of the Committee on COSASE for all that work done over those four financial years. I will allow a few comments.

5.36
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Chairperson and members of the Committee on COSASE for this report. Given that the years that they are processing have been a while ago, I want to make some brief comments.

First of all, before I forget, I would suggest that the chairperson accepts that we amend some of the recommendations to include the timeframe because some of the recommendations have been left without any clear timeframe. I think a period between three to six months after the adoption should be good enough for Government to take action. 

Secondly, I observed that in the report, there is some information that appears to be stale now. For example, the Accounting Officer at NITA-U has now changed. It would be very difficult for the board to take action.

Having reflected on what we did yesterday, in future, we might have to suggest that if the report of the Auditor-General is not processed within six months, then it should be brought back to the House and it is adopted so that the recommendations by the Auditor General can be taken forward. 

Nevertheless, I have picked one item and it is the issue of Akii-Bua Stadium in Lira. Of course Shs 1.2 billion that was allocated then cannot construct a stadium but the information we heard on the ground was that this money was advanced to Lira District Local Government. 

It is surprising to see from there that the amount is Shs 1.2 billion and Lira District Local Government only acknowledges Shs 600 million, which is half of that. It would have been important if the committee had updated itself on the progress of this work. Nonetheless, I welcome the recommendation for a forensic audit because this has been a problem to the entire sports fraternity in Lango Subregion.

Lastly, on the issue of mischarge, unsupported expenditures, wasteful expenditures and receivables by KCCA, this money should be around. I found the recommendation of the committee to be very weak because these are the monies we see coming up in apartments and businesses around. The committee should have recommended for full recovery of these amounts of money.

In future, entities like KCCA that are very lazy to collect what is due to them, Parliament should reduce the appropriation by that same amount to them. For example, KCCA refused to collect Shs 53 billion. If it were possible, we should actually reduce appropriation to KCCA by Shs 53 billion, too, so that they take care of that in the next financial years. Thank you.

TEH SPEAKER: Thank you. 

5.39
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on COSASE, hon. Munyagwa, for the good report he has presented.

I will start with delay of completion of road works. However, I will insist on complaining that the Ministers of Kampala Capital City are not here to listen to their audited report. Definitely, we shall continue. We shall meet them there. 

I thank the chairperson and the committee members. These are very serious observations. Currently, they are building roads in Kampala, but how can a road of two kilometres be constructed in a period of two years. 

When Ms Jennifer Musisi was the Executive Director of KCCA, wherever they were constructing roads, they put in place traffic lights. You cannot fight traffic in Kampala without the use of traffic lights. They are constructing some roads in Makindye Division. As you go to Ntinda, some roads are being constructed. They have, however, not catered for traffic lights. 

Traffic lights are very key in Kampala. If you make a research, in most of the areas where Ms Musisi left traffic lights, the traffic flows very well at least. There is some good performance of the traffic. I do not know how these contracts were signed without giving due consideration for these areas. 

We have a very serious road called Salama Road Munyonyo and Calenda. That road is historical now because it is the CHOGM road. That is where we have the mini basilica that was commissioned by His Holiness the Pope. One of the Uganda martyrs was also killed there. However, you can bury an elephant in one of the potholes along that road. That is not mentioned in the report.

About KCCA schools, as the Committee on Education and Sports, we insisted that Uganda Lands Commission should provide land titles to these schools. This is failing. Schools in Kampala are losing land. I do not know what we are going to do. This is a very serious observation.

On top of that, Committee on COSASE, you were supposed to talk about the teachers in KCCA. They cannot be considered at the same standard as those from Kalungu or Ssembabule because their status is different. They are using transport; they have no housing but they are still earning Shs 4000,000, and yet, they spend over Shs 200,000 per week to move from their homes to come to the schools to teach and to also feed. There is no feeding of teachers in Kampala. All that is not talked about here. 

I want to talk about National Council of Sports. Before that, I am insisting that whoever will take over the Committee on COSASE should take keen interest in looking at Kampala schools and not only primary schools. Head teachers fear talking because they will lose jobs but people write letters of no objection Uganda Lands Commission and the school land is taken.

As I conclude, on National Council of Sports, we have an audited report in PAC where the ministry of education spent Shs 5 billion to give architectural designs for all stadia in Uganda and nothing was done. Currently, Uganda’s national football team is going to host another country for a World Cup qualifier game at St Mary’s Kitende’s Vipers’ stadium. Mandela National Stadium Namboole is dilapidated. The hotel was taken by someone. 

We have failed to bring up this law; the National Council of Sports Act, which has to be amended. National Council of Sports must own all the assets of sports.

What is happening here – When you go on FM radios, all the media houses are attacking Parliament, that we are not doing anything for sports. However, how much attention have you given sports, Madam Speaker? The news reporters; the fourth arm – Because when we talk about sports in the committee on education, they are never there. Their interest is on Asian properties. Those are the news that sell in Uganda. By the time we talk about sports, nobody is covering us.

Then you hear everybody is attacking us and yet, we are saying we are struggling. They say Parliament only recognises sports when somebody has won an event and then we bring a motion.

The only remedy we can have is to bring the National Council of Sports Act in place, we look at the sports assets and put powers in the National Council of Sports. You heard already the President gave Shs 10 billion to FUFA. The minister for finance, hon. Bahati is there. He can bear witness. They have refused to give this money to National Council of Sports to give all other sporting activities. All the money is going to FUFA alone. 

As I conclude, nothing is going on. Lugogo is stolen. When you go to Akii-Bua stadium, part of the land is stolen. When you go to Masaka Recreation Centre, they have stolen off acres. When you go to Bugembe, it is the same story. In Soroti, all the land for sports is stolen. We are only there – Yet Uganda is talented.

This Government killed sports. When you go to school, children cannot play football. They cannot even get a ball of Shs 20,000 to play in a primary school. They cannot even make balls out of fibres. How can we be there when sports is one of the most selling entities in the world? You heard what happened in Premier League when a new league was going to be started. There was a battle between EUFA and FIFA and all other bodies. 

So, let us go back, work with National Council of Sports, empower them, give them money and then bring back sports. Once these players go outside, they will bring money to the country.

As I talk, we have a footballer called Sekajja training a team in Europe, Salzburg; he was our captain here. All this must be looked at. 

The FUFA has beaten all the players. Mr Masinde Onyango has left because the National Council of Sports is nowhere. Thank you for the report, Mr Chairman. I pray for you. 

5.46
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. 

From what we are hearing, if this country tried to only implement some controls to mismanagement - we have enough money to avoid borrowing. How do you write off receivables of that magnitude? Of course, for that money to be written off, it has to go through Parliament; we either make that decision or not. If we refuse to write it off, it means those they are demanding from, like KCCA defaulters, will have to pay. 

The reason the report is here is to seek authority. In my opinion, we cannot write off that money, until those we should write off have either died or have been declared bankruptcy. Failure to do that, then, we need to demand that money from them. 

Section 48 of the PFMA talks of the internal audit, which is very clear; that the internal audit shall apply the soundness and application of the accounting functions and operation controls of a Vote. It also says that shall evaluate the effectiveness and contribute to the improvement of risk management process of a Vote and shall provide assurance on the efficiency and effectiveness of the economy in the administration of the programmes and operation of a Vote. 

That means by the time issues go wrong in an entity, the internal auditor should have raised a red flag. If the internal audit is not functioning, then, what are we doing? 
Madam Speaker, this complaining that we are doing here is not necessary because the people who should work are not working. The internal auditor should strongly come up to tell the people of Uganda what is happening at any particular time. 

They also said that when they are making their internal audit reports, they report to audit committees. Madam Speaker, these queries would not come here if these were functioning. 

As much as we are looking at some entities, we should also look at the staff at the internal audit and procurement levels. We should come out strong on them. For instance, if one has a project and they are the project managers, they should manage that project. How can it take years and they are not sanctioned? If they have a contract that had clauses for sanctioning delays and somebody delays with the contract, how can they not call on that clause? Yet if the Government does not pay, people will go to court and it ends up paying damages and interest –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude, honourable member. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. My concluding remarks are these: the committees of Parliament work for Parliament. I am happy with what Hon. Munyagwa presented. 

Yesterday, there was a COSASE report that stated that if you carry out an investigation, it can take a long time; that is where we want to go. There are times where, we, as a Parliament, need to take decisions on some of these reports. There is nothing criminal with adopting the Auditor-General’s report and saying, “As Parliament, we agree that what the Auditor-General raised should be implemented.” 

That is why I want to go to the law and show you where it is. Article 90(1) of the Constitution reads: “Parliament shall appoint committees necessary for efficient discharge of its functions.” 

Article 90(3) says, “In the exercise of their functions, under this Article, committees of Parliament –(a) may call any minister or any person holding public office and private individuals to submit memoranda or appear before them to give evidence.” The issue of saying that everybody must appear is not necessary. 

This means that the memoranda are enough. We can decide here to adopt the report of the Auditor-General and his recommendations. We can say that we want the Ministry of Finance to issue a treasury memorandum within the prescribed time because it is possible. 

In the circumstances, I move that we adopt all the outstanding reports of the Auditor-General for COSASE, Local Government, to date so that they are worked on by the Ministry of Finance.

THE SPEAKER: Is that at the end of this sitting or when we are closing Parliament? Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, when do you propose to move that motion? Is it when Parliament is being prorogued? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am going to make this proposal when we have finished this debate, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

5.52
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman and the committee for the report. This report is more or less a mirror of what is going on in the country. 

There are particularly three areas I would like to comment on. I moved a motion for Government to halt the demolition of Nabagereka Primary School and you were the one in Chair, Madam Speaker and Parliament did its best by passing resolutions to Government. What happened? We even visited the site but Nabagereka Primary School and Shimoni Demonstration School are now no more. 

I have heard that KCCA only has four public schools in its name and records: Kisaasi, Bukasa, Kamwokya and another one that I do not remember. What happens to the rest of the schools? What has happened to this country? 

The other day, the President was reported in the press saying that NRM has had a difficult time in the last election because of the discarded population; the Ugandans. We deny them the right to education and opportunity for equity and equality. In the canons and principles of economics, education is one of the instruments for bridging income inequality in the country, where even the children of the poor could aspire to be useful Ugandans. 

I bet if you are to scrutinise the entire Frontbench of ministers, none of them can tell you that they did not have a weird background; they are strugglers but one of the ladders they used was education, and this applies to the President of this country as well. 

Now, if we are the ones in power but at the same time we do not take cognisant of the role education plays in the lives of our children; the future of the generation, Madam Speaker, we shall end up with an angry and discarded population left at the mercy of nature; and it is disturbing that this is still going on. 

Madam Speaker, it is interesting that when we had the magnificent Namboole and Nakivubo Stadia, we thought the country would prioritise its sports. Fake developers – and I can tell you that the one who took over Nakivubo for modern development, where is it 10 years down the road? The one behind it is Ham, who is equally a troubled businessman. The other day, he was seeking for the Government bailout and yet this is the person we have surrounded a whole national stadium called Nakivubo; they just built their arcades around it.

What language does this Government want to listen to? Why are you running down this country like this? What have we done to you? You applaud the sports persons but at the end of the day, you do not show that you have commitment; you are allowing sports facilities to go to waste.

I see the President hosting sports persons for each victory we get at international level. It means that it is a moment for Uganda but we are doing the opposite.

Madam Speaker, I am perturbed and I think it is high time that this country chose its priorities. Do we want to save a country or put it to waste?

Madam Speaker, on the issue NAADS; it spent 18.55 billion on tea seedlings but they could not show the people who got the seedlings. They could not tell how much acreage was planted. Who is eating this money? There wasn’t even evidence of delivery. 

Now, you are making Ugandans pay for this colossal amount of money. What did Ugandans do? I think Ugandans deserve a Government they trust in to lead the people. Therefore, you cannot lead people you are not showing the way to proper prosperity. Otherwise, this is total corruption.

Madam Speaker, whatever we do, let us minimize political involvement in the agriculture and economic matters of this country.

Madam Speaker, you are aware that NAADS was illegally turned into Operation Wealth Creation (OWC). To make matters worse - I do not know many technical people in OWC. However, I know that the Deputy Director OWC is none other than Ms Sylvia Awori, a beauty pageant, someone who specialises in beauty competitions. Yet, you make her the Deputy Director of Operation Wealth Creation. Are you serious? She is a designer and a fashionista. Yet, you make her the Deputy Director of OWC that has supplanted NAADS. Moreover, you have professors, people with doctorates and people who are knowledgeable about this area.

I stand to support this committee report and really take a moment to ask the Government- yes, we can play politics but politics should not enter into the lives of Ugandans. You can appoint them in some other entities –(Member timed out)

5.59
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the chairperson and the committee for bringing this report, though it is being read at a time, when five years have elapsed. However, it is still current in some areas.

As far as OWC is concerned, it is well known nationally that it has no law that allows it to operate. It has operated for some many years that some people think that NAADS and OWC are the same, yet they do not have the same secretariat.

When you ask for accountability, you get accountability from NAADS. It is possible NAADS has an executive director. However, OWC operates in its own way. This is why we are failing to know how many acres they were supposed to plant and how many seeds they supplied. What does this mean? It means that they did not have a target for Ugandans –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude. I think he took part of your minutes.

MR TIMUZIGU: So, Madam Speaker, that means, they need to be more professional than they are. How do they become professional? They have to be merged with NAADS such that they can have a way of bringing accountability to Parliament or the entire nation.

Lastly, as far as the land for schools is concerned, it is a grave mistake to have no land for schools in Kampala, when the population is increasing in the city. Life is also changing; people have to be educated in the city more than even in the villages. If they do not get education, we shall have a very difficult city and all people who will get educated from villages will come to Kampala and suffer.

We need to mind about the wellbeing of children and teachers. The only way to do that is to have land protected and have more schools. I fear the Government will need to even buy more land and build more schools, which will be expensive and yet they gave away our land. Therefore, before we go to that end, we need to capture the situation, when it is still manageable. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.02
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also thank the committee for coming up with this nice report, which reveals a lot of issues that we are experiencing in our economy.

Madam Speaker, it is very surprising to hear Bank of Uganda being dragged into this report on the account of wasteful expenditure. Bank of Uganda, year in, year out makes a lot of noise on how they are making losses. It appears that they have gone into bed with the Ministry of Finance. Several times, you will hear Finance complaining how the Bank of Uganda has become very expensive in managing the expenditures of the Government and they need a lot of money.

In this budget we are grappling with, a lot of money is going to Bank of Uganda, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to fund the extravagance and wastefulness that has been very well brought by this report.

I would like to thank the committee for exposing this and I pray that people in charge of finance should help us to save this country from the extravagance, the wastefulness of the Ministry of Finance unless this is another way of channelling money through Bank of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I am not surprised that the issue of NAADS comes up here. I belong to the Committee of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, where I was put a year ago. We went to Zombo, we were shocked. There was totally nothing. We were told a lot of money had been spent on tea growing in Zombo. So, we wanted to see as an oversight committee how far people of Zombo were copying up with the production of tea? However, we were shocked to find nothing on the ground. People were very bitter. In fact, they were even accusing us of blackmailing them. They told us that “next time you come back here do not tell us about tea”.

What is even surprising is that when we started interrogating these issues of tea growing under NAADS and OWC, I was shocked because we were told to go and meet Silvia Awori. I personally refused to go there because I knew her as someone in the entertainment industry. Yet they were telling us she was in charge of tea in Zombo.
 
Madam Speaker, even when she came as we were investigating this issue of tea - she came to Parliament leading a team of soldiers. I looked at her and out of respect, I simply walked out, but that shows you the problem we have in this country. We have got Ugandans who can manage our affairs, but people who are in charge take things as a joking matter.

When I look at the issues concerning some of our playgrounds, it is surprising that playgrounds all over the country are not there, because they have been grabbed by developers. However, it is shocking that even when you come to Lugogo here; how can somebody fail to know that the prime land he is managing does not have a land title? How can it be?

This must be high level connivance; something is wrong. They have taken all the land in Namboole Stadium and they claim that we did not know. If you ask some of them, they say that “We did not know that, that was part of our land.” Then what are you managing? How come the people who are put to be in charge of these things, are the very ones who are abetting the grabbing of public land, land which is supposed to be for sports grounds? Madam Speaker, there is something wrong, which needs to be further investigated.

It is unfortunate that this was a report of 2015/2016. I do not know what the status is now. I would be much more interested in knowing what the current status is as regards this, now. I believe nothing has changed. When you go to Namboole, you will realise that they are now putting up more markets; instead of recovering land.

Madam Speaker, something is wrong. One time, Hon. Odur was saying that, my Government declared that this was going to be a term of no mchezo. Maybe, that is why these sports grounds are going. I do not understand. I need a clarification. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.07
MR DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for raising up serious issues. In 2019, I was in my constituency carrying out oversight role, as a Member of Parliament. A tipper lorry was moving around the constituency distributing coffee seedlings not knowing whom to give. They were just moving around saying abagala emwanyi (those who need coffee). Madam Speaker, I had to intervene and called the RDC and we chased away the so called supplier of NAADS. 

I do not think that we should move this way. Whenever the President goes, he is happy calling out the coordinators of Operation Wealth Creation saying: “Tell us, how we have performed? And how many seedlings have we distributed?” You find officers saying that “so many millions of seedlings”, and the President is happy that the Operation Wealth Creation has worked.

Madam Speaker, if we are to move this way, we shall not help this country. We should look at the impact of the programme like Operation Wealth Creation vis-à-vis NAADs.
 
Regarding sports, I would like to applaud our country sports men and women, for raising Ugandan’s flag high. We are proud of them and the President too, is proud of them. 

However, when it comes to facilitating the sector, they are given a peanut. We are now in they budgeting process and we are supposed to host sports, but when you look at Namboole that was rejected; Nakivubo Stadium which is in the city centre is not yet finished. You look at a private pitch that has been allowed, it has difficulties because there is no road network; and the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development and Government, are not prioritising this sector. We are only proud to say “Kiprotich you are welcome, we are proud of you” and we pose for photos. We should go beyond that. 

Madam Speaker, finally, regarding the recommendations of the committee, especially on the accounting officers and other officers who embezzle these funds, as a country, we are seen almost to be promoting corruption. I cannot imagine the whole Parliament adopting the report with recommendations –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR KAHONDA: Regarding the embezzlement of Government funds that someone should be held responsible and should be prosecuted but the following year, you see the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, re-appointing the same person to the same portfolio. 

To make matters worse, you find some of those officers are elevated to head authorities and ministerial posts and as Parliament, we also go ahead and approve them.

As Parliament, it is high time we helped this country by emphasising on the recommendations of the committee. Once our report is approved, then the Executive should make sure that those recommendations are implemented. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.12
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono South County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues, to thank the committee, for the work well done. As I was driving, I was watching my T.V.I came a bit late because I was attending a function for the daughter of Bishop Sebaggala. 

When the chairperson and the committee took time to investigate but when it came to recommendations, there was nothing on KCCA and Bank of Uganda. The one of the three people I was having in my car asked me, “Is that not giving them more plan to steal. How can Bank of Uganda open up a dormant account in a foreign country for years, and people are not taken to court?” The recommendation should be that, they should be taken to jail because their intention was to steal that money. 

This Parliament is going to end and they wait for another one to come, and then they eat the money. They should also come up with very tight recommendations. On unfinished roads and water drainages, almost 60 per cent of the money was given by KCCA when the works were not even 50 per cent done. The recommendations do not task the Executive Director and people concerned to refund.

Madam Speaker, one of your committee of this Parliament, three weeks back, was in Kitgum. Now, all the roads are being re-constructed. This is because that was our recommendation; that all the roads be redone; either from the CAO’s salary or the engineer. The money was directly stolen. They are now re-doing the work. 

We do not know where they will get the money because out of that money certain percentage goes to the individuals. Therefore, let them refund and do the work. 

However, as I was driving, I heard that you know that the executive director selects a few of the technical people and they work as the contracts committee, and at the end of the day, these committees are awarded to their own people, or they themselves create companies. That is still a challenge and we should come up with tighter recommendations. 

I support the honourable member who is coming up with a motion that even people should refund, because we are now doing a post-mortem; and our term is ending. What will happen? This report is coming in and the new team may not make serious follow up; they are going to start their own journey, and this will be left to die a natural death.

Madam Speaker, I thank the committee, but more recommendations should be attached so that they can bite for the good of this country. I thank you.

6.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to add my voice to thank the committee chairperson and the members for a very good report, which has been well presented this evening and to thank the committee members for the effort in the fight against corruption. 

This Government pursues a policy of zero tolerance to corruption and therefore the recommendations, which have been given to us by the committee, will be taken seriously and I am also of the view that whoever has been named in the report who should account, should actually account and the good thing we have the Prime Minister here with us. Therefore, the report should be taken seriously by Government and those found culpable should be investigated and disciplined, if they have mismanaged Government resources.

To comment on the tea programme, I come from an area where this tea programme has been implemented in Kigezi and I agree there were issues and irregularities.

Speaking as a Member of Parliament for Kinkizi East, I had my own misgivings and where there were areas of corruption, I took them on but I can tell you that it is not easy. There are two court cases which are hanging over my head because of my involvement in the fight against corruption in the tea programme in Kigezi.

At one point I referred the matter to the Inspectorate of Government but the IGG said, “This is a private matter.” I said, “These are resources appropriated by Parliament through NAADS; how do you reduce them into a private matter?” It is not easy as we do our work as Members of Parliament. I thank the committee for raising all these issues and they should be pursued to their logical conclusion.
Finally, the issues of land which are being raised; I just want to provide information as a minister from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development that we are developing an inventory of Government land.

When we went into the ministry, we found Government did not know where its land is in most parts of the country and working together with Uganda Land Commission and the district local governments, we have constructed a land inventory which we are concluding so that we know where Government land is in all corners of the country and we have an advanced inventory now.

The view is to ensure that all this land is titled, including land which belongs to schools and educational institutions which have been raised here. So the assurance I want to give the members is that yes, we are completing the inventory so that we can title all this land in all parts of the country so that when the agencies bring –(Interruption) 

MS OGWAL: Thank you, for giving way. I would like the minister to clarify to me the timeline for submitting the inventory you are talking about because I remember the Ninth Parliament requested the Minister of Lands to submit the inventory all-over the country up to the end of the Ninth Parliament but we never got it.

Now, the 10th Parliament is coming to an end but we have not got the inventory. Can you tell us when you are likely to come up with it so that we can keep a record of it?
Lastly, we are aware that in the last 10 years, some pieces of very prime land which are for our development like the piece of land where the Indian Government wanted to build along the source of the Nile, we found that it was already given to some investor.

In the last 10 years, what pieces of land which otherwise belonged to Government were given out to the so-called investors and who are they? It is in our interest to know. Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, for the clarifications. I was not the Minister of Lands in the last Parliament but we did not find that request for the inventory but the process started and once we complete, we shall definitely share it with Parliament.

Like I said, we have an advanced version of the inventory of Government land and we have instructed the various agencies to start titling that land because the expenses of titling are met by the various agencies. 

Therefore, we want appeal to this House that when the various Government departments and agencies bring their budgets to help them title this land, we should support them so that Government land, wherever it is, is titled and protected.

With respect to land which has been given out to investors in the last 10 years, I cannot provide that information here but Government can provide it. The challenge is that we have few days remaining for Parliament to wind up but this information can be complied by Government and we share it with Parliament.

Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, the committee once again, for a very good report.

6.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Once again we thank the chairperson of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE), members of the committee and the chairperson of Public Accounts Committee this morning for the value-adding effort against this cancer of corruption.

Now that there are glaring facts about misuse of funds, the relevant institutions should immediately take action. There are enough facts about misuse of funds in the reports that have come.

Yesterday, you could see how Hon. Obote was trying to say that if these reports delay, then we miss a lot and we want to thank you for the fact that you have given time for these reports to be debated and concluded.

Maybe we need to tie the accountability reports of the Auditor-General with the budgeting process. Like if this information comes before we appoint accounting officers, before we start the budgeting process, that will help us to take action immediately on the accounting officers using our own powers of not appointing them. That could help for immediate action because if they go for IGG, police, or court, that will take time but people must know that this business of misuse of funds is very dangerous and we should take action so that they avoid this.

I want to correct one point the chairperson kept on referring to, he said, “These people mischarged money without authority of the PS/ST of Ministry of Finance.” ust to inform you, the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury does not have powers to authorise mischarge. The law only allows virement of resources up to 10 per cent but if somebody mischarged, it is unlawful and the law also provides for how that can be collected. So, we do not have powers to allow a mischarge. The Minister of Finance can authorise to charge on a certain vote.

Madam Speaker, I want to thank the chairperson and members for the work that you have done and the effort you have put in, to fight this cancer of corruption. If all of us continue combining these efforts, in a few years, we shall actually achieve our long-term goal of making sure that we have zero tolerance towards corruption, as a Government in power. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do adopt the report of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises, as presented.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON THE PETITION ON THE ABUSE OF OFFICE AND CAUSING FINANCIAL LOSS TO GOVERNMENT BY THE KCCA PAYING 10 PER CENT NSSF CONTRIBUTION FOR ITS PERMANENT AND PENSIONABLE MEMBERS OF STAFF

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a very short one. It is a report on a petition. It is not as long as our usual ones; then we shall go to item 8 and item 9.

6.27
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Mubarak Munyagwa): Madam Speaker, with your permission, I will try as much as possible to summarise but I will give a small background in one minute.

On 14 February 2020, Madam Speaker, you forwarded a report to the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises, with instructions to investigate and report back within 30 days. 

However, due to the COVID-19 outbreak, we did not make it in 30 days. We actually processed this petition to its logical conclusion. In so doing, we interfaced with a number of stakeholders, including the whistleblower himself, Mr Mohammed K and the management of KCCA. We reviewed the written memoranda by both the Public Service Commission and the Solicitor-General.

Madam Speaker, with your permission, I request to go straight away to the prayers by the whistleblower and the recommendations of the committee. 

Madam Speaker, during our interface with the whistleblower, he laid out four prayers.

The first prayer was that it was discovered that KCCA is remitting NSSF contributions for its workers who are permanent and pensionable, which is irregular, as per the Solicitor-General’s opinion. The Solicitor-General opined to the effect that the conduct was irregular. KCCA staff came and they testified before the committee that the conduct was irregular and done in error.

So, the whistleblower made a prayer that NSSF should be compelled to immediately transfer the equivalent of 10 per cent so far remitted to NSSF since 2013 to the Consolidated Fund, with interest accrued since 2012.

Madam Speaker, the committee observed that NSSF is an open body, which allows different types of people to make contributions to the fund. Apart from the mandatory contribution that allows employees to contribute five per cent and their employers to contribute 10 per cent, there are other open avenues for saving with NSSF. 

Section 10 of the NSSF Act provides for voluntary membership. It states that any employer who is not an eligible contributor may apply for voluntary registration as a contributing employer; and any eligible employee of such employer may, thereafter, apply for voluntary registration as a member of the fund”.

The section also allows public officers on permanent and pensionable scheme to save with NSSF on voluntary basis.

Section 17 of the NSSF Act states that, “The Treasury may make payments to the fund, in respect of those Government employees specified by the minister responsible for public service who are under fifty-five years of age. Any payment made under this section shall be credited to the account of the employee, in respect of whom it is made, and if that employee is not a member of the fund, he or she shall, forthwith, be registered and admitted to membership, even if the employee is no longer a Government employee.”

The committee, therefore, observed that NSSF was not at fault to accept remittances from KCCA, as they could have been voluntary or special contributions, as provided for and highlighted in the law above. 

Besides, NSSF does not interfere with the managerial issues of their client institutions. In case KCCA was remitting for permanent and pensionable staff, NSSF had no mandate to direct otherwise. 

Madam Speaker, the committee, therefore, basing on the facts as embedded above, notes that this prayer not grantable, as it has no legal basis for implementation. The committee, therefore, recommends that the prayer should be dropped. 

Prayer number two is that all the officers of KCCA and NSSF involved in this act, which was intended to defraud Government and cause illicit enrichment, should be prosecuted, in accordance with the law. 

The observation of the committee, Madam Speaker, is that regarding the law stated above, the committee did not find the officers of NSSF at fault for accepting remittances from KCCA.

Secondly, the committee did not find any intentions of NSSF officers to defraud Government and to cause illicit enrichment, as the remittances are not shared among themselves, but credited to individual accounts of member contributors.

The committee, therefore, recommended that the prayer to prosecute officers of NSSF is not tenable. The committee, therefore, recommends that the query be dropped.

Observation on prosecution of KCCA officers 

Madam Speaker, the committee observed that officers at KCCA were advised against the irregularity, but continued to remit money to NSSF for permanent and pensionable staff. 

The Secretary Public Service Commission stated that PSC did whatever it could within its powers to guide the KCCA management on the issue of paying 10 per cent NSSF contributions, against the laid down policies, but their advice was not taken. 

He further stated that it was the Public Service Commission that advised KCCA to seek legal interpretation from the Solicitor-General on the matter, that made KCCA to act. On 27 May 2019, KCCA sought guidance of the Solicitor-General on how to manage the terminal benefits of their employees. 

Although the first opinion cleared KCCA to continue remitting contributions to NSSF, the Solicitor-General produced a second opinion that overrode the first one. It stated that, “…in the absence of a specific instrument regulating NSSF contributions of KCCA staff, KCCA management acted irregularly to subject staff to NSSF contributions, instead of applying the Pensions Act”. 

Despite the Solicitor-General’s opinion and advice from Public Service Commission, KCCA management continued remitting the same to NSSF. They continued with the practice because they were direct beneficiaries of the scheme. 

The accounting officer by then refused to comply with the legal obligation to which he was subjected to. The committee found this irregular. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the accounting officer, who ignored the Solicitor-General’s advice and continued remitting the funds, should be held liable for the loss of public funds and should be penalised, in accordance with the law.

The next prayer, Madam Speaker, is that all KCCA staff who have since retired or resigned from the authority, but were beneficiaries of this illegal act should be made to pay back the money they received to the Consolidated Fund, failure of which the accounting officer who remitted the monies makes good the loss.

The committee observed that remittances had been stopped and recoveries were underway. During the last meeting the committee held with the management of KCCA, the new Executive Director, Ms Dorothy Kisaka, informed the committee that after studying the issue, she found the practice of remitting NSSF contributions to permanent and pensionable staff irregular and this was stopped. 

She further informed the committee that the meetings KCCA held with various stakeholders, including Ministry of Public Service, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and PS/ST informed her decision to stop irregular remittances. She further reported that recoveries were to be made from gratuity of both staff who are still in service and those who retired but have not been given their terminal benefits.

The recommendation of the committee on this is that the accounting officer of KCCA should expedite the process of recovery of the funds and remit the same to the Consolidated Fund.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure that gratuity is not paid to the retiring staff before full recovery is made. 

The last prayer is for the whistle-blower. The whistle-blower requested for his entitlement, as per Section 19 of the Whistle-blowers Act, 2010. 

The committee observed that the whistle-blower was so patriotic in disclosing this irregularity to higher authorities. Non-disclosure of the same indicates that KCCA was likely to continue with the irregularity unabated. The whistle-blower is therefore entitled to five per cent of the net liquidated sum of the money recovered in accordance with Section 19 of the Whistle-blowers Act, 2010. 

Recommendation:

Upon full recovery of the funds and remitting the same to the Consolidated Fund, the whistle-blower should be paid within six months, as the law stipulates. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the committee is pleased to report to you that the irregular practice of remitting NSSF contributions to permanent and pensionable staff has been stopped by the new Executive Director of KCCA and efforts to recover the funds are underway. 

The committee observes that there is no instrument by the Ministry of Public Service that declares KCCA as the “Other Public Service”. Therefore, it is still governed by the same custodian laws of Public Service. KCCA can pursue that option and obtain an instrument that can enable it to make its own Pension Scheme as provided by Parliamentary Commission and other public services.

The committee commits the report to this House and the recommendations therein. I beg to move that this committee report and its recommendations be adopted by this House in its entirety. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson and the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises for this report. Honourable members, I think the report is very clear. Do we really need to discuss it? 

6.39
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee chairperson and those members who helped to bring to the fore the petition as presented before this honourable House. 

While internalising this report, it came to my notice that KCCA was paying NSSF contribution for its permanent and pensionable staff, and yet these are essentially under the Ministry of Public Service.

This is where Government, which is the employer, pays 10 per cent and the employee pays five per cent. It is very strange how KCCA embarked on this exercise. How? Already they knew these were permanent and pensionable staff but they proceeded to offer them another NSSF facility, unfortunately at the expense of the taxpayer.

I want to fault the NSSF for allowing this in the first place. They should have pointed it out that the KCCA staff were already covered under Public Service and they were not part of those employees – I only saw from the chairperson’s report that Section 17 of the NSSF Act provides that the treasury may make payment to the funds of those Government employees. Probably, the law needs to be clear on this. Those who are involved must be held accountable.

Having agreed with the Public Service Commission, KCCA management and even the Solicitor-General, I would have had stronger recommendations. Now that the practice was stopped, and the irregularity was noticed, I beg to support the committee. I thank them for this report and I thank all other committees. 

Many petitioners come to this Parliament. We have petitions like mine – of course I wanted to take this opportunity - over the Foot and Mouth Disease and the irregular quarantine in Lwemiyaga. I am seeing the Tenth Parliament is coming to an end and the petition that I brought before this House is yet to be disposed of.

Therefore, I would imagine that once the committees receive petitions from deserving cases, they should be expedited so that Parliament of Uganda pronounces itself on the same. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Jonathan Odur and Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi will each speak for two minutes, and then we will take a decision. 

6.42
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to propose that we also amend the motion. This whistleblower’s name should be forwarded to medals committee. These are Ugandans who deserve to be rewarded with those medals. 

Secondly, I would like to disagree with the exoneration of NSSF management. That template that you fill and submit to NSSF - You cannot only remit the 10 per cent without the five per cent. It is impossible. It means this was a well-planned syndicated crime and even the account within NSSF could be a fictitious account that was just being used to siphon the money. It is impossible for any employer to remit only 10 per cent when the five per cent is not there.

I had expected the committee to have gone ahead to, first of all, establish how much – The petitioner alleges trillions of shillings and here, the report is not very clear whether it was actually in trillions of shillings.

Secondly, I had expected that even the list of those employees should have been availed. The committee should have interacted with them to assess whether actually, on retirement, for those who retired, they were able to access their benefits from NSSF. That is very silent in this report. 
Madam Speaker, I beg the chairperson that we should not exonerate NSSF management. Somebody within NSSF was aware and was facilitating this fraud. We cannot let it go unpunished. Thank you. 

6.44
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, I think we are just making a big mistake. I want to thank the chairperson of the committee and the members. First of all, Section 8 of the NSSF Act talks about those who are exempt and it is in the first schedule. Madam Speaker, if we go to the first schedule, it is very clear. That is why I want to agree with Hon. Jonathan that NSSF should not be exempt. I think it is a group of criminals. 

It says; “The Uganda Police Force, UPDF, Uganda Prisons, employment by virtue of which employees are eligible for pension benefits under the Pensions Act.” The seventh one reads, “Employment by virtue of which employees in the public service, local authority or corporation or a body established for public services are eligible for pension under any charter or non-statutory scheme approved by the minister.” 

Madam Speaker, NSSF knew that these are public servants. We want to assume it was KCCA. That means that was a local authority. NSSF cannot be exempt from this act. 

I am not very sure if the chairman checked the payslip to confirm that five per cent was deducted from the employees. You may discover that the contribution was 10 and even the five was contributed by the employee. 

This account is serious. There is no need for us to say that we should wait for gratuity or retirement. NSSF should immediately transfer this money to the Consolidated Fund. Who was supposed to apply for the number? It should have been Public Service which never applied. KCCA had no authority to register with NSSF because all public institutions are cleared by Public Service to register for NSSF. If they never got the clearance from Public Service, it is criminal. I think the MDA and those who left should be arrested. This is how people are stealing public money. They pretend to be doing a great act and yet it is theft. 

I would like to amend the chairman’s proposal by saying:
 
NSSF should transmit all the money it has got from 2013 to date to Bank of Uganda with immediate effect. 

The Executive Director of NSSF and the head of accounts – we, accountants, pay things legally; we do not pay illegally. There is no accountant who would know that they are exempt. In fact, the head of accounts, the head of internal audit, the executive director of NSSF and the MD of NSSF should be arraigned in court for theft of public resources. This is a very dangerous thing. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR MUNYAGWA: Madam Speaker, first and foremost, I would like to inform this House that we had a look at the payslips. When the Solicitor-General pinned that it was irregular for them to keep on remitting, the then, ED, Madam Jennifer Musisi stopped remitting for herself but continued to do so for the rest of the staff, which shows that it was a deliberate act. 

I entirely agree with my senior brother, Hon. Nandala-Mafabi on the amendments. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put a question that the motion be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House adopts the report of the committee on commissions, statutory authorities and state enterprises on that petition. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MR MUNYAGWA: Madam Speaker, I would like to take this honour in one minute to thank you very profoundly for the co-operation you have given me. I sincerely did not know you. By the time I came to Parliament, I had not interacted with you so I did not know that you were such a good human being. 

I would like to thank the Secretary General, Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving me this chance to serve as the committee chairperson. It was not a simple decision. Some people even went ahead to suggest that “Munyagwa is irreparably stupid to handle such a committee.”
Nonetheless, the chance was granted to me and you opened your doors to me. Madam Speaker, I am very grateful and I am happy to report that the term has ended. It is unfortunate that I lost and you lost a good campaigner so I cannot help you with anything. I am like a castrated bull. I will only pray for you and God will reward you. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Munyagwa. I thank the committee again for the work done. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have two things to talk about. I had wanted to raise the issue of the other motion but from the advice and what we have discussed with Hon. Jonathan, we want to make a comprehensive report. 

In that case, Madam Speaker, we request, that, on the Order Paper tomorrow, we are given time. It should be one of the priority businesses where the Speaker makes decision. We would like to be among the first – 

THE SPEAKER: Certainly, the matter is important and it will be on the Order Paper. It is going to solve what Hon. Bahati was talking about; by September, will we have finished doing the reports? If we adopt that, it means that it will help us move straight into action.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Since you have given me an opportunity, the minister is going to bring his amendments. Madam Speaker, don’t you think that minister is tired of over borrowing? Can’t we allow him to sit down today and we go to other business apart from borrowing? 

THE SPEAKER: There is also our good committee which has been working very hard. He is just amending. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AMEND THE REQUEST FOR GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO € 108,521,152.60 (EQUIVALENT TO $ 119,096,962.91) TO FINANCE MASINDI - BIISO, KABAALE – KIZIRANFUMBI AND HOHWA – NYAIRONGO – KYARUSESA – BUTOLE ROAD UPGRADING PROJECT (97KM)

6.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I pray that one day you come this side. 

Madam Speaker, it is a short motion. It is the motion for a resolution of Parliament to amend the request to borrow up to € 108.5 million equivalent to € 119,096,962.91 million to finance Masindi - Biiso, Kabaale – Kiziranfumbi and Hohwa – Nyairongo – Kyarusesa – Butole Road Upgrading Project: 

“WHEREAS on 19 February 2020, the Government of Uganda, in accordance with Article 159 laid before Parliament a draft loan agreement for € 108.5 million to be concluded between the Government of the Republic of Uganda and the Commercial Bank of China to finance the Masindi - Biiso, Kabaale – Kiziranfumbi and Hohwa – Nyairongo – Kyarusesa – Butole Road Upgrading Project; 

AND WHEREAS the request was on 11 March 2020 in accordance with Rule 175 (2) (b) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament referred to the Committee on National Economy to examine and make recommendations to the House; 

NOTING that circumstances have risen that require urgent need to amend the request in order to change the funder from Industrial and Commercial Bank of China to China Construction Bank on the same terms and conditions, as had been negotiated by Government with the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, as evidenced in the revised loan agreement between the Government of Uganda and China Construction Bank thereto; 

NOW THEREFORE this Parliament resolves to amend the request laid by Government on 19 February 2020 and referred to the Committee on National Economy on 11 March 2020 to borrow up to € 108.5 million equivalent to € 119,096,962.91 to Finance Masindi-Biiso, Kabaale–Kiziranfumbi and Hohwa–Nyairongo–Kyarusesa–Butole Road upgrading project (97KM) by changing the funder of the project from the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China to China Construction Bank and the amount reduced to € 99 million.”

THE SPEAKER: Is there any response from the committee or it is just changing? 

MR BAHATI: It is just changing.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that the loan request be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to item 9.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO SDR 72.3 MILLION (SEVENTY TWO MILLION THREE HUNDRED THOUSAND SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS) (EQUIV. TO USD 99.56 MILLION) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT (IFAD) AND USD 30 MILLION FROM THE OPEC FUND FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (OFID) TO FINANCE THE NATIONAL OIL SEEDS PROJECT (NOSP)

6.56
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to present a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to SDR 72.3 million from the International Fund for Agricultural Development and $ 30 million from the OPEC Fund for International Development to Finance the National Oil Seeds Project.

Madam Speaker, before I proceed, permit me to lay the following document on Table:

    i) Report of the Committee on National Economy; 
    ii) Minutes of the meetings;
    iii) A brief to Parliament on the proposal to borrow by the Ministry of Finance;
    iv) A letter from the Ministry of Finance to the Deputy Head of Public Service and Deputy Secretary to Cabinet;
    v) A letter from the Prime Minister to the Head of Public Service and Secretary to Cabinet on the loan committee clearance;
    vi) Letters from the Minister Finance to H.E, the President seeking approval;
    vii) National Planning Authority letter;
    viii) Minutes of the technical decisions and negotiations committee meeting;
    ix) The National Oil Seed Project Agreement; 
    x) The National Oil Seed Project Financing Agreement; 
    xi) The amortization schedule for the loan negotiations; 
    xii) The project completion report;
    xiii) The project design report;
    xiv) The draft report on local economy wide impact evaluation; 
    xv) The brief on the impact palm development activities in Kalangala;
    xvi) The impact study report for oil palm component Ministry of Agriculture; and
    xvii) Ministry of Local Government letter on the project; Madam Speaker, I will lay this after my presentation. 

A request was made to this House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and was referred to the Committee of National Economy for consideration. 

The committee considered the request to borrow the already said amount from the agencies, which I have already alluded to. Permit me to skip the methodology and the document review.

Agricultural sector remains the backbone of the Ugandan economy. Given the dominance of agriculture as a source of livelihood, agro-industrialisation offers a great opportunity for Uganda to embark on its long-term aspiration of transitioning into a modern industrial economy.

Madam Speaker, in the agriculture sector the oil seed industry ranks high on the Government agenda due to the poverty reduction potential.

Through the Vegetable Oil Development Project 2, progress has been made in domestic production of vegetable oil and its by-products. Government has been able to increase production of oil seeds to 80,000 metric tons annually with a target of 400,000 metric tons. This is attributed to increase in raw materials for oil seed production.

There is still need to increase production of oil seeds to cover the demand gap (362,000 metric tons) and reduce import of vegetable oil into the country to meet demand. The project is linked to Agro-Industrial Development Progarmme. It is also aligned with the Agricultural Sector Strategic Plan that focuses on rural economic transformation and stresses the importance of commercialization of smallholder agriculture.

It is also aligned to the Sustainable Development Goals 1, 2, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 13.

Madam Speaker, the performance of the on-going loans in each sector is given under table 6. There has been low absorption on four of the loans and this is due to delayed access to counterpart funding.

On the project objectives, the overall goal is as follows: The project goal of the proposed National Oil Seeds Project is inclusive rural transformation through sustainable development of the oilseeds sector. 

Project beneficiaries

The National Oil Seeds Project is a nationwide project with implementation supported from six area-based hubs - which are given under table 2 and it covers 54 districts. The selected hubs cover the poorest regions of the country.

The key national oil seed project intervention support to oil seed value development under component 1, will work directly with approximately 12,000 smallholder households in the project target areas.

The project target beneficiary groups is smallholder farmers mainly women, youth and men growing the seed.

Under table 3, we have the components as they are broken down. The project and financing is covered under table 5.

Loan Terms, Economic and Financial Returns, and Budgetary

Implications

IFAD loan terms are provided under table 6. The conditions for the IFAD loan are as follows:

    i) The project manager and the finance and administration manager within the project coordination unit shall have been appointed with the terms of reference and qualification acceptable to the fund.

    ii) Provision of a designed account or any other banking arrangements, to channel the proceeds of the financing shall have been established.

The OPEC Fund is provided under table 7. Terms of the OPEC Fund are the following: 

    i) Satisfactory evidence that the execution and delivery of the financing agreement has been duly authorised and ratified according to the constitutional requirements.

    ii)  The legal opinion of the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Attorney-General has been provided.

    iii) The evidence that the loan or other financing agreements between the loan administrator and the borrower for financing the project, has been declared effective or will be declared effective concurrently with its agreements. 

The level of concessionality

The two loans are both concessional, since their grant element exceeds the threshold of 35 per cent. 

Budgetary allocation

Madam Speaker, the Government counterpart funding of US$ 14.426 million, has got to be provided within the budget. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has given an irrevocable commitment of providing that money in time.  

Economic benefit and return of the project

The economic internal rate of return is 23.6 per cent and the benefit cost ratio is 1.72. This means that for every dollar invested, it will earn $ 1.72. 

Project implementation

The project will be implemented jointly by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Ministry of Local Government, through a project steering committee, which will be set up. 

The known and current debt situation

The project forms part of the projects included in the recent debt sustainability analysis, which reveals that debt is still sustainable. The current debt sustainable protex will be at a public debt to GDP ratio of 49.9 per cent by June of this year.

On compliance with parliamentary guidelines, the project gets a score of 70 per cent. 

Observations and conclusion 

Agricultural sector challenges

The committee noted that the challenges facing the agricultural sector being the backbone of the economy, some of them are beyond the scope of the project. 

Therefore, the committee recommends that the Government should strengthen the institutional base of the agricultural sector, remove distortions, facilitate trade, and enhance resilience through climate smart agriculture and low-cost irrigation systems to increase the level of productivity.

Fulfilment of loan conditions

The committee noted that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is slow in fulfilling loan conditions. This delays disbursements and, in some cases, where there is a commitment fee charged on unutilised amounts, the Government suffers.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government ensures speedy fulfilment of effective conditions of the financing agreements for these loans in order for the committed funds to be released by the IFAD and OPEC fund on time, to guarantee timely implementation of the project and to minimise on the commitment fee, on undrawn balances.

Farmer access to financial services

Recommendations:

    i) The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should ensure that the agricultural input credit products that will be introduced to all village savings and loans associations, during implementation of the project, are supported and the clusters are adequate.

    ii) In collaboration with the Microfinance Support Centre, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries ensures that tailored capacity building is provided efficiently and effectively to SACCOS in the project areas to develop and rollout agricultural financial products suitable for oil seed growers.

    iii) The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should ensure that provision of financial services to smallholder farmers on management of loans, as well as management of income from oil seed sales to ensure that beneficiary households do not default, and that income is invested well for the benefit of the household members.

Youth employment

The committee recommends that the National Oil Seed Project mainstreams youth opportunities and engagement, in the process of oil seed commercialisation. In addition, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should- 

    i. Harness youth farmer groups that have been formed to uptake practical demonstrations and fields;
    ii.  Engage educated youth as economic mobilisers in the project beneficiary communities; and 
    iii. Provide incentives for youth participation in the training as providers of auxiliary services. 

Gender implication

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should ensure that there is deliberate empowerment of women in the implementation of this project, through incentivising and building the capacity of women to increase their active participation in and leadership of farmer organisations and service provision. 

Local content

Recommendations:

    i) In line with the Government policy of promotion of local content, during implementation of the project component of support to market linkage infrastructure serving the Oil Seed Sector, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and Ministry of Local Government should prioritise local contractors and suppliers to build and enhance their capacity to offer the required services without compromising the PPDA Act. 

    ii) The Ministry of Local Government should ensure that the beneficiary local governments growing oil seeds are provided with adequate funds for the maintenance of oil roads production or road maintenance shall be the responsibility of the district local governments and sub county local governments, to avoid a repeat of what we have seen in Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme, Project (CAIIP). The roads are not being maintained and many of them are now worse than they were, before the project.

Low absorption of funds

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should ensure that all inefficiencies that are affecting the sufficient utilisation/absorption of funds for the project on enhancing of National Food Security, through the increased rice production project in the districts of Bugiri and Bugweri are mitigated to guarantee the timely realisation of the development objectives and expected social and economic benefits of the project.

Scope of the project

The committee was concerned that the cost of some of the seedlings of the recommended oil producing products are unaffordable to the ordinary farmer. Hass Avocado and Macadamia were cited that a seedling goes for Shs 15,000, which most of our farmers cannot afford. 

We recommend that these oil seeds should be provided by the Government to give an opportunity to all our farmers to benefit in this lucrative business. 

Recommendation

    i) The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries includes Macadamia, Hass Avocado and Shea nut butter, are among the oil seeds in the focus crops of the oil seeds project. Today, Hass Avocado is called “the green gold” and our neighbours in Burundi, Kenya and Rwanda are benefiting high. In fact, it is now the main export for Burundi, and they are reaping big dollars.

Government should consider delivering bilateral agreements and any other measures to promote export of the oil seeds to ensure sustainable access to the international market for these seeds.

The committee also noted the need to strengthen crop inspection. As we speak now, we have only 1,400 agricultural extension farmers out of the 5,000 needed.

The crops have to meet quality standards right from production. So, Ministry of Finance should provide sufficient funding for recruitment of the extension workers and their facilitation.

The committee further recommends that the crop inspection function should be strengthened to ensure that there are crop inspectors at the village level, rather than waiting and get the farmers’ crops to be rejected at the time of sale. All of you are familiar with what our maize has gone through with our neighbours.

On the life cycle costs of the project, the committee recommends that Government considers planning for the life cycle cost of the project to ensure proper maintenance of the same, once major capital investments are concluded.

The ministry of agriculture should work with Ministry of Works to ensure harmony of project locations, that there is no duplication of planning, and also to minimise on wastage because we do not want this project to spend on roads which are being worked on by Ministry of Works, or the other way round.

On the use of tax policy to discourage imports, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, together with Uganda Revenue Authority should evaluate the tax policy around oil seeds; with the view of promoting their expert and protection of the local industry in the short medium term. This is because our industries are just upcoming, and the few which are there are still in infancy and need protection.

Subject to recommendations I have already alluded to, the committee recommends approval of the proposal of Government to borrow Special Drawing Rights $72.3 million from International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and $30 million from the OPEC Fund for International Development, to finance the national seed project. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Syda Bbumba.

7.17
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson, Committee on National Economy, for the job so far done. 

We are making this loan request of the Special Drawing Rights of $72.3 million from IFAD, and another $30 million from OPEC, at a time when we are on the verge of passing a new budget of 2021/2022.

Has this loan request been integrated in the Budget Framework Paper or it is a separate and independent financing arrangement? They should have integrated it in our budget system, if they knew.

Added to that, Government has counterpart funding of the $14.6 million and this appears nowhere to have been arranged for. There are many things we do as if we conceive programmes on hoof, and yet we are supposed to be planning for this country. Unfortunately, the minister in charge of planning, who is very present in every sitting of this House, saw this but could not help out.

How will we get this counterpart funding that you have not indicated where to get it from, and this delays in the disbursement.

A very important point is, where this money is; part of it is for oil seed production, the other part is to be shared with the Local Government under CAIIP, and yet it was to construct roads, and this money is going to get lost along the way. Where is this money, Mr Minister?

We have distortions in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. That is why most activities are taken as projects; like National Agricultural Advisory Services, (NAADS) and Operation Wealth Creation (OWC). 

That is where this money gets lost and now we are here hoodwinked; you tag it under gender, women and youth. Which youth and women are you talking about?

We are being taken for a ride because they know that once they talk about gender, this Parliament will support. This is not the first intervention. There was the mango fruit intervention done by this Government, and as I report to you, mangoes from Teso to West Nile are going to waste. There is no mango juice product that has been produced in spite of the heavy injection of money. 

The chairperson of the committee has been in her area overseeing the tomato juice production. Can she confirm from the experience of the tomato project in Nakaseke, where it was given assurances about the tomato ketchup; it has remained on the drawing board.

It is high time that this Parliament stepped back and avoid being sugar-coated on these undertakings. By the chairperson mentioning that we would have reached 49.9 per cent debt sustainability ratio by June - this is already too much!

You are urging us to borrow on a matter that is not clearly defined and quantifiable. What is the land holding in this this country? What small farmers are you talking about? Have you done a study? Which clusters are you talking about, who has formed these clusters? And in which regions are they formed?

I think we are getting excited about this green gold, as the chairperson said. However, on the ground, we have had all matters of interventions. As I have mentioned, the tomatoes in Nakaseke - she is here.

We have the Soroti Fruit Factory; it is there for everybody to see, that of west Nile; is there. We have had all manner of attempts, but the moment we do not step back as a country and study, how are we going to help the youth? And these avocados, what are their maturity period? Where is the market?

We have had all experiments right from vanilla; silk worms were also high; moringa; name them, but they have all not delivered us.

I would urge members to first halt this loan request and we first study it; cluster the gender; how many women are going to be involved; where the market is -it is not enough to tell people to grow avocados; grow the seed fruit. You must stream line all these issues - processing and marketing of this loan was designed along those lines and you say that “you people start”, I would support it 100 per cent. However, they are leaving it the way it is and it is only a conduit to borrow money; but they do not have substantive and substantial areas they are going to intervene in the seed growing. I beg to oppose this, Madam Speaker.

7.24
MR EMMANUEL KALULE (NRM, Gomba County East, Gomba): Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. I have normally been cautious about loans. However, I think this is a good loan and I support this proposal to borrow.

I had opportunity to visit this island – the former Ssese Island – which has been transformed by the agricultural project of palm oil growing. The success is there for everybody to see. I also had opportunity to visit Buvuma Island, where the same project has kicked off and things are moving well.

Madam Speaker, we should support this particular loan. I know that my colleague, Hon. Ssekikubo, was complaining about Hass Avocado but some people are already growing it and I am one of them. 

In fact, a few days ago, I was in Musubi Company; they have a branch here. They are just going to open the Hass Avocado oil extraction factory. They are opening it at the end of this month, which means the market is there.

As the honourable chairperson of the committee has told us, Burundi is already reaping a lot of money out of Hass Avocado. So, Madam Speaker, I think this is a worthwhile loan. We should support it and I am sure it will be a turning point for this country as an agricultural country because the demand is there. 
I know that you cannot satisfy the demand for this Hass Avocado. You cannot satisfy China; they need a lot of it. However much we grow it, we shall never satisfy the population in China.

So, I request my colleagues to support this loan. Let us have a go at it because I understand the loan also includes growing groundnuts - because they are also oil seeds. We already have areas that are growing a lot of groundnuts. I think Busoga is one of those areas.

We have already got things to show. We do not need to go in for a study. People are already growing the groundnuts. The Hass Avocado is already being grown by the Musubi Farm. Madam Speaker, the sooner we pass this loan, the better. We need to support the agricultural sector. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Mwiru and then someone should help hon. Baba Diri to come this side.

7.27
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson and members of the committee for the report. I rise to support the loan request, premised on the fact that on all occasions, I have been disappointed by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

When you look at the tax collection in the country, 85 per cent of the tax is collected from the central business area. Hon. Bahati still holds out as a minister of finance and has been coming here with a lot of loans. I have not been seeing any interventions towards making the other parts of the country very productive.

In my opinion, this must be one of those loans which is intended – if well utilised – to expand the tax base, if there are fruits of actually this loan.

Madam Speaker, we were in this House and there was a motion moved by Hon. Veronica Bichetero from Kaberamaido to the effect that Government should establish a seed bank. We have not actually been briefed on how far Government has moved.

You will agree with me that we have appropriated a lot of money under NAADS. Other than most of the colleagues - including the Frontbench holding out as suppliers of seeds under NAADS - most of the seeds, which they have even been selling to Uganda Coffee Development Organisation and the NAADS Secretariat, were not even germinating. I have proved that in very many areas. That shows you that actually, there has been a very big problem.

As we move towards passing this loan under the oil seeds, I implore Government to ensure that in that regard, there is something done in that direction.

As I conclude, you will agree with me that when we talk about the GDP – which Hon. Bahati has been talking about – almost 85 per cent of the GDP is held by almost 10 per cent of the population. Of the 10 per cent, 69 per cent are foreigners.

So, we have been boasting about a foreign economy, to the extent that if they were to withdraw, the economy would collapse. Today, if we have a loan which is going to the agricultural sector, I would implore the implementers that they actually give local content priority. 

Although we passed the Local Content Bill - and I am meant to understand that it has not been assented to by the President. However, that is the only way we would ensure that our local people are involved in this sector.

The final appeal is that whereas we have been supporting this sector, we have been looking at most of the oil on market. Most of it has not been manufactured here; it has been imported from Malaysia, repackaged and put on the shelves of supermarkets. That is a very big challenge.

So, we need a real analysis on how the loans and appropriation we have been passing in that sector have impacted on the sector. Notwithstanding that when we are even creating tax exemptions, we even exempted on output VAT for BIDCO - I think the technical people here will tell us – so that whenever the company builds capacity-

If you look at what we have gained from what they have been doing, there is some gain. However, on the other hand, they have also exploited the loophole by importing cooking oil from Malaysia and other areas, repackaging it here and then putting it in supermarkets, as part of the product they are actually producing. That should be investigated by the sector ministry. 
I want to conclude by supporting the loan. 

7.32
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the loan for seed growing. 

Seeds are very important for our agricultural sector. Currently, buying seeds is really a nightmare; they are very expensive. The seedlings and the seeds themselves are very expensive. If we get this loan, that means we shall be buying our seeds in the vicinity and they will be accessible and cheaper because they will be near and the method of producing may be cheaper.

Madam Speaker, I support the idea of youth and women. I think the men are getting with us. We talk about women and youth for everything. Growing things are all for men and women. I think we should include groups of men.

We are getting the loan. How are you going to identify these groups? How are they going to access this money? At times, it becomes very difficult. You hear that the money is there but the process of accessing it becomes very expensive and difficult to get. I hope you will devise a method, where we can access this money easily and the groups can grow the seeds for us to get.

On the issue of counterpart funding, quite often, Government says, “The money is there”, but at the end of the day, the money does not come and we delay the project because of money.

I would like the finance minister to tell us what the source of the money is and when we are getting it so that we have these seeds. 

Madam Speaker, I support the loan. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I am not trying to influence you. However, because I am constantly engaged in trying to solve the poverty issues in the Busoga area, when I was invited to Musubi Farm, I came back and reported to this House that there is a new crop which I think we should invest in to generate incomes. It is because an acre of avocado, if well looked after, can raise as much as Shs 28 million. So, I came and even sent the Committee on Agriculture to visit Musubi Farm and find out what is going on. 

In addition, I have, myself, planted eight acres of avocado. I also have eight acres of macadamia. So, I am not influencing you, but I think we should try to improve the incomes of our people through that. 

7.34
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am actually dragging my feet to say yes to this loan. While the project may be very good, have we exhausted our support from within? Sometimes, you go for borrowing after doing feasibility studies, research and everything. 

We have chia seeds; they are very small and black in colour. They say it is medicinal. Our people of the north grew a lot of it last year. The advocacy was that it was going to be Shs 6,000 per kilogramme. Many people could not send their children to school because there was no market for chia seeds.

So, we are rotting with chia seeds in our homes because the market failed. Instead, some other people asked to buy the chia seeds to be bought at Shs 1,000 per kilogramme, which was really exploiting the farmers. 

The committee should do their work very well to find out more about the growing of avocado. I think a lot of it is in Arua. Have they tried to establish something that we need to expand on? Usually, a loan should be for expansion.

If we take this loan, it will be with a warning that it does not go to waste. Let it empower our people. When we talk about Shea nut, it is very useful. However, when it comes to growing, I do not know how many years it takes to grow Shea nut because its fruits, seeds and oil are very good. So, we reap a lot from it.

This is what I can say. Next time, you need to convince us better say, “We have done this. The factory is here and there is this example. So, we now need to expand and roll out to the country, and we need more funding for it.” If you are not showing us any avocado factory which is manufacturing either food or juice, -(Interjections)– We will take the loan but with a bit of reservation. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to invite you to go to Musubi Farm in Mayuge District, Bukamooli Sub-county. You will see this mass farm of avocado and plants for the factory.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that a question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House approves the loan as requested.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF PROPERTY BELONGING TO THE LATE FORMER PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA, HIS EXCELLENCY FIELD MARSHAL IDI AMIN DADA AT PLOT 10, PRINCE CHARLES DRIVE KOLOLO AND BUILDINGS IN KAWEMPE

7.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a very brief report. So, I beg the indulgence of members. I will just take a few minutes. 

I am reporting on the properties belonging to former President, His Excellency Idi Amin Dada as raised in this House. The report, brief as it is, has been uploaded on our iPads. Let me go through it very quickly.

Parliament directed the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to clarify on the status of property belong to the late former President of Uganda, His Excellency Field Marshal Idi Amin Dada, notably Plot 10, Prince Charles Drive Kololo and buildings in Kawempe. 

As a ministry, we have interrogated the Land Information System, and I would like to report as follows:

    1. On Plot 10, Prince Charles Drive, this plot was titled under LRV 2 59 Folio 14 issued on 26 September 1950 in the names of one Kalipada Dasfopta. I think he was an Indian. He later on surrendered this plot to the City Council of Kampala on 15 October 1964. We found no evidence of reallocation on our system. Currently, this plot is occupied by the Embassy of Korea. So, we did not find on our system that Field Marshal Idi Amin, at any one point, owned that plot. I have attached a copy of the title and also the instrument surrendering this piece of land from Kalipada to the City Council of Kampala. 

    2. We also found in our system Plot Nos. 29 and 31 in Mbuya were registered under LRV 741 Folio 1 and registered in the names of Idi Amin Dada in a two year lease, but the lease expired in February 1971. Later, plot 29 was reallocated to one Gaster Lule under LRV 2194 Folio 2 for five years which expired in 1998, and it is now registered under LRV 4315 Folio 15 in the names of John Cossy Odomel and eight others since 2012.

Plot 31 again in Mbuya, which was earlier on in the name of Field Marshal Idi Amin was also reallocated to Wilber Kaberuka under LRV 1900 Folio 2 for a five year lease with effect from 01 July 1990, but it was later transferred to one Lucio Dimascio in 1994. Currently, it is registered under LRV 3958 Folio 3 in the names of the same Luscio Dimascio and others for a 44 year lease with the effect from 01 July 2008.

We could not retrieve any details of any other properties in Kampala so what we advise is, if we are given plot numbers in Kawempe then we can see if they are in the system. 

However, when you search for Idi Amin Dada, it does not bring any properties in Kawempe. He could have owned them but they were not registered under his names; they could be under other companies’ names. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, in our system, we found an unnumbered property located near Arua Aerodrome registered in the names of Idi Amin under LRV 744 Folio 3 in Arua for a 49 year lease with effect from 1 June 1967. This means the lease must have expired in 2016 and we are not sure whether the family is pursuing extension of this lease. The advice we give is that the family could apply for extension of this lease so that it is extended to them. 

Madam Speaker, this is the information we could get from our system and I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity. 

Allow me to lay on the Table this report and the accompanying land titles and also the instruments surrendering the land in Kololo from Kalipada Dasfopta to the City Council of Kampala. I beg to report. 

7.45
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. However, I am seeking clarification from him. It is now trite law in the Supreme Court case of National Housing Corporation v. Kampala City Council that once someone is on occupation and he is a leasee, upon expiry of that lease, one has a right to be given the first opportunity to renew the lease. 

I am seeking guidance from you to know whether the family of the late Idi Amin Dada was given an opportunity to extend the lease because their address was known. It was even disclosed in the lease document that you had on record. I thank you.

7.46
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Dr Chris Baryomunsi for this statement. 

We are talking about the properties of none other than the former President of this country; Idi Amin. You can fault Idi Amin for your own reasons but the fact remains that he was once a President of this country for eight years. 

What I read from the minister’s statement is a statement of dispossession and disinheriting. What has the Government done to protect the inheritance of this one time President of this country - the Fountain of Honour then? He led this country in an economic war.

I do not intend to come and try to rehabilitate the former President but you cannot run away from his achievements for this country. At least, from what the minister stated, Amin was not a thief. He has been exonerated. Even in his home district, Arua, look at Jinja and Masaka, he did not touch any property of the people of Uganda in spite his overwhelming powers. He could have accumulated all this, had he so wanted, like we see nowadays in the current crop of leaders. 

How was his prime property at Plot 10 Prince Charles Drive given to the Korean Embassy? Was the family compensated? Tell us. Amin is gone but you owe a duty to his name so that yours can also be treated in the same manner. Please watch out! You are not going to live forever. Would you also want to follow the same trend? 

Look at his plots in Mbuya. He was a former President but the family is languishing in poverty. They do not have Mercedes Benzes to drive but all you do is to deprive them of their property, which is very unfair, Madam Speaker. 

Can the minister tell us when the restoration is going to take place; to restore these properties to the family? Please tell us, you cannot just keep quiet. At least, I know that your boss, hon. Amongi, has fought for the return of the former President, Milton Obote’s property.

Amin has nobody to stand by him and you are now giving us a statement that you want us to welcome. The importance of this statement is to urge you to restore his property. He is gone but he was a Fountain of Honour in this country. Probably, if it was not for him, we would not be here seated in this House. He could have made his own mistakes but you cannot keep grudges forever and ever. 

Once we have a Government in place, it has the duty to protect the first families. We have passed good laws here to protect the former leaders of this country so it is not fair to just tell us that their properties just vanished and were taken over by certain people. 

I see a one Kaberuka, amongst others – Please, you did not come to share the properties of former leaders. Be dignified and do something good so that Uganda has a history to cherish and see that once leaders are here, they remain our leaders forever. 

7.51 
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, assuming this matter concerned one of us here, I do not know what the former President would do or say. 

Just like my senior brother, Hon. Theodore, said, my opinion is that if it is difficult to restore the properties to the family, can we compensate them because they are like any other person? Remember, we have compensated very many people in this country. In fact, it is even shocking that this House set up a team to investigate the land issue and they are looking for information to report to us about the money, which was released for compensation. 

This was a former President of Uganda and it does not matter whether he was good or bad. I am sure if we looked at our history properly, in as far as building this House here, he had a hand. 

He also did not have an element of corruption in whatever he did, despite the challenges he went through. My appeal to the Government is for us to compensate the family of the former President because he led this country with zeal, although he had his challenges. When is the Government going to compensate the family? 

The Government should actually give them back their property. If the Government is unable to do that, please, go ahead and compensate this family because the children are still yawning. Although they are getting a few benefits, we should not use that as an excuse. They should get the property that their father once owned.

THE SPEAKER: Minister just for the record, I think it is true that the President of Uganda encouraged these families to come back because they are Ugandans, even if their father died in Saudi Arabia. This matter arose because one of us found Mrs Amin in very dire state; sickly without proper treatment and she was complaining about not having a home.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable members for the comments they have raised. Government does not intend to dispossess anybody leave a lone even past leaders of their properties.

What I was presenting is what we have on record. The Hon. Ssekikubo to the best of my knowledge, has studied law and for us as people who deal in land, we say evidence of ownership of property especially land is possession of a title. You cannot say I used to live here. If you have no title, living there is no proof that you own.

Therefore, the challenge we have like in the case of Plot 10 Price Charles Drive - yes, the family of Idi Amin could have lived there but we do not have any document or instrument to show that he owned it.

Like I said, what we find on record is that this plot was in the names of Kalipada Das Gupta and he had acquired it on 26 September 1950 and then on 15 October 1964, he surrendered it to the City Council of Kampala. Even the title which I have laid on Table, has the names of City Council of Kampala.

Therefore, we cannot trace the family of Idi Amini there. Even the land in Mbuya, which I have provided, shows that Idi Amin had a lease of two years, which expired, and he never attempted to have it renewed.

The other piece of land, which I informed you about in Arua, is that the 49-year lease could have expired in 2016 but we do not have evidence on record that anybody has applied for extension; so the family can apply.

However, definitely, in terms of compensating the family, that can be politically handled but what I was providing you is what we have on record in terms of what he owned and the kind of titles.

Lastly, on what Hon. Mwiru presented, it is correct that once you have a lease and it expires, the lessee is the first priority if you are to renew but you have to apply. It is not Government which will approach you that “come and renew”. It is you to express interest and when Government makes decision, the first priority goes to the persons.

The land in Arua which is near the airdrome where the 49-year lease should have expired in 2016 and we have no evidence that anybody applied to renew it. The family could apply for extension and Government will willingly do that –(Interruption)

MS BETTY AOL: Madam Speaker, considering that Amin was a President and right now, he doesn’t have any property in Kampala yet he should have and also considering the fact that the President encouraged the family to come back home, is it too difficult to try, politically now, to get the one where he had a lease of two years? Can’t that be handled together with one of Arua, so that the family has two pieces of land; one in Kampala and another in Arua? If it is not difficult, can you do something? That is my plea, Madam Speaker.

They also committed that the family comes back home, so we should also see how to adjust and accommodate them even in Kampala. Thank you.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the minister that we went as a committee on Physical Infrastructure to the land in Arua. It is at the tail end if the runway of the aerodrome and currently, it is not even developed. Apparently, soldiers who guard the aerodrome stay there.

Maybe, what Government can do is actually to help compensate the family for that land in Arua like we have done for the owners of the land in Entebbe, because to ask them to renew the lease might not be possible. I do not even think it would be possible for them to occupy that land because it is the army occupying it.  The Government can help the family acquire land and resettle them since he was a former head of state.

However, I want to agree with the minister that we need to respect our law. It would not be fair in circumstances the minister has presented to dispossess other Ugandans from the property just because a former head of state once lived there. 

I think we also need to set this very clear and set a precedent that will not be abused because next time, they can come to your property and say the first lady or first family once lived here even if they were renting in the neighborhood and grab your land. Therefore, we must also be very careful when we are making certain proposals here.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, just for the minister, in the same spirit about the land of Arua; we were there and they showed us that that is the former President’s land. They gave us the history how the Arau airstrip came up. Therefore, any attempt by Government to just take that land in the face of those people, they will know that Government has grabbed the former President’s land.

As hon. Othieno has said Government, for record, should show the family and the people of Arua that they recognise but because of that, you can compensate something small because they cannot repossess it. We saw soldiers there. But it is a long hill, it is a very large piece of land.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Arua land if the army is occupying it, definitely the army does not own that land. But if Government needs to use it as you are saying they are using it, we could engage members of the family and either compulsorily acquire it or do a willing buyer willing seller and we negotiate with the family. First of all, renew their lease but also maybe acquire it as Government and not just taking it forcefully. I think we will get in touch with the family and work it out.

I also want to assure members that the Government has no ill- will and ill-intentions against the family of Idi Amin because we acknowledge that Idi Amin was the President of this country and you cannot wish it away. 

Therefore, any privileges which go to former leaders even his family is entitled to.

Like I said, earlier on, what we base on is evidence of possession of land. Unfortunately, it appears and I think his family would settle on pieces of land and may be they would not formally acquire these pieces by way of getting titles. Even in Mbuya, where the lease was only two years, when it expired in 1971, no attempt was made to renew the lease.

Politically, like we have said, we could engage the family, and see how to support the family to acquire property or land, and this may not be resolved here but Government is willing to go into that kind discussion with the family so that the family gets supported. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I really want to thank you. We have done quite a bit of work today. I want to thank the Clerk and your team. House is adjourned to tomorrow, at 10 o’clock.

(The House rose at 8.04 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 7 May 2021 at 10.00 a.m.) 

