Tuesday, 2 May 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliamentary Building, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INTERIM ELECTORAL COMMISSION BILL, 1994

(Debate Continued.)

MR TIVU (Youth Representative, Northern Region):  Mr Chairman, thank you very much for allowing me to air my views on this very important Bill for the genuine reasons given by the Minister and also the Minister without Portfolio, who happens to be the CA Chairman.  I agree with them for the following reasons; and the fact, I believe that, democracy is very important and it is the NRM’s point number one.  And, therefore, it is an obligation for the government to implement its point number one in a way of organising frequent and fair elections, and for that reason, I support the Bill.  

I also feel that, this Bill is very important, because I believe there is relationship between democratic ideals and the principles, and economic growth.  When we have democracy practised in a country, you will find that there is going to be a good relationship between democracy and economic growth for the following reasons.  

First of all, when people elect their leadership, and when they have their representatives, and when they elect their government, they will agree to the economic and physically policies of the government.  And therefore, when they agree to the policies of the government, we shall be able to realise the required revenue we need for our economic growth.  It is for this reason that, I support the Bill.  

It is also important for the government to embrace its democratic ideals, there is a big relationship between democracy and economic growth.  Because when there is democracy and when there is election, there will be stability in the country.  And when there is stability in the country, people will be able to sell and thus we shall have economic growth.  That is why, because of the frequent RC elections we have been having since 1986, there have been peace and economic growth in the country for which I support the Bill. (Applause)  

So, in view of this, I call upon the Members to support the Bill and to analyse the Bill very critical to see to it that, the Bill must assist us.  It must assist us from today and onwards to get a kind of representative in Uganda, which must not take us back into before 1986.  Why do I say this?  

I have some experiences; when I was still young, I have been observing how elections were conducted.  And some of these things start because - they start immediately when we have this kind of Bill.  When we have the Interim Electoral Commission Bill like this, this is where the first rigging starts.  So, unless we are very careful and critical in analysing how this Bill is like; we are going to bring for us our problems  

I want to give you some examples.  In the 1960s and 80s, it was deliberately made in the Electoral Commission Bill - the Commission had to divide Aringa which is a county to two constituencies, so that one part goes to another county.  The policy there was to differentiate an opponent - somebody whom the government of the day did not want to succeed.  That kind of thing brought a problem in that constituency until when elections were held in NRM.  So, I have learnt that, we must be very critical and we must avoid this kind of mistake.

I also want to say for this Bill to succeed, we must embrace upon the Government to make sure that there must be political instability in every part of the country.  Because in any part of the country, where there is war, that is the first rigging.  Why do I say this?  In 1980, when we were having the elections, what happened?  We had the ex-service men who had come from Amin’s Government.  They were searching somewhere, because the people of West Nile were pre-dominantly UPC and DP, these people were disturbed so that a war was created.  And then, at the end of it, everybody was declared unopposed UPC.  So, what was the consequence?  The consequence was war in West Nile for five years.  People lost lives, people lost property.  

So, I am embracing upon Government, if we are to have fair elections, if we are to have peace; every part of the country must be peaceful on the day of the election for this kind of thing to work democratically.  

I want to say something briefly on some of the parts of the Bill where the Article No.9; which I think is talking about the functions of the Commission - to demarcate constituencies for elections and so on.  I would have loved indeed I will propose that, it will be better for us to have our election areas determined; it must also be related with the population census of our country.  If you go to Akabway’s place right now, there is nothing to show between the population census of 1990 and what was happening - 1991, I mean.  So, I am wondering what kind of logic was used.  It makes me suspicious that, in certain places, things are not worked according to scientific facts.  Our scientific population fact is the population census and, therefore, when we are having our electoral areas determined, we should make sure that we take some of these scientific facts into principle.  

Another thing which I want to warn government against is - you know we have ideology of being seconded before time, so that you are taken by surprise when the intention has been achieved after a long time.  So that the ignorant cannot realise. if I go to constitutions again, in the Constitution being written right now, I believe we are going to have constituencies of districts because we have women and so on.  

Now, I pray to our colleagues in the CA to make sure that this time when they are determining districts; I am told it is being referred to Parliament.  But districts are going to be constituency areas.  So, from now, any district that is going to be instability, the objective must be clear and scientific.  I will not like and tolerate a district instability all of a sudden because, we are going to have elections so that you have no representatives in some other places.  This is a kind of manipulation in Uganda, which is taking us backward; and which we cannot tolerate.  

Let me comment very briefly on the unfortunate evident which may disrupt the Minister’s efforts in the Bill and also government effort in development.  In relation to the strength and attitude, with hope of trained manpower, which we train and we disband in order to fulfill our own objective.  

Why do I say this?  In 1979; and before that, we had 20 personnel in the Uganda army.  They were trained in Libya, in Russia, in Israel.  When the new government came, these people were disbanded; professional soldiers and so on.  They were just abandoned there.  It so happened again when we had the 1986 regulation; people were trained and they got experiences in the war - they were disbanded.  Now, what has been the consequence?  The consequence has been that, these people feel that, they are trained personnel, trained in the hands of government funds, they are qualified personnel, but they have been denied to exercise their professional abilities.  And that is why we have these thuggeries and that is why we have this kind of persistent roads.  We had that experience in West Nile for 10 years until these people got tired and when they were absorbed by the NRM, the knock has it now.  

I am suggesting to governments in future; please do not recruit from one place; it is very dangerous.  Secondly, do not abandon trained military men anyhow, they can become dangerous. (Applause)  

We shall continue to have that problem in the North unless government develops a positive attitude to see those trained military personnel back in government service.  If you say that, these are rebels and so on, I am telling you, those are human beings trained, and they will want by nature to exist; to be professionals.  Mr Chairman, I thank you.

MR MARWAS (Dodoth County, Kotido):  Thank you, Mr Chairman, for allowing me to add my voice to those hon. Members who have already contributed to the Bill.  I am a Member of the Committee which dealt with this Bill, therefore, I would say, I support the Bill. (Applause)  

There are only two issues I want to raise which unfortunately do not fall under jurisdiction of the present Minister for tabling the Bill.  Unfortunately, I do not see any Minister from the Ministry of Local Government around.  However, the Deputy Minister is around, I think he can take into consideration what I am going to say because, what I am saying now took place when he was still handling the affairs of that Ministry.  

I am specific on Clause 13.  On this Clause 13, there are conditions that the Commission should take into consideration while demarcating new constituencies.  And the first one that is 13(2)(a) to ensure that, each county has at least one Member of the Legislature, except that no constituency shall fall between more than one county.  I think this is the first one, from the old Electoral System - sorry of 1980s where many counties were agreeing together to make a constituency, I am not on this.  Then we come to 3.  When we come to 3(b), - 13(3)(b), where a county has a population of 140,000. This is a way of combination from the law that created the Constituent Assembly.  But I am wondering, because as you see it, we have had certain districts, some created out of some counties or - I stand to be corrected on this.  But some of the districts which were created recently, some of them were almost sub counties.  

As we speak now, we are creating a new Parliament out of the seven counties.  I am asking, how many counties are already out of those counties that became districts?  Because as far as I am concerned, it is only women representatives to the NRC, that came from the new districts.  But then the population becomes because we do not have any Members from those new districts except the old ones.  

So, I am asking, now if there is something like the - from my hon. Friend from Kisoro; he is going to create out of that county, five counties.  The question is, most of these counties have been created in certain parts of the country.  For me I do not understand why there was an acute need of districts from certain areas of this country, but not from another area of this country.  Of course, people are saying -(Interruption)

MR KAVUMA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. First of all, I would like to correct that information which is being created in this House.  For the creation of districts necessarily increases the number of the people who are going to come to the Parliament - it does not.  Because the basic constituency is the - except for the women.  Because if you take for example, a district like Kisoro, there is only one constituency and only one county.  And because the county was the basic electoral area, there are now 3 members, because there are a number of - in that particular county; there are more than 40,000 people.

MR MARWAS:  Mr Chairman, I wish to inform the Minister that as we have seen Kisoro has - from one county where hon. Mateke comes from, we already have 3 counties now.  We have already recommended the constituencies.  I am saying it because after creating -(Interruption)

MR MATEKE:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform my colleague that, Kisoro district, we are going to the county, it is heavily populated.  We now have more than 200,000 people.  And we have got difficult rain.  That is why I think we created three CA constituencies, and it is being proposed that Kisoro district should have 3 counties.

MR MARWAS:  Mr Chairman, my argument has been finished. I think hon. Members, that is what it means.  If you see (c), they say in the City of Kampala, there is only new 5 constituencies.  But I am seeing Kampala with a population of over 800,000 people.  We should also leave Kampala if a district is to have as many constituencies according to the population. (Applause)  The same happens to Jinja.  

On 13(2)(b), and you compare to 13 (2)(b) says, should take into account the means of communication, geographical futures, then the population and areas and the boundaries of districts.  I refer you to the county I represent.  I represent the county of Dodoth, and it had a population of 100,000 people in the last Census, and the area is over 5,000 square kilometres.  Where sometimes I have to walk a distance of 50 miles before I get the said thousand people.  It borders the Kenya and the Sudan border; right up to the districts of Kapchorwa - I mean, the districts of Moroto.  You can imagine, running an area of 5,000 square kilometres with people of 100,000.  By then there is due consideration although we should take account in 13(2)(b); but then when it comes to 13(3)(b); it is eroded; I mean the change of which it is the present renewal of the people.  

So, here I can see my hon. friend the Minister of State for Lands, with his 3,000 people.  I saw he had a lot of problems But then when it comes to these others, there is no alternation given.  So, I think we should merge 13(2)(b) and 13(3)(c).  

Mr Chairman, I am asking the last question. This House was created for I do not know how many members of Parliament - some say 90. I think the hon. Obwangor who is more senior here than other people could have told us.  But I am saying, from this law, the way it is, we are going to create a lot of constituencies more than the people sitting in the next House across the road, in the CA.  I do not know that it is realistic, that we are going to have a House of 300,000 people; we are talking of resources being meagre, we are talking of this.  But I think the drafting needs to take into account.  After all, yet you are having a problem of handling this House of 250,000 people.  Now, if you make it to 300,000 people tomorrow, I think we are going to have a problem.  Mr Chairman, I support this Bill.  Thank you.

DR KASULE KYAMBADDE (Youth Representative, Central Region):  Thank you, Mr Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to the Bill.  Mr Chairman, allow me through you to thank the Minister for Constitutional Affairs for having ably introduced the Bill.  This Bill is timely since the Constitutional making process is almost coming to an end.  And it is clear that, the NRM Government is committed to the democratisation process. (Applause)  

For the election to be carried out successfully, I think that civic education should be considered very seriously.  I say this because during the CA elections, some people were confused.  Some thought that having elections meant removing the current President then.  I think that was because we had not had enough civic education.  This will help us not to loose the votes or the candidates and not to be manipulated.  Because during those elections especially the illiterate, when they sought guidance from the polling assistants, they would be misled as to whom to give the votes.  So, I think this one will help us very much to have fair elections.

About Section 9, sub-section 5(d); about the transfer of the electorate from one register to another.  I think for the people to be transferred should be informed in advance before the polling day about their transfer.  This would also make it easier.  I also saw this in the CA elections, where people were moving from one polling station to another looking for their names.  

Coming to section 13, about demarcating constituencies, I would like to request the Minister to clarify to me how the women and other interest groups like the youth and workers will be elected.  Because there is no provision about the demarcation of their constituencies.  So, I would have hoped that this one would have been included in Section 13 sub-section 2.  I do not know whether I will still use the Youth Statute 1993; I would seek some clarification while trying to wind up.  

Also in this Bill, I have not seen any section referring to Presidential Elections.  I would also request the Minister to clarify to me, how that one also will be done.  

Finally, the last one is only a dramatic error, section 16, sub-section 2, second last words, between candidate and question.  I think it is candidate in question.  With those few observations, Mr Chairman, I thank you.

MRS BAHEMUKA (Women Representative, Hoima):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Allow me to make some comments on Clause 9, Section (d).  It talks about the functions of the Commission.  The Commission will receive and determine complaints for example, about the registration of voters.  Another Clause allows people to move from one place to another.  Today, it is very difficult to know who is who more especially when people claim having been away for may be 30 years or more; so others will be coming claiming to be grand children of somebody in that area.  Whoever is around will find it difficult to ascertain that what he is saying is true and therefore he should register in that area.  When one Clause allows to register and vote by we have very many Ugandans who are living abroad; they have different reasons for being away from Uganda.  Now, when they decide to register from a given area, it will be difficult for these people to make it a right choice and therefore, we shall end up getting a bad governance.  

Now, these people have a chance to be away from Uganda, and therefore, whoever is not in position to live outside Uganda will be a victim of such bad governance.  We have had such cases.  And the person at the grassroots normally does not have a means to move out of Uganda and, therefore, they will be the most people affected in this case.  

Therefore, I would suggest, before somebody is allowed to move to a different area, he must give his document indicating the very origin of that person, the reasons why he left that place and what work he has been doing elsewhere; otherwise, we shall end up getting some people ferried from some other areas, coming to vote for some candidates. Therefore, ending up with a wrong candidate in a given area.  

Another work of the Commission is to receive complaints about these registers.  Experiences from last elections that registers were not displayed for a long period.  Therefore, those who would have complained did not get a chance to look at these registers.  Even if they did, then others were given a chance to vote from a different area, others did not have their names appearing in any register.  So, I am asking the Minister concerned to make sure that registers are displayed for long period and they are accessible to all these people.  

Now, another point I am going to talk about is that the Commission receives complaints about campaigns.  We have had experience that these candidates normally do not have healthy campaigns.  They do not stick to the regulations laid out.  Now, when they say, do not talk about your neighbour, but talk about yourself, they end up talking about each other.  And, therefore, I would suggest that whereas the public is going to receive civic education, even the candidates themselves get this civic education and do the right things expected of these people.  Yes, they will need it.  This civic education was not given enough period; some areas did not get enough lessons.  The rate of perception differs from individual to individual.  I would suggest that, civic education is given a period of not less than three months. And this civic education should be done in the languages people understand.  Whoever applies to become a civic educator should be conversant with a local language of the people in the given area.  Last time, we had people who could not speak the local language also teaching these local people in the villages.  Therefore, they ended up understanding very little, and in the end, we missed some votes, because they were wrongly done.  

Next, I am talking about writing names of people who are not yet 18 years.  Clause 15 sub-section 1 and 2, allow people who are 18 years and above to be registered.  Therefore, these two subsections contradict Clause 9, sub-section (b).  Which says, somebody can be registered below the age of 18, provided the date for voting, somebody will be 18 years.  This is going to create a problem more especially in areas where we have youths who have plenty of muscles around them, they can easily claim to be 17 and 8 months; calculating that, they will be 18 years, at about that period of voting.  

School children are going to create a problem and, therefore, cause rigging of elections.  I would suggest that we register only those people who are 18 years and above, let the others wait until their time comes, when they mature fully. (Applause)  

I would also like to comment on the nature of elections.  People who are supervisors, we also need some civic education truthful to their work, so that there is no rigging.  Now, this can be done only if civic education is properly done to the grassroots person.  Therefore, those people who claimed not to know how to read and write caused a problem in some cases.  It was not their fault and we cannot blame others but those who were at the polling stations.  

I will suggest, where there is adult literacy campaign going on in some areas, we have everybody to learn how to read and write a few letters so that, one day of the elections, each person can write or can make a tick or a cross or whatever symbol is given rather than expecting somebody to help another person.  Because nobody can claim to be 100 percent good.  Somebody can be tempted to make a wrong choice for somebody.  Mr Chairman, I thank you.  

MR KABUGO (Nakaseke county, Luwero):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the Bill, but with some critical and some observations which I should like the Minister to take note of, so that he corrects them if time permits.  I start with the title.  The title says that, this is an Interim Electoral Commission.  I would not refuse if we had discussed and debated on this Bill prior to end of last year, because it is dated October 1994.  But as we debate the Bill now, we have already made some concrete decisions and agreement with the CA, which I do not think that, they will create any problem if some of these are adopted and put into this Bill, so that they are implemented.  

We have already agreed on the fact that the President will be directly elected and this Bill has nowhere - this is mentioned off.  In this case, it follows that, after passing this Bill, we shall go back again and get the Minister to call this House to debate on the procedure and method of electing the President.  Whereas the intention of the Bill is to prepare the voters register, demarcate the constituencies as well as paving a way of how the head of State of this country will be elected.  In this case, I ask through you, Mr Chairman, the hon. Minister to look into this very seriously so that, the title is also changed.  

Coming to Clause 4, I gather from sub-section 1, that Members of the Commission will be appointed by the President on the advice of the Cabinet.  This must not be the case; in this case, the President and the Cabinet all are interested party in the forthcoming general election.  How could these really appoint names that will be impartial?  In this case, I suggest that we adopt the CA method, whereby the President gives power to this august Body, since the Members are going to about 5, let us get 7 names, pick the Chairman who will be the Commissioner, and the other four members so that we get the impartial representation on this Commission.  

I say this because CA, when we were meant to elect our Chairman and Deputy Chairman, the exercise went through very smoothly and we never had any complaint about these two officers.  So, in this case, if we want to get an impartial Commissioner and his Colleague, we should have these people appointed by ourselves here, selected in this very House.  Let the President give us the names and we choose who should be the Commissioner and who the other four members.  

Since the Bill that we are deliberating on is the one which is going to pave the way in general election, I would see that, it will be a waste of money and time, if these people are going to work on temporary basis; I mean pending the promulgation of the new Constitution and then appoint a new Commission which will be permanent and probably pensionable.  But if that is not the case, I take these people who are going to be appointed to work on this - up-dating voters register, the constituencies and demarcate - I mean appoint civic and polling agents, we need to have them nominated by a Permanent Commission right now. 

The thing which is mentioned in sub-section 2; because it says, the Commission shall be in existence until other provision is made by the Constitution and Members of any new Electoral Commission replacing it under the Constitution have been appointed.  Definitely, this will be a duplication of work.  These people who serve as Commissioners are the very people who are going to pave a way for date when - date for the general elections and Presidential elections are set.  In this case, I would appeal that the Minister will look into this very closely and seriously and change the title and the provisions of this sub-section 2; in the Article No.4.  

Article 13, Clause 2(a), makes a mention of counties.  And, from what we have agreed upon as truly decentralised administration, it seems the counties are non existent.  They are just left there as administrative units.  So, in this case, I do not know how the election and Members who are going to represent these counties will have a sound and very strong voice.  Whereas down at the district level, we have sub-counties and district councillors who are well catered for in the new local government chapter.  

I suggest that the Minister also reviews this and sees that he comes out with something that is going to work out very well clashing with a provision of chapter 13 that deals with Local Government under the new Constitution.  With these few observations, Mr Chairman, I support the Bill.

MR KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I will not quarrel with this Bill, but I will give a few questions which I think require explanation if this Bill has to work.  The first one has been raised by hon. Kabugo; how interim is this - interim Commission meant to do?  (Applause)  One could say get the point when this Bill was drafted in October last year.  But as we speak now, the Constitution is going to be promulgated by the 31st of July, this year.  

Now, if we take into account that, we have to pass this Bill and it has to be assented to, and then eventually we have to form the body to set up that Commission.  By the time you set up that Commission, the new Constitution shall have come into force.  What will be the fate of this Bill?  This is something we have to address.  

My view is that, actually we are being time bad.  And if we do not do something about it, we might be passing a useless Bill.  I will illustrate.  For example, Clause 4(2) says, the Commission shall be in existence until other provision is made by the Constitution.  And the members of the new Electoral Commission replacing it under the Constitution have been appointed.  

Now, if the Constitution is coming into force in the next three months, is it not foreseeable that in the next 5 months we will be getting a new Commission.  So, why this one now?  And it goes further and this is serious.  And thereafter, this statute shall apply to the new commission, which such multiplication as is necessary to give effect to this Constitution.  It is a contradiction; we have to handle this.  So, my worry is that, we might be engaging in something that might not last very long.  

Now, on election.  Let us take into account the fact that the new Constitution is coming into force in the next three months.  And we have drafts, which already indicate what kind of Constitution we shall have.  The Constitution already if one has to go by the draft which is most likely to pass; we will have a Commission with a chairman, a deputy chairman and not less that 3 or more than 5 members.  Now, ours here is not naming a deputy chairman and the membership is less.

MR MARWAS:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I can see the bother hon. Kawanga has.  But I know as a lawyer like himself, he knows for use when the Constitution comes into effect, any law that is contrary to the Constitution promulgated then -(Interruption)

MRS MWONDHA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like just to clarify and give information that, when a new Constitution is promulgated, it does not necessarily mean that, all the laws that have existed have elapsed.  Because in any case, the country has to keep on running, and it has to keep on running according to the law.  And that is why, when the Constitutions are made, we have transitional provision and I have to allege the fear of those ones fearing about the fate of this Interim Electoral Commission, which we want to establish now; that already we have catered for existing laws after the promulgation of the Constitution in Chapter 20, that Article 299.  

We have said that concerning the existing laws subject to the provisions of this Article, the operation of the existing law after the commencement of this Constitution, shall not be affected by that commencement.  But the existing law shall be controlled with effect modification, adaptation, qualification and exception as may be necessary to bring it into conformity with this Constitution. (Applause)  

MR KAWANGA:  Mr Chairman, I am surprised that hon. learned friends think I do not know that.  (Laughter)  I am saying all this, because I know that.  And that is why I am pointing out obvious inconsistencies which will immediately take effect.  I am saying why provide for them, if you are going to immediately have to cater for those changed situations.  So, that is why I am pointing out all these kind of things; I will give another illustration.  When we talk about the functions of the commission which are laid out in Clause 9; they talk about demarcation of constituencies, the compiling of registers and so on, for those who are familiar with the Constitution we are drafting, this is almost a reproduction of what is in the draft constitution.  

But what is interesting is that, item F is mentioned here; when it is not mentioned in the Constitution.  So, either you include it there or you eliminate it here, in order to develop and implement a convenient system for enabling voters to vote by proxy and with the assistance of the Uganda Embassy, High Commissioners, and the Consultants Board for enabling Ugandans residing outside Uganda to register and vote.  If we want it here, then I may have to persuade our friends in the CA to include it. If they do not, then we ourselves may not have to include it here.  

I will give another example.  Take the question of the function, which is 9(i)(g).  and in fact, 9(i)(g) says, to perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Minister, by statutory instrument.  In the Constitution we are going to say, but this shall be an independent commission, which shall not be subject to the directive or any authority.  

Now, having it said in the Constitution, we are making a provision care for a Minister put direct the Committee.  What is he doing?  All these are the kind of inconsistencies which are obvious here; which we should not go into now.  Why should we be including them, if we can handle them at that stage?  I will give another example, Mr Chairman.  

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  May I inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, the Minister who presented this Bill to us is hon. Sam Njuba; but he is no longer Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs; may be then our new Minister of State could come up with his own version.  Thank you. (Laughter)  

MR KAWANGA:  Mr Chairman, Clause 9, sub-clause 2 says; the commission shall subject to sub-section 3 of this Section, perform its functions in accordance with a relevant law for a period being regulating elections and referenda.  But to ensure all public elections and referenda conducted by the commission statute are free and fair.  So that where any conflict exists between the provisions of any such law, other than the Constitution and this Statute; this Statute shall prevail.  Now, Mr chairman, with regard to the first one, it is not very hard to say that, we have got an Electoral Law in place now.  But with the changed circumstance under the constitution that law is virtually non-operative as of now.  There is no way we can talk of an Electoral Law under the provisions of the new circumstances of the new constitutions other than anticipated.  You will have to make a new electoral law.  So, already that renders the first part of the clause funny.  But of course the second one is interesting, hoping that this small thing will prevail over virtually other electoral laws - it is interesting.  I think the hon. Minister will look into that.  

As to Clause 13(i), which says, subject to sub-sections of this section, Uganda shall be divided into as many constituencies for the purposes of election of Members of the legislature as the Commission may prescribe.  And each constituency shall be represented by one members of the legislature.  Already in the Constituent issues are saying, there shall be Parliament to determine the number of constituencies.  So, recall that Clause again here is - we are saying that, it is going to become redundant immediately.  Everybody know that, there will be Parliament to determine the constituencies rather than the commission.  And it is only reasonable.  

As for Clause 13(2), which reads, in dividing Uganda into constituencies, the commission shall ensure that each country has at least one member of legislature except that no constituency shall fall within more than one county.  I must note that, this is a carbon copy of what is in the new Constitution, or which is proposed in the new Constitution.  But my question is, I agreed each county should have one representative.  But why do you want to tie it down?  That never, never again shall you know, one sub-county from another county be added to county, especially now when we are creating new districts which have been counties; which counties we are now sub-dividing into counties.  The consequential aspect of a county as a shall not be operative in the future.  And if really there is need to add one sub-county to another, to get what hon. Marwas is talking about, you know parity in numbers.  What is wrong with that?  But of course that is something which one has to consider.  But as it may, the most interesting aspect is Clause 13, sub-Clause 3.  What does this Clause want to achieve?  It has better show what it wants to achieve.  Does it want to say that, the existing constituencies for the Constituent Assembly shall be a constituency?  Because if he wants to say that, it has better say so.  Why do I say this?  Clause 13 says, whenever practicable designate as constituency any area designated as an electoral area by the Commissioner for the Constituent Assembly, under the Constituent Assembly Statute, 1993.  That is what this Clause says.  And any responsible person will say that, actually that is what this Clause wants to be done.  But what we have to do as constituencies for the Constituent Assembly be the ones designated as constituencies for the next coming election.  But having said that, it goes to sections, which are funny.  Do you want a county to be a unit of making constituencies or do you want a population quarter to be the basis of determining a constituency or both?  But if you want both, then why do you go ahead and say, in the case of Jinja Municipality, designated out of that Municipality two constituencies. (Laughter)  

I am the projected census for Jinja Municipality and it is estimated that by this year, it will be about 70,000 people by population.  So, automatically it should be one constituency, why do we say, it has got two?  And if you mention Jinja Municipality -(Interruption)

MR LUBEGA: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, as if that is not enough, you have got to underline it, because of Jinja, under the saying Clause 13 3(c); the hon. Mover moving the Bill says that in case of Kampala, each division shall consist of one constituency, whereas in the CA Statute, the constituencies were based on population.  That is where for instance Makindye division, which is more than 200,000 people; Rubaga division, which is more than 180,000 people, were divided on the basis of our formula.  That are we now under Clause 13 3(c); the mover goes on to propose that, even these big divisions will constitute to one constituency; you can see the inconsistencies that are being moved.  Thank you. 

MR KAVUMA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I wanted to give this information because hon. Lubega is being a little bit unfair.  He did communicate with me here when he came in about the question of Kampala.  I responded that I am already taking care of this to the effect that a division for purposes of this article, will be treated as a county.  In which case, it will be liable to sub-division if population warrants and other criteria-

MR KAWANGA:  Thank you very much for that information.  But as if the problem of Jinja is not bad enough to quote from hon. Damiano Lubega, if you mention that Jinja should have two, why do you not talk about Masaka Municipality? (Laughter)  Why do you not talk about Entebbe Municipality?  If you make a specific mention of something in law, it means there must be special reason why that has to be done and I want to know.  Because of the provision to say that nothing will be added to the county, I want to know, is a Municipality a county?  I am asking this; for example, I understand Moroto Municipality has a population of about 10,000 people.  Is it the intention of this Statute to ask Moroto Municipality to make up something for the quarter or not?  We want to know.  Will these Municipalities themselves constitute constituencies or not.  This is not outlined in this Clause.  

I will just make a passing comment with regard to clause 14.  14(i) reads with disputes and how they will be handled by the Judiciary.  Now, in that particular case, already in the Constitution, we are saying that it will be Parliament to make laws, which shall govern the procedure to be followed in making petitions.  This one is talking about the Chief Justice shall make rules of court for regulating the procedure in respect of any abuse.  

So, already I am seeing again another small conflict.  We have to resolve one matter which has been raised by the hon. lady from Hoima and that is Clause 15 which says, every citizen of Uganda of 18 years of age or above is entitled to vote and to be registered as a voter for the purpose of public election and referenda.  It is the duty of every citizen of Uganda of 18 years of age or above to register as a voter for public elections and a referenda.  

But as you can know, earlier on, one of the functions of the Committee is to be allowed to register people who are going to become 18 at some future date.  First of all, that is a very dangerous practice but too, it is also conflict with these two provisions.  The spirit is conflictual.  If you want people of 18 to register and vote, state so and that be the end of the day rather than say, okay, we shall register you in future and so on and so forth.  Because of the kind of things we have here, you can cause a lot of confusion by that kind of arrangement.  

Finally, elections are of very emotive subject in this country and we must be very careful what kind of legislation we put in place to ensure that this is fairly done.  If there are any kinds of loopholes and doubts, one should make sure that they are covered so that we do not get into problems  It is in that spirit that I have posed all the questions that I have posed.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MRS MWONDHA FAITH (Butembe County, Jinja):  Thank you very much.  Mr Chairman, I thank you for having given me this opportunity to contribute to this Bill.  First of all, I have to say I support it because it provides the preliminary steps to the general election process.  As we all know, the electoral process is a real process.  So you cannot think that we are going to put in place a law to make sure that the process is put in motion after the promulgation of the constitution.  And also have to support it because it is a big step forward to allay the fears of speculators who think that the government promises empty promises, people think that government wants to entrench itself in power.  And also it helps to make sure that the democratic process will begin, one, promulgation of the constitution has been put.  

I want to make some observations but may be before I make them, I think I have to mention because I will be cheating myself when somebody says that what is contained in the Bill is a reproduction of what is in the draft constitution.  Okay, to a certain extent, that is true but not to generalise like that and in any case, when the Minister was presenting this Bill or tabling it, he was saying that actually even in the draft constitution there is a provision for making or establishing an interim commission and the only condition which was put was that this interim commission which is going to be put in place, its function will be regulated by it and its powers and functions as far as possible conform to the provisions of Article 85 and 86 of the draft constitution.  Of course, now it is under debate and we are yet to come out with something concrete.  I do not see anything wrong with it and then there are fears that after the promulgation of the constitution, we are wasting our time because we put in place an Interim Electoral Commission because when the Constitution has been promulgated, it does not mean that all the laws cease to exist and we have to enact new laws.  There is a provision in the transitional provision in chapter 20 which provides for that and law will be modified and adopted with such qualifications.  

I would like to make an observation that I think to avoid the executive or any other person who would love to interfere with the work of the Interim Commission, I would like to say that this commission has to be an independent Interim Commission.  Of course this is in line with clause 12 of the Bill if you look at it.  That is what it is trying to say.  This is the reason why we do not all emphasize it here so that the people can have the confidence that the Interim Electoral Commission we are going to have is actually an independent Commission and it is not going to be fettered with by any other person.  

Another observation is that I think it is proper when we are providing for the Membership of the Interim Commission to have a Chairman and Deputy Chairman.  My opinion is that the job may be so demanding and if it is so demanding, in the absence of the Chairman, then the Deputy Chairman can carry on the functions and then I will make another observation also on the removing of the member of the Commission.  I just wondered and may be I seek the indulgence of the hon. Minister as to whether really it is necessary when one of the Members of wants to be removed again to seek the approval of the advice of Parliament or cabinet.  





I am seeking the indulgence, of the hon. Minister on this issue.  Then in Clause 9 sub-clause 5(e), why in the Bill it is that the commission may delete the name of a person who has died because if he has died, why is it ‘may?’  Why is it discretionary?  Because the person has died, why it not ‘shall?’  Why should we leave it there?  that is the issue I need the indulgence of the hon. Minister.  

Also, in Clause 18 where it concerns the finances of the Commission.  It talks about reasonably adequate finances.  the word reasonable is a little bit tender and dangerous.  So in my opinion, I do not think that the word reasonable really works to the purpose of what we like this Bill to be and so, I also seek the indulgence of the hon. Minister why the word reasonably adequate resources to finance the commission should be there.  

Lastly, on Clause 19 where it provides for the commission to make regulations for the better or effective performance of its functions.  Why is it the Commission to make regulations?  Why not the Minister responsible to make the regulations effective performance of the functions?  Thank you very much.

MR RWABIITA (Ibanda County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Taking into consideration the discrepancies pointed out by hon. Karuhanga and I hope the Minister has taken note, I support this Bill, and I support it because it is a good sign of planning ahead.  It will be unfortunate when the Constitution is promulgated, then we have to sit down and wait to make laws for holding elections.  So, I think this is a good point we are trying to do here that we plan ahead and I would request the Minister to try and synchronise some of the Clauses pointed out which seem to be out of order or not in line with the constitution so that we do not waste time next time to go and revise this Bill.  So, this will help us all so that we have a good law and when the Constitution is already done, the process of election takes place.  

Before going into the Bill, allow me to make a few observations of the elections of CA.  We had some anomalies which should be corrected so that our future elections are done properly.  One is the question of registration certificates.  These were not marked at all and therefore, there was a danger of people using them more than once.  Somebody would vote and go and give somebody, he comes under the same name or another name and vote.  So, I think in future, such certificates should be marked so that when somebody voting has finished, that certificate is identified easily by those doing administration of the elections.  

Number two, people used to move especially during registration, you would get people moving from one electoral area to another.  There must be some rules and regulations to stop that because if a constituency is stopping from A and BC and you get few from that end coming to register here so that in future, they give more votes to the candidate in that area.  that has been done in some constituencies and it should be looked into and stopped because it confuses first of all the population that are supposed to be found in those constituencies. Now, if anybody was serious and tried to find out the total number of people who voted, in some constituencies, you find that they are more than those who registered.  This is a fact.  

Another thing is that of registration certificates or the registers.  Last time, things were done in a hurry and many people could not identify whether their names were there or omitted.  So the registers should be hanged at the sub-county headquarters and people and even down to the muluka so that people can go and identify their names and make sure that their names are there or extra names which are not in those constituencies should be pointed out so that we do not have double counting and rigging.  

On this Bill, I want to talk about Clause 9 and on (f).  Although this Clause does not appear in the new Constitution, I think we still have time perhaps to consider it because I think it is important that a Ugandan abroad should practice or use his human rights obligations and as a citizen of Uganda to vote a government that will be coming into power.  We have had examples in Uganda, or recent the Eritreans, they voted here, the South Africans voted here and they went back afterwards.  So, I do not see anything wrong if our High Commissioner in London could hold election of all Uganda citizens in the UK to vote in the President they want or the government they want.  So, that one, I think should be taken care of here and even in the Constitution so that Ugandans are not denied of their human rights to elect the government they want.  

When we come to Clause 9 5(c).  That shall up-date their registers to such a day as the Minister may by Statutory Instrument appoint, (d) may include in the registers a name of any person who is not 18 years of age but will be of voting age before the date appointed by the Minister under paragraph (a).  

I want to oppose this Clause because we already have problems of identifying the age groups during elections and this has been a source of rigging.  You get rid of 13, she puts on tennis balls here, she puts on a big blanket down behind the busuuti and she comes swerving up and down and definitely she looks a big woman and she comes with a kid even. (Laughter)  So those tricks we know have been there and when you allow this one, it means you double them.  You give people a chance to rigging through under-age.  

We are making the Constitution that we hope will stay and should be respected by our nationals.  This is another reason why we should be careful of allowing under age to register so that they vote when they are 18 years.  We are making a Constitution that should be respected for many years to come and we expect to have regular elections every five years.  Now, what is the hurry of bringing these children to vote now?  let them wait for another five years and then they come when they are mature so that they can vote when they are of age.  So, I think the Minister should look into that because it would be calling for more problems in the electoral procedures.  

Hon. Kawanga pointed out discrepancies on Clause 13 but the principle is good and it is that every county should be the unit of electoral area.  Now, when you put that as a first unit, then you can always divert from it because there are other sections.  You may find a county which is either very heavily populated and needs to be divided.  

Although hon. Marwas and hon. Kawanga pointed out some discrepancies on Clause 13, but the principle is good; the principle is that every county should be the unit of electoral area.  Now, when you put that as a first promise, then you can always diverge from this, because there are other sections, you may find a county which is either very heavily populated and need to be divided or the geographical conditions as the terrain is so impossible for even one electoral Member to run effectively.  So, when a county is a standard unit over areas, then the sections, as I said, we go back, look into the population of those counties.  

He living example is the county of Bukoto, Masaka, by its size and population, it should be a district, because I think it is more 350,000 people; so that is why now they have got five CA (Constituent Assembly) and Constituencies for CA, because of the population and the size of it.  So, when we talk of a county, that is the standard but exceptions come in and I think the electoral Commission will look into that and to me a 70,000 population is quite reasonable, it could be more, it could be less.  The best example we have today is Kalangala, is 16 or 17,000 people and it is a district, but it has got - I do not know 500 Islands or more; there are so many Islands that even if you have a helicopter, you need a lot of time to cover them to go and jump here and then tomorrow you are there, next day, you are there.  So, that is a living example, where population does not count now, but the geographical terrain also should qualify a certain area to be as a district or a constituency.  

With the policy of decentralisation, the consideration of people of 70,000 people is a very good principle, because a county is too large, one person might find a very big job to run around give services to the people.  Now, that we are decentralising, we want to get services nearer to the people.  Let us divide these units to areas where a person can be effective in rendering services to his or her people.  Therefore, I support the principle of even dividing a county when the population demands for that.  
  
On Clause 16 (iv), I support the principle of announcing the results at the polling stations, with the experience we have had in CA, that minimises the old cancer of rigging elections through tampering with the figures, somebody gets 15,000 votes, but at the end when it goes at the district headquarters, it is 7,000 and we do not know where the 8,00 has gone.  So, this will reduce the chances of rigging peoples votes; so that the Returning Officer will know that at polling station B, there were 5,000 and that is what he gets as a returning officer.  So, I think that is a good principle and it will reduce cases of rigging and changing figures, as if somebody did not get the votes he is supposed to get.

Clause 18, is speaking of getting sufficient funds for the electoral Commission. I think this is an important clause which should be considered by the Minister for Finance.  Before we start on any elections, there must be enough funds because the other day when we had started the CA, we spent almost the whole month doing almost nothing because of logistics - no loud speakers, no papers, no what.  Now, you ask yourself, are these people serious?  So, the Ministry of Finance should make sure that there is enough money when we start these electoral processes, so that it does not get stranded on the way and then delays the process and then in telling people to start the bad behaviours of rigging and doing all sorts of things.  

I want to end by saying that when the elections are on the way, I hope Parliament will again come out with the regulations on how we should handle elections.  You see, people think that by decampaining somebody on lies, then he gets a point - you drive your point to your constituents.  But this is, I think an old tactic which must no be repeated in our modern society; the campaigns should be clean as we have been doing in the Movement type of elections, the RC systems so that when one goes through and another fails, they still remain friends not enemies, but when you start mudslinging, campaigning on naked lies; sometimes I tell them do not have a naked lie, put kavera around it so that it appears acceptable.  Some people come out that somebody is going to kill me or he has planed to kill or he is doing so and so - definitely such behaviour is very archaic and is not called for the modern and clean politics.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Thank you, Mr Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to the important Bill. I wish to observe that inception that an election and if it is a national election is of exceptional importance to a country and because it is an important matter of great exception, it is important that a law that we put in place should address some of those important aspects.

An election is important to a country because, it is an opportunity for the incumbent leaders to account to the people; it is a time when those who have been in power to go the people and people ask them a number of questions and those who challenge them also challenge from on what they have done or what they should have  or what they have not done.

But Mr chairman, of more importance to me, is that for a country like Uganda, an election and moreso, the forth-coming election under the new constitution is of exceptional importance for three main reasons.

Looking at our history, and the desire of the present government and of Ugandans, to ensure a bright future, the next election will have to address:

    (i) The issue of peaceful change of government.  It is unfortunate that since independence, it has not been possible for an election in this country to address peaceful change of leadership and that when an election is held, for example, the 1980 election, it becomes a controversial matter and very unfortunate that when an election is held, an election becomes a controversial matter and therefore, it destroys the basis of peace and stability and therefore, it is my considered view, that apart from an election addressing the issue of peaceful change of Government, it should also address as a consequential aspect of that issue of peace and stability; because if an election is rigged, if an election is not accepted and respected, first of all by the nationals of the country and possibly international, it merely plunges the country into war and into instability; and I do pray that the next elections which will come under the new constitution which will be definitely a good election that will not plunge this country into another boat of instability and war.  I recall that because of these, there are those who believe that they can only capture or they can only come to government by means of war, by means of fighting.  I think it is going to be a good thing for us to realise that the time is up for those who think that they can come to power by these other than through election.  I also believe that the issue of good government has to be uppermost in the minds of the people of Uganda, and that an opportunity for an election is for people to choose good leaders and therefore, the issue of good governments will also be addressed as a matter of exceptional importance in the life of any country.

I want to emphasise two matters which are of importance to me in this Bill.  One which gravitates around the nature of the Commission - Interim Commission and that is the issue of an independent and impartial Commission.  

This is a very important principle, so important that if an Electoral Commission is to have any credibility, both nationally and internationally, it must be seen to be independent and impartial and therefore, I support those who are of the view that the first stage in ensuring and impartial election is in its appointment.  

I urge this House and my colleagues to accept the Amendment which makes it mandatory not only for the President and Cabinet but also for this House to participate in the appointment of an election commission.  It is important that an electoral commission is not appointing and it is seen to be appointed by the Executive to carry out this will.  Once the people start to attack the electoral commission, then the whole basis, the whole credibility of that election is gone, and I am assured by the Minister the Corridor, the minister responsible that he has no objection to the amendment and I thank him for that.

Another issue which I think has not been addressed in this Bill - a small Bill, but the real meat, the real importance of this Bill to me will be in the regulations.  One Member mentioned something about regulations and I think that in the CA Bill and the CA Statute, all substantive laws and regulations were brought together.  Those of you that - you passed the law here, you can recall that the substantive law itself is general but the detail of that law in the regulation and that is what matters.  I therefore believe that the Minister may at the appropriate time because we may not have the time to - if we pass this law soon, it may take time to bring that regulation here.  But we may amend Section 19 to ensure that the regulations will be made for approval by this House and I think that instead of delaying the Bill, we can allow the Minister to lay before this House the regulations for approval.

Lastly, let me say that an election will be accepted and respected if it is free and fair and there is a word now which has been added now by various international observer teams and without fear.  I think you have heard this in various reports of the international observer teams that the election should be free and fair and without fear and I think, what do we mean that an election is free, fair and without fear?  I wish to contribute and not very exhaustively that to me, one of the principle is, fair competition, that all those who want to participate should be allowed to participate without hindrance.  

The second one, is that those who are participating should be allowed to offer alternative policies; there is no need to restrict somebody, to speak within the same national principle or I think the confinement of those who may be in power that time.  Somebody should be free if, for example, the Government in power is a right wing capitalist government, I think if that election is to be seen to be free and fair, those who believing left wing socialist policy should be allowed to articulate those policies and it is up to the people to choose whether they want a right wing capitalist government or they want a left wing socialist government.

Of course, it is now a common word among the people of Uganda ‘no rigging’ and I think that state machinery should not be mis-used and when I say state machinery you know what I mean.  By this, I mean the infrastructure of the state which include administration, which include the police, which include the army, which include the intelligence, which include the chiefs and so on, should never, never be used to interfere with an election, otherwise, that election will never be free and fair and that election can have problems or accessibility and respectability.  

The issue of the decision of the people, is final.  In our Constitution, there were and in the Draft Constitution, the Constitution which is being made now, the basic principle which is there is that, power comes from the people and that the people are supreme.  That is the basis of a free and fair election that the people are free to elect those they want to lead; and that if this regulation, this law which we are making today, for an interim Electoral Commission, is to be of any meaning to the people of Uganda to ensure their free future, peaceful future and stable future, the people must be given a free hand to choose both whom they want to lead them and those people should be free to sell their policies, to compete freely and to be facilitated in all ways possible and no should be seen to be made.  

Mr Chairman, I thank you for this opportunity and I hope that the new Constitution backed with the new election policies and law will make this country a better country - a better place to live in.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

DR TIBERONDWA (Igara County, Bushenyi):  Mr Chairman, I want to thank you for giving me this opportunity to make some observations about this Bill.  First of all, I think this Bill was published in October last year, I do not know why we did not debate it then.  We have not have two months to go and we are debating this law which will again have to out date within two months.  I would like to know from the Minister, in fact, I think I know because it seems as if the Committee had rejected this Bill and the Bill has not been amended to the same Bill which is the Committee has changed its mind. (Laughter)  I do not know what has happened to them.  These things happen, Mr Chairman.

MR MARWAS:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to correct an impression, bad motive created by the Member holding the Floor and did day that the Committee on Legal and Security Affairs, did reject this Bill, I would like to inform him that neither has he approached the Committee nor the Minister; the Committee did discuss the Bill, and the Amendment moved by hon. Butagira are the Amendments moved by the Committee.  Therefore, if we had rejected it, we would not have moved those Amendments.  Thank you.

MR BUTAGIRA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, my hon. Friend, hon. Tiberondwa seems to be debating from ignorance because if he was here last week and listened to my presentation, he would have been wiser. (Laughter) 
 
DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I understand the words by the Chairman of the Committee.  If I were in his position, I would probably would have defended myself the way he has, because these things happen. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, I would like may be towards the end or at a suitable moment during my contribution, the Minister to make it clear to this House under what Constitution are we debating this Bill.  I raise the matter because the 1967 Constitution as amended by Legal Notice No. 1 of 1986 does not give this House the power to create an electoral Commission; because Chapter 5 of the Constitution which gives that power was suspended by Legal Notice No.1 of 1986.  So, under 1967 Constitution as amended by Legal Notice No. 1, we do not have the power to debate the Constitution.  Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  It has the powers.

MRS MATEMBE:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the information I want to give hon. Tiberondwa is that, this Parliament is the Parliament that is the supreme legislating body o this land, and it is empowered to make any law in this country and under the current constitution in which we are operating, we have all the powers to make this law.  So, let him stand informed on these matters.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, because there is a deliberate move to derail me.

THE CHAIRMAN:  No, no.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, the Draft Constitution which is now under discussion by the Constituent Assembly does allow all that is contained in the law, but that has not yet become law, the present Constitution has not yet become a constitution and although I agree that Parliament can make laws, but it makes law within the Constitution of the country; Parliament is not supposed to make any law regardless of what the Constitution says; the Parliament has also got limits.  

If for example, the Minister came out and said, Legal Notice No.1 of 1986, paragraph (i) if re-filled, I would have no quarrel, but without that one being in this law, we are definitely not doing official -(Interruption)

MR KAVUMA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I only want to inform hon. Tiberondwa who unfortunately was snot here at the beginning of this debate, that in fact, the issue he is talking about, the Constitutionality of the Bill is very clear, it was explained, I only drew his attention to paragraph 7(i) of Legal Notice No.1 of 1986 which if he cares to read, will clear all the doubts in his mind and I only want to echo hon. Butagira’s words, that if hon. Tiberondwa has been here at the beginning, he would have been much wiser.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I have read paragraph 7 that the Minister has talked about and it does not give parliament powers to pass laws which are against the Constitution of this country.  Regarding the timing, we have waited for 10 years and I think honestly, unless we have got another reason, we can wait for another two months and have -(Interruption)

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of clarification.  I see clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor that, legal Notice No.1 of 1986 suspended the Chapter on elections.  Did that Legal Notice also go ahead to say that this Parliament shall never talk about elections; because we are not amending the 1967 electoral law, we are only instituting an electoral law that is consistent with the current developments in the country.  Did the Legal Notice actually say this Parliament shall never talk about elections?

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, Legal Notice No.1 of 1986 suspended Chapter 5 and article 47 of that chapter allow this House to create commissions for elections and that Article was also suspended.  So, I would like to inform the hon. Member and I continue to say that if we do pass this law without repealing that section, I want to state very clearly as we did in the case of he Vice President, we at one time we abolished the post of Vice President and then we created it, and we continued having a Vice President without legal and constitutional cover; we are doing exactly the same, Mr Chairman.

MR SIBO:  Point of information.  This point was very disturbing to many minds of us.  I took trouble to find out from the Solicitor General, whether it is in order for us to go ahead and debate and pass this Bill.  I was told by the Solicitor General that the Legal Notice No.1 of 1986, does not stop anywhere in that legal notice, does not stop Parliament from enacting a law on electoral commission.  It did suspend the electoral commission, but did not say that Parliament shall never enact any law to provide for electoral commission. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  He has understood it.  Proceed please.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  The solicitor General who has just been quoted by the hon. Member, hon. Adrian Sibo is the same Solicitor General who advised the Government to appoint the Vice President when Legal Notice No. 1 of 1986 has abolished that post.  So, the advice of the Solicitor General, lost credibility that time. (Laughter)  Mr Chairman, I understand, I am told that the donors, like the United States, like Sweden and U.K are pressing that we should have foreign - before we can get money.  Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MR KAVUMA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I want to correct the erroneous impression hon. Tiberondwa is creating in this House, in my capacity as Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs, that I have not and government has not had any pressure from any donor anywhere to table this Bill before this House.  It is only the policy of this Government that it wants to make all the necessary arrangements for the forthcoming elections to ensure a smooth and orderly transfer of power and to ensure free and fair elections in accordance with the democratic principles, the people of Uganda have chosen to be governed under.  Unless hon. Tiberondwa has other channels, but as far as government is concerned, we have no pressure from any donor.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I would respect the hon. Minister and I would not want to say in this House that he is the same hon. Minister who hold me this, because he told me in privacy. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.  Cries of order.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I want to categorically deny that I have never told hon. Tiberondwa in confidence or in camera or anywhere at all that we have pressure from donors, it is a lie and in the interest of the proceedings of this House, I will request him to withdraw that statement.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, as I talk, we have in the Ministry of Works buildings on the Jinja road -(Interruption)

MRS SSEBAGEREKA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is the hon. Member holding the Floor in order to keep derailing the House giving us information that is not substantiated.  Is he in order to allege -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Well, he is not in order, but we can tolerate him.  Go ahead please. (Laughter)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I want to thank you for accepting to tolerate in the spirit of the National Resistance Movement.  I want to point out that in the Ministry of Work, on Jinja road, there are people who have been working there for about two to three months who are updating registers for this coming elections getting information from upcountry, they are updating - even if you go there now, they are working three shifts a day and they are up dating electoral registers.

MR KAVUMA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, once again, I want to inform the House that, hon. Tiberondwa is mis-informing this House.  The people he is talking about are employees of CA Commission, they are computerising the Voters Registers, they are not updating, they have no legal authority to do it, they are only placing things on computer and that is proper in their capacity to do under the law. 

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I have reasons to feel very uneasy, about this hurry, because some of us, in fact, all Uganda have an interest in the peace and stability of this country and the out-come of the next elections.  We have not yet got a Constitution in place and this law we are going to pass is going to empower one person who has not declared that he is a candidate for President to nominate. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

DR TIBERONDWA:  President Museveni has already declared that he is - he has already accepted nomination from winning that he is going to contest elections and I want to inform this House that he is not the only person interested in being President of this country. (Applause)  What is going to happen is that we are going to put this law in place, the registers are being updated, and some candidates are going to be ambushed in these elections without knowing, because what is going to happen now, the President is all over the country -(Interruption)

MRS NJUBA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is the hon. Member in order to continue insisting on the registers which the Minister has already told us that - about what is happening with registers?

THE CHAIRMAN:  No, this is another thing.  Proceed please, this is different.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, if you do not give enough time for the other interested persons to campaign and you bring out the Constitution, you bring out this law, you already have the Commission in place, the other candidates are already going around campaigning, we shall not have enough time to compete fairly.  There are many people who are trying to derail me from my points, but I would like you to protect me, Mr Chairman.
      
THE CHAIRMAN:  Make your point clear.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, inside the Constitution, there is one thing I think that needs to be taken care of; that is voting by proxy.  Hon. Kawanga has pointed out the inconsistency between this Constitution which is being made.  But there is also a danger in this voting by proxy; there is a possibility that non-Ugandans may vote from outside and send their votes here and the reason why they can do it, they could be assisted by our own ambassadors accredited to those countries.  There are also other Ugandans who really want to cause problems to this country, who have refused to live here and whose votes may have negative intentions.  So, I would like to propose that this question of voting by proxy be re-considered.  

I would therefore like to propose that when we are updating the register, we should think seriously about this question of voting from outside the country.  Then, I also have a reservation about Article 9 sub-section (ii), the last paragraph, clause 9 which says; so however that where any conflict exists, it is a provision of any law of any such law other than the constitution and this statute shall prevail.  We are making an interim law and we are saying it shall prevail over the other laws which are existing.  I think, we need to be very, very careful, we are in line on the good will of the present leadership of the NRM and we should know that these laws are going to remain and the personalities may change; and when the personalities have changed, and they can change any time -(Laughter)

MRS KALEMA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I want to inform the hon. Member holding the floor that, he is quite correct.  Personalities can change, people can change and I would like to inform him that although in 1980, my Minister, when I was Deputy Minister, took my Secretary and his Secretary to his constituency, and he made them to make extra registration cards for voting constituency.  This is not going to happen now, it will not happen any more; it is not going to happen again and we should realised that it is not possible with the NRM which the hon. Member has said is trusted, the NRM government cannot do what was done in 1980.  That is my information.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, cries of order.

DR TIBERONDWA:  I am happy that the hon. Member does realise that personalities can change and they can change any time without notice or with very short notice. (Laughter)  

So, we should not think that it is always going to be the good will of the present leader or leaders that is going to remain.  Sometimes, we may have a very unreasonable resident or a very unreasonable Minister and these things should not depend in personalities.  For example, we are banking on the understanding that by the time we pass this Constitution, that we are making in the CA, that we shall have the same personalities in lace.  That thing is very, very, illusive.  I would like us to look at the principles rather than individuals.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR KARUSOKE (Ntoroko  County, Bundibugyo):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman for allowing me this opportunity.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR KARUSOKE:  Mr Chairman, since I am holding the Floor this time for the first time since we returned from recess, I would like to add my voice of the Atiak massacre and I would like to add my voice too to the resolution we passed here condemning this very barbaric and in human behaviour by Kony rebels.  In the same vein, I would like to express condolence for the loss of our Colleague, who departed from this House during the recess; in the names of late Tom Rubaale, and Teddy Omara and Kirya Gole; and I would like, therefore, to congratulate the new Members who have been elected in their places.

When we are discussing this Electoral Commission law, we should not forget our history.  Our history is that, since Independence, we have held one general election and because of the mess that transpired during that election, Uganda had to shed a lot of blood to be what we are now, and I want to say that that error should help us to focus into the future as well as in the present so that we do not go into this same situation again regardless of our collective or individual interests.  

I want us to see election - national elections like this one as something that is going to correct a lot of imbalances, a lot of inconveniences, and put all of us together so that after elections, we begin to move together as one man, as one Ugandans.  We can only do that when we observe two principles; one, should be that government - it should be the duty of government to keep ground levelled and as far as I am concerned I have no doubt that the ground is being levelled.

At the same time, it is our duty as Ugandans and moreso, those of us who are going to participate in the general election of this country to accept the fact that when the football pitch is well levelled, we shall play as much as we can but at the same time, at the end of the game, some of us will emerge winners while others will be losers; and therefore we should accept the fact that at the end of the game, some people must be losers while others are winners.  It is in this spirit that elections which we so much yearn for are going to benefit at all.  If we do not hold this principle, all we are trying to put in place for the good of this country is going to end up in chaos.  

In view of this, I would like to call upon this House and moreso the Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs, to be very tolerant.  Let us be very tolerant to each other, let us listen to each other with patience, let us respect each others view although we may not necessarily accept them so that, at the end of the day, we have an acceptable principle upon which we are going to build our election process.  Because of what we know and what has been happening in the past and because people have a lot of misgivings about what is going to happen, I would like us and I would like the Minister to accept that under Clause 4(i), the establishment of a Commission, Parliament should be the final body to approve members of the Commission.  I would like to call upon the Minister not to be resistant on this one, let us accept because we must make sure that the representatives of he people have a final say to approve those people who are going to handle the matters of election.  This will be clear transparency and clear accountability for the people of Uganda.  

Under Clause 9, 5(e), I would like us to add on the following; may delete from the register name of any deceased voter.  I would like us to add ‘or non Ugandan.’ Given the 1994 Constituent Assembly elections, there were some people who went and registered whose citizenship was a bit doubtful.  In my constituency, for example, because we are the same tribe across the border, between Uganda and Zaire, people in my constituency regard those across the border as their brothers and sisters and therefore, they should be Ugandans, and there is no reason why they should not come in and vote.  So, there were some cases, a few cases of people who were allowed to register whom we did not approve, we did not approve these people, because we knew they were not truly Ugandans, but there they were - they had come and registered and I think in the end, they voted.  So, they did not necessarily vote for me, but the fact is that they voted.  

I would not like to repeat this same mistake while the Commission is given power to remove the names of those deceased, we should also give it power where it is evident to remove the names of those who are non-Ugandans.

Clause 9 (vii) (a) says and I quote:  ‘The Commission shall recognise and facilitate the role of polling agents of candidates and also representatives of the different sides in the referendum.’  I am very, very strongly in total agreement with this provision; because agents of candidates play a very big role in ensuring that there is fair and free elections.  They make work as watch dogs against rigging and unfair malpractices; and therefore, they are very good instruments of a free and fair election hence the need for the Commission to recognise their role and to facilitate it.  I, therefore, very strongly recommend and I support this provision.  

Clause 12, I also endorse this provision.  However, I have a bit of a problem; because before or during election, but mainly before election there are many people, there are many organisations, there are many parties that come up talking a, b, c, in criticism of a Commission; they criticise a, b or c, about the Commission’s work and when they do this, they explain to the Commission to respond in a way and when the Commission is responding to this criticism if in my view, it is being influenced in a way.  Why do we not reserve our criticisms and may be address them in a court of law?  Where an individual or a political party or a group of people feel inconvenienced by the behaviour of a Commission where they feel the ground has not been properly levelled, instead of airing their views publicly, which in a way undermines the authority and the independence of the Commission.  Why do they not address these problems in a court of law and then the court of law could give it the decision?

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor now that, it was not the case with all the electoral areas especially in the Constituent Assembly elections of 1994.  In some cases and indeed in my area, the law says that bribes should not be given, but here somebody went around and we informed the returning officer but he did nothing.  I thank you.

MR KARUSOKE:  I thank the hon. Member for that information, but what I was saying is that, we are definitely going to have problems in elections, we are going to see some things being done inadequately; we are going to see some things being done unfairly, in personal views.  But what I am saying is, instead of going to the radio or going to the Press and criticise the Commission which Commission we are saying should act independently without any influence from any quarters, we should address these problems to the court of law and the court of law take the responsibility of finding out whether or not what is being said is true instead of attacking the Commission directly.  

So, in other words, I am suggesting that we really discourage any person or any authority from making remarks with regard to the operations of the Commission so that the Commission is independent and whoever feels aggrieved by its behaviour should address these problems to a court of law.

Clause 13 (iii), 3(c) and (d) talk about the city of Kampala being divided into constituencies according to divisions and where a division has more than 140,000 people it can be sub-divided into two electoral areas.  The Municipality of Jinja is provided with two constituencies, but there is total silence about the rest of the municipalities, I do not know where my Municipality, Fort Portal will fall.  I do not know where Kabale Municipality falls.  I do not know where Mbarara Municipality falls nor Mbale or Arua.  So, I do not know.  Can the Minister think about this and make provisions for the rest of the Municipalities in this country?  This is a very big omission, Mr Chairman.

Clause 18(i), in my view is redundant and unrealistic.  It is redundant because the legislature has no way of ensuring that the Commission is adequately facilitated.  The legislature will treat the Commission as it does treat other organs of government, but where money is not available, it is not going to be the responsibility of the legislature to make sure they look for facilities for the Commission.  

So, I do not think this Clause is very, very necessary here; it is unrealistic and redundant.  We would rather - the Clause 17 (i) and 18 (ii) and (iii), talk enough about the facilitating the Commission, that it will draw its funds from the consolidated funds and that in discussing the renumerations and allowances of members of the Commission, the Ministry of State for Constitutional Affairs will liaise with the Ministry of Finance and I think this is enough; there is no way Parliament is going to say, get enough money for this Commission where the money is not available.  So, Mr Chairman, I beg that this Clause be deleted.

Clause 19 (c).  I am again not comfortable with this provision; because I am not sure how the Commission will be able to impose a penalty of some fine or an imprisonment of 12 months, I do not see how the Commission can do this.  I think this is - it should be provided for in the electoral law and we leave it to the courts to do, but not the Commission.  The Commission cannot really impose a penalty, it has no means and I do not think it has the legality to do that, it is not a cause of law, it is not technically capable, and so it cannot impose a penalty on any offender.  Let that penalty be a fine or an imprisonment.  The Bill should specifically spell out penalties for particular offences in electoral law.  This one, is Electoral Commission law, but we expect an electoral law to come also with details of offences and penalties.  Mr Chairman, with these remarks, I beg to support the Bill.  I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  And with that, we have come to the end of today’s session.  We adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.

(The Council rose at 455 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 3 May, 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)

