Wednesday, 4 May 2011

Parliament met at 3.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you and I am happy that you are portraying yourselves as patriotic –(Laughter)– by the increased number of attendance. Please, continue that way.

Hon. Members, I am sorry to announce that the father of our colleague, hon. Latif Sebaggala; also the father-in-law of the Minister of Finance, hon. Syda Bbumba and hon. Nabilah Naggayi Sempala, and also the uncle of hon. Tunde, passed away last night. The burial is taking place today at 4.00 p.m. and I have conveyed your condolences to the family. I am sorry but I should have also mentioned that he was the father of the current Mayor of Kampala City. Let us observe a moment of silence in his honour.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

3.13
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, Bishop Okile also lost his dear wife and so I wanted to inform you of the bad news. The burial is taking place tomorrow and those who would like to contribute amabugo or commiseration money should give it to hon. Elijah Okupa.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us observe a minute of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Today the European Union team of the Election Observer Mission in Uganda for the general elections on 18 February 2011 presented to me a report on those elections, and they have promised to avail every Member of Parliament a copy of this report.

Hon. Members, you are invited to the Frank Kalimuzo Memorial Lecture on 06 May 2011 at 2.00 p.m. at the Equator Hall, Imperial Royale Hotel, Kampala. The theme will be, “Higher Education in Africa.” The guest speaker will be Prof. Godfrey Uzoigwe who is a professor of history at the Mississippi State University and the guest of honour will be His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda. You are all invited.

3.16
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): I am raising a concern that I would request especially the Minister of Internal Affairs to take note of. You last week informed the Members of Parliament that there will be registration for the national identity cards, which is taking place in the Conference Hall.

I visited that place yesterday and today but there is a lot of missing information. I was not able to register because the information that they got, I think from Electoral Commission, is lacking. 

I was also informed that hon. Wadri and hon. Nduhuura could not register because the information that they have does not show all the villages or the polling stations, which are needed for complete registration. 

I can give my case. When they inputted Kasilo County, Kasilo County only has three polling stations out of the 72. So, I could not register because my parish and village are not shown. This was the same case that happened to other two colleagues I have named but there could be more than those.

When I asked the officers, they told me that they had communicated to the responsible authority but they have been slow in responding and giving this information in order to update -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: I wish to thank my honourable colleague for accepting this information. When I went there yesterday, the whole of Terego County does not exist in the database of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and if Terego does not exist, then there could be a possibility that other counties which may be much smaller than Terego are also non-existent on the database. I propose that the Ministry of Internal Affairs goes back and does a thorough job because if a county fails to exist, where else do I now register –(Interjections)- no, I exist but the county where I am born from does not exist on the database. I thank you.

MR OKUPA: That is the information I wanted the Minister of Internal Affairs to take. I also encourage honourable members to check because you may also be falling in the same category but at least those are the three of us who have found ourselves not able to register. At the registration I was told that I would put any of those counties but I said, “No, I do not come from those villages.” Apapai Village where I come from is a very famous village and there is no way I can be put in another village. I thank you.

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): I thank you colleagues. You note that the exercise of beginning to issue IDs is on but we still have challenges. However, for those of you who did not register afresh during the registration exercise of these past elections –(Interjections)- just hold on please - your full data is not captured so we will need you. It is only the fresh - you remember the four million new voters and those who had to change and anybody who went for a change of details –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I wish I could be given a chance to give information to the colleagues. Why am I not allowed to finish?

THE SPEAKER: Let him finish then you can come in.

MR KASAIJA: If there is some information, which is incorrect, please, I would love to get that information from anybody. Therefore, for those of us who had been registered earlier on for the 2006 elections, all your data definitely is not with the system. That is very true but for the new ones who are registered for the first time, much of the information is correct.

Because there is a lot of information that some of you may not even have in your head, we have decided to design a questionnaire or a list of things that before you register, you take that list, fill in all the information that the system requires even if it means calling your home area and so forth in case you do not know the little details, then we shall use that information to have a full data bank. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us exhaust this.

3.21
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I think the Minister of Internal Affairs should accept to go back and check. You see, when you go and register, there are pre-determined questions they ask and their computer system gives you a guide that, for example, you are in Kamukuzi division and the village is this. So, what these Members raised is that some counties and some villages are missing and when he inputs and that village is not available, they will give you a village which is not yours. So, they should go and update that information because even I registered and it was long time ago. My information is there just because it was correct but I had a colleague who went and he was only given a sub-county; the village was wrong and the parish was wrong. They have not been included in the database so it is important that the data - because even if you filled it and it is not available in that system, you cannot be registered fully. I thank you.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I would like to implore the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs to avoid the habit of attempting to defend the indefensible. It is becoming a habit. The fact of the matter is that the data, which is in the computer, is wanting. He is now saying those who did not register afresh are not captured; he is giving us the impression that in the whole of Terego County, for example, nobody registered.

Secondly, even for the newly created districts, some exist in the data but others do not. Yesterday I was painfully registered again under Kumi District when I belong to Ngora District and yet very few parishes in my constituency exist in that data which is being used now. So, just take it from here and get back to clean the data.

The other point that I noted is that the process of registering is not less than 15 minutes and if we go at that rate, I would like the Minister to tell us how long Government will take to register 33 million Ugandans because the process is very slow. 

3.24
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was sympathetic to my senior brother over this issue because I think he was not properly briefed by the people operating the system. The truth is that during the election time, the entire data was tampered with somehow with the creation of new stations, villages and counties and so on and so forth. The people operating the system had little capacity to alter fundamentally and now they are finding themselves unable to proceed. 

My advice is: do not rush them with the exercise. Go back, sit with them and they tell you their problem and then after that, you advise them on how to re-configure the software and come back and do the whole job afresh. Otherwise, the people you are advising to go and register because they did not register afresh were told to do exactly that. So, it looks like they did not follow the instructions. Now, let us move together, get back to them, sit with them and they will tell you the problem. Right now, they are following an order and they fear to tell you that the order has a problem. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr speaker. We want to tell the Minister of Internal Affairs that the original data was changed and when it was changed, they have failed to return it to where it came from and that is why we are having this problem. So, we want to advise you - since you used it for elections and you really know what you did to us - to go back into the system slowly but surely. Even my name Nandala-Mafabi is not there. So, there is a problem; this data was masterminded for elections and it cannot work for national IDs. You better go back - and hon. Kasaija, you know what you did. Thank you.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I will begin with the speed of doing this exercise. I acknowledge that the speed is very slow and we are taking up this matter with the suppliers of the equipment and we shall inform you at an appropriate time when things have improved.

As to the inaccuracy or the lack of information that should have been captured and is not available, we will go back and check and where things have not been done properly, we shall try to improve them. 

I want to assure you that there is nothing sinister or anything like that but maybe mistakes were made here and there. We promise we shall improve and we shall go back to the ministry and find out exactly what the problem is. 

Please, can I ask each one of you; this is a national exercise and when you see something going wrong, do not wait until we come to Parliament here? You can ring us and say, “There is something wrong here”, let us know first and we move on. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Next item and it is hon. Anywar making a statement.

3.28
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that I had approached you to make my statement on the “Women of Courage Award” and as I had earlier told you, I wanted the ladies who were given the award to also be here. Unfortunately, some are in Jinja and they could not make it. They will be here tomorrow. I will make it tomorrow. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ARREST OF COL (RTD) DR KIIZA BESIGYE ON THURSDAY, 28 APRIL 2011
 
3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, yesterday I read out a statement from the Ministry of Internal Affairs in relation to the arrest of some Ugandans who got involved in unlawful assemblies and processions as well as those who rioted in the streets of Kampala. I completed that statement, but as you all recall, I thought I should show a video recording of the events that took place especially showing who did what in the process. 

Mr Speaker, as you did permit me yesterday, I ask the technical people to show that video tape. Thank you.

MR WADRI: I rise on a concern of procedural nature. There has been a lot of conflicting information from the press fraternity and government officials on the events that happened on that fateful Thursday when Dr Kiiza Besigye was inhumanly arrested. Even then, there is also a contradiction between the senior Minister of Internal Affairs and his Minister of State. Therefore, knowing that machine presentations can be edited, I would like to find out from you, Mr Speaker, if immediately after we have viewed that video, we can be allowed to present our version –(Interjections)- we cannot edit a person holding a hammer; we cannot forge Arinaitwe hitting the glasses of a vehicle with the butt of his pistol. So, kindly allow us to watch what the Minister of Internal Affairs is showing and then we shall show –

THE SPEAKER: Should it be found necessary; because you do not know what is going to be shown - look at it and should it be found necessary, I will allow you.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, if I am allowed, that will be fine so that we compare the two videos. 

(Members viewed a video presented by the Minister of State for Internal Affairs.) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, is that what you wanted to show us?

MR KASAIJA: Yes, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, we have been watching the video as presented by the minister and we had requested that we show you the video from what we have as our perspective. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Who is going to be your operator?  

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I beg your pardon.

THE SPEAKER: Who is going to operate it? Is it the same person? 

MS ALASO: The staff of Parliament, Mr Speaker. Thank you. (Mr Matia Kasaija rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, do you want to make a comment before we see the other video?

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I have not completed my story. 

THE SPEAKER: Let him wind up.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I have not completed my story. I wish I could be allowed to finish my story.

THE SPEAKER: Leave him. We are here and we shall continue to be here. Let him wind up.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I will be very brief. On 28 April 2011, that is, last Thursday, in reference to the conditions of the arrest of Col (Rtd) Dr Besigye, statements were made in this House. I am quoting the Hansard: “All the blood that you could see in the vehicle means that there is more injury that has been caused to Dr Besigye. Plain-clothed men who hammered the vehicles said, “Muteere, muteere,” which in Kinyankole means, “Beat him.” If Dr Besigye had been walking on foot that could be reasonable enough for you to say he was pulling crowds.” 

I am quoting again: “I would like to add that we are not sure whether Dr Besigye is alive or dead.” 

Another quote: “This harassment, I would like to warn, could be a recipe for an insurgency in this country.” 

I would like to quote: “You have kidnapped Dr Kiiza Besigye. We have tried our best to make sure that we follow the law to the letter.” 

Another quote: “… one came with a claw hammer and the other with a pistol and broke a wind screen of his vehicle.” 

Another quote: “I do not want to live in a country where security forces are using hammers to hit people’s vehicles and political leaders.” 

Finally, “The victims of your brutality are the ones to blame.”

That footage has attempted to answer some of these wild allegations against this state. The rest I leave for the House to debate and come to a conclusion. Thank you, Mr Speaker. The rest I leave for the House to debate and come to a conclusion. Thank you. 

(Members view a video presented by Ms Alice Alaso.)

4.04
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Mr Speaker, we also want to put on record a narrative of events from our perspective on that day because we have listened to what the Minister said. We do not share the same view and I would like to put on record, for the purposes of the Hansard, a narrative of events on that day.

Dr Besigye left home, heading to work in his car as you have seen; he was not walking to work. When he reached the Kubbiri-Bwaise roundabout, the RPC Kampala, Mr Grace Turyagumanawe, blocked the road ahead and informed Dr Besigye that he could not proceed via the Makerere Hill. He also told Dr Besigye to turn around and use the Mulago roundabout and his argument was that Makerere Hill was congested. Dr Besigye grudgingly obeyed and he drove to Mulago roundabout, through the Old Mulago Road. 

Near the roundabout, Dr Besigye found the road blocked with three police vehicles: UP 2569, UP 1036 and UP 1928. Mr Turyagumanawe came up again and told him he could not proceed. Dr Besigye argued – he needed to go to work but first through his bank in Wandegeya. Turyagumanawe at this point was relentlessly on the phone, perhaps talking to superiors seeking direction on how to deal with Dr Besigye.

Finally, Turyagumanawe responded that Dr Besigye is not allowed to go to the city centre to which Dr Besigye objected. He said he would then walk to his bank if he was not allowed to drive. Turyagumanawe called in the Traffic Police who ordered Dr Besigye to drive back, asserting that he was blocking the traffic flow, which road had actually been blocked by the police vehicles in front and also from behind, making it impossible for Dr Besigye to either move forward or turn back. 

At that instant, Dr Besigye got out through the roof of his car to address the Police and draw attention to what seemed to be a well-planned scheme. It is then that Turyagumanawe called the commandos in civilian clothes to break the left window, where Dr Besigye was seated. 

At 10.30 a.m., Besigye’s arrest began; a commando who was wearing a hooded jumper came with a hammer under his jacket and used it to hit the left window of Dr Besigye’s car. The hooded commando continued hammering on the left window until he broke it and the hammer fell inside the car. He ran away thereafter. 

I lay on the Table photocopies of still photos which show the hooded man. The first one shows the hooded man himself; the second one shows the hooded man hitting the car with a hammer. Thirdly, you see him continuing to hit the car but now he has cracked a hole into the car and the fourth photo shows when he has lost the hammer and his hands are on the car. 

Mr Speaker, in a space of a few seconds after this man broke into the left window, another assassin, a one Arinaitwe, showed up on the right hand side of the car. Using a pistol, he broke the window of the car as his boss, Grace Turyagumanawe, attempted to chase away the media.

At 10.37 a.m., the assassin, Mr Arinaitwe, made a crack at the right window. Turyagumanawe was seen ordering his policemen at the scene to use their disarming pepper spray on Besigye and he commanded: “Spray inside. Spray inside”. 

The agents obeyed. They sprayed the pepper and a poisonous compound inside the car. They sprayed the chemical and pepper and teargas onto Dr Besigye and his assistant, which spray went across to the left window into the eyes of the policeman and the commandos who were standing on the left hand window - this statement should clarify the source of the hammer and the spray which affected the commando on the left side of the car -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I don’t know whether you can ask them to keep quiet. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, let us listen to the account given by hon. Alaso. 

MS ALASO: Yeah, because when the Minister gave his account, I was civilised enough and I tried to listen. I hope these ministers will at least pretend that they are civilised and listen. 

Dr Besigye was brutally hurled into a pick-up, beaten, slapped, tear-gassed under captivity and kicked by Arinaitwe the assassin, the commandos and the mambas, under the command of Grace Turyagumanawe. 

The journey from Mulago roundabout to Kasangati took about ten minutes or slightly more. Six people were knocked by the van between Kasangati and Mulago roundabout. The police need to account since the van that was following picked up all the people who were knocked on the way. We want to know whether they died or they are still alive. 

The van on which suspects were transported was a torture chamber. In that police van were six men in civilian clothes, putting on dark glasses and with their driver, each one of them had two pistols and they had SMGs in the car. They brutalised the suspects all the way to Kasangati, cracking the skull of one of Dr Besigye’s assistants. The torture men in the police van also smoked “bhangi”. We demand that the police disclose who these people are. 

Dr Besigye was dropped off the police pick-up, as you may all have seen in the documentary. He lay in Kasangati Police Station. For 50 minutes, Dr Besigye was unconscious and nobody was allowed to see him. The Members of Parliament who rushed to Kasangati were not allowed in. One hour later, panicking and thinking that Dr Besigye was dead, they called in his assistant, Sam Mugumya, who was also locked up in a police cell, to check on him. They told him, can you check if he is still alive. And Mugumya checked and told them he was breathing. That is when they called in Dr Olive Kobusingye. Over an hour later! Yesterday, the Minister said I was allowed to go in. I went in two hours later. 

Since the Minister in his statement has decided to keep quiet about the people who were involved in this operation, it is my cardinal duty to tell you that the one who commanded this operation, Mr Grace Turyagumanawe, joined the police of Uganda in 1981. He was dropped from his position on 2 May 2001 by the then IGP. Barely a month later, he was reinstated. 

He had been dropped off based on the recommendation of the Sebutinde Commission of 1999. The Sebutinde report, on page 415, refers to Grace Turyagumanawe, who was an assistant commissioner of police in charge of traffic and road safety. It is said in the report that under his leadership, the traffic department experienced unprecedented corruption, bribery and extortion by the traffic police. However, it is sad that Grace Turyagumanawe was reinstated by the current IGP in disregard of the Justice Sebutinde report. 

Today, he is also remembered as the officer who blocked the Katikkiro of Buganda, John Baptist Walusimbi, in September 2009 at the Sezibwa Bridge sparking off the infamous September 2009 protests in which more than 50 people were killed. 

The assassin - we have always told this House that there have been people lined up to assassinate Dr Besigye. And we will tell you who Arinaitwe is because the minister refused to talk about Arinaitwe.

Arinaitwe Bwana Gilbert, the assassin, became cadet assistant superintendent of police in September 2007. His officer’s No. is A/1089. He is a CID who is in the Homicide Unit but currently attached to the Rapid Response Unit. His other number is 233553P14409022966.

Finally, I would like to make only one comment on the video -(Interjections)- yes, even this one was sent to assassinate Dr Besigye; you wanted him dead. You shot him the first time and hon. Kivejinja said he bit his own finger. That time you missed him. The second time you came again. 

MRS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, we are all aware that Arinaitwe is a police officer who was deployed to execute a mission and he carried out his duties legitimately. Is it in order for hon. Also to allege that Arinaitwe had been sent to assassinate Dr Kiiza Besigye and that this was not the first time and yet she cannot substantiate who gave the orders? I am in Government and I know that there were no orders given to Arinaitwe to assassinate anybody. Indeed, he did not assassinate Besigye. Is she in order? 

THE SPEAKER: I think there are two issues here in that this was not the first time. According to her, what Arinaitwe wanted to do was to assassinate. She was talking about the acts of Arinaitwe and in her opinion, what he did was an attempted assassination. But we are asking her to substantiate the second time since she says that this was not the first time. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, the first time was when Dr Besigye’s hand was shot at but to date, the assassin has not been traced.

THE SPEAKER: Was he the same person? 

MS ALASO: No, this shows that this is the second time there is an attempt on Dr Besigye’s life. In the first attempt, they shot at his hand and the second time is what you have just watched today but we are going to look for the other video and bring it here for Members to view. 

I would like to conclude because my task is just to clarify to this House what is on record. The clothes in the first video were not the ones that Dr Besigye was putting on that Thursday when he was injured in a scuffle. The clothes he was putting on in the video that was shown by the minister are the clothes he put on the day when he was freed from Nakasongola on Wednesday. The clothes Dr Besigye was putting on that day are the ones we have shown you: a plain light blue kitengi shirt with embroidery around the neck. 

Finally, I would like to tell the honourable minister that my personal response to this statement is that, it is possible to bring in all forms of statements to this House. Even “doctoring” a video is very possible but I would like to tell the people in charge of this country that you are taking Uganda full cycle. We used to say that these are things which only used to happen during Amin’s time but they are happening during President Museveni’s time as you watch. Children are being shot at like Juliana in Masaka and the minister shows no remorse. You are taking this country full cycle. And the sooner you realise that we don’t need permission from you; we don’t have to apply to you to be part of this country, the better because we shall be here. The only thing you can do to us is to kill us. 

But I also want to tell you that even if you kill Dr Besigye, the issues being raised will continue to challenge you in your faces and you will have to deal with the fundamental concerns that Ugandans have put to you. How I pray that you don’t drive this country to destruction! How I pray that the Good Lord will help you engage a reverse gear! I thank you. (Applause)

4.25
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have landed into a problem and this is the problem of watching a video and then discussing that same video or those videos when they have been switched off. When you are going to discuss videos, they remain in play. You run and pause – these security officers know how it is done. So, you can rewind and clearly watch what is going on. I am sure hon. Awori is aware of this. So, I think this one has passed us but it is not very important anyway. 

I would like to appeal to my senior colleague, the minister that for every event similar to the one reported about, he needs to be extra sensitive especially about the lives of the people that perish during such an exercise. His entire report did not refer at all to the deaths. 

There were three major components as a basis for our discussion: One, the demonstrations or riots - you could pick the appropriate name; two, the handling of the situation; and three, the human lives that went with it. So, for every discussion, we should include these three elements because you may not even be here to defend the actions of Dr Besigye.  

There is a saying in Luganda that if you steal food and you are taken to jail, you will still be given food while there. So, even if Dr Besigye had misbehaved, there was no licence for the state to misbehave. What we would like to ask ourselves here is whether the manner in which he was arrested was really appropriate especially for people with advanced age like you, Mr Speaker, the hon. Prime Minister and Maama Bitamazire? I am sure that when you looked at Dr Besigye being roughed up onto the pick-up, you got double thoughts. So, it is not upon the minister to explain that someone was misbehaving but rather how he was handled when he misbehaved. So, to come here and say, “He misbehaved and, therefore, deserved that treatment” is wrong. 

The minister said that the Police have got functions which include protecting life and property. So, the minister forgets quite immediately to remind us that on that day when life was being protected, it was indeed lost. So, we are demanding that you let this House know how many lives were lost, even if these lives were taken by Besigye, so that we can know that either ten or 20 people died.

Still in the Minister’s statement, he talks about the officer who was injured - unfortunately I have said that these videos have been taken in a way that is just childish. It is also childish for you to sit there and begin to contemplate on recorded items. I can assure you that they are going to be played a million times on international televisions in the week to come, so they should not form a very serious basis of our discussion this evening. This is because some of you have limited knowledge about such footage. If you are not capable of identifying a scene where one window has been broken and then another window is smashed and spray is coming from a different direction - you only come to say that they have sprayed him. The question to ask is, “Who is spraying?”

We also got information from the minister’s statement, on page 6 that it became justified to use appropriate force to effect the arrest. Now, we want to know from the minister what he describes as “appropriate force”. We would also be interested in knowing what was involved in what is described by the minister as “appropriate force”.

In the past, many of us were here crying that individuals come without official uniforms - the official uniforms are always brought to the House and are known - and they are armed. It is difficult to regulate un-uniformed people when they are armed - they could be on the Government side or the Opposite side. So, allowing un-uniformed people to use guns so freely like you have seen is dangerous. This is what happened during September riots; it is what happened in Kasubi. All the officers of the Army and Police -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, is it your suggestion that all the members of the Police Force should be uniformed? Aren’t you aware of the CIDs; are they uniformed?

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, I am perfectly aware that there are police officers who are not uniformed. On top of that awareness that I have –(Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the hon. Member for giving way. It is true that all men and women serving in the Army are not supposed to be in uniform, but in civilised countries those without uniform have got to engage in covert operations. The moment you act in broad daylight, you must be in uniform.

MR KYANJO: We are here to learn from each other and I have modestly carried myself as a good student, learning from many experiences. I learn from those who are taken to be senior in character, manner and education. I have said that it is true that some members of the security forces are not uniformed but what I have known for a long time is that they do not execute arrests.

THE SPEAKER: The CID?

MR KYANJO: Yes, under circumstances -

THE SPEAKER: I have been dealing with prosecution for Government and I have been working on files handled by CID. The CID do not have uniforms and they arrest.

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, I fear to say that I know all that.

THE SPEAKER: No, but I am telling you. You can ask hon. Kawanga and hon. Katuntu; they know all this. The CID can arrest.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank hon. Kyanjo for giving way. The information that I want to give my colleague is that when a CID officer who is not in uniform comes to arrest, he identifies himself with a warrant and effects an arrest.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, honourable colleague, for that useful information. What we are stating today is what is going to run this state. What I am stating is that under such circumstances, like that of Mulago roundabout, I would not have expected a CID officer coming with a hood on the head to execute an arrest in the presence of the Police and another one comes in a manner similar to that one. Whether reasonable or not, to execute an arrest under such circumstances simply degrades the institution. Mine was to simply say that the Police have been infiltrated by non-police officers. I want to ask whether this was a police officer. I am asking the Minister.

MR KASAIJA: Let me begin with un-uniformed officers or officers that go on duty not in uniform. I want to agree with my brother, Wadri, that when we go to arrest as CID officers, we should identify ourselves and why we are arresting. 

I want to inform you that those officers were called when the situation went out of control but the situation in which they were acting did not allow them to say, “I am officer so and so and here is my card”. When we are making a judgement against an officer, we should remember that as the Police, they are mandated under the Police Act to do whatever is possible to preserve life.

I will not deny that he was not a police officer; he was a police officer on duty. I know his name is Arinaitwe and he was under the command of the officer in charge, that is, Grace Turyagumanawe. Those who were in uniform were preventing the riots but those without were arresting officers. Thank you.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, hon. Minister, for the information. This, therefore, means that these were officers of Government acting on orders of the Government. 

We now go to the second stage - whether they were acting reasonably and within the law. You have said they were not capable of identifying themselves and that is why I primarily disqualified them. However, somebody bringing a gun and then it falls down and he picks it while another one is also wielding a gun – I can assure you, Mr Speaker, that individuals who can learn the practice of holding guns like that are going to be many in this country and I am sure that you and I will not survive them! So, it is better for all of us to be careful when we are sanctioning this kind of conduct. 

I want to conclude by demanding that the Minister tells this House the number of individuals who were killed on that day because that is of paramount importance. We are talking about the manner in which Dr Besigye was arrested but I thank God that Dr Besigye is alive. However, there are people who died and we want to know the people who died so that we are capable of taking appropriate action from that.

I am also demanding that the conduct of using un-uniformed people to engage in scuffles, like it was seen that day, must stop. Officers denied knowledge of what happened in Kasubi and they said that the people who came in plain clothes did not belong to the Government. Today it is a new story; they belong to the Government and have been acknowledged. 

If we are not going to know the deaths and we are here to entertain ourselves with whether or not these were police officers and whether Dr Besigye was mistreated or not, we are not going to find a lasting solution.

Lastly, I want to thank the hon. Member for Ruhama. I followed the speech of this honourable member on television a few days ago and I liked the comments she gave over this situation. I think they were useful and I suspect that if she is listened to by mainly some of her close colleagues, we may find a solution. 

THE SPEAKER: Why do you suspect? The two are different. (Laughter)

MR KYANJO: I suspect. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, we saw you in the film. You can give your account.

4.42
MS BETTY ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I will start by responding to the statement by the Minister as it was presented to this House. There are many questions as we go into details in analysing the statement and the footage shown in this honourable House. I, therefore, direct myself, for further clarification, to the hon. Minister. In his statement, he says that that senior police officer was sprayed from Dr Kiiza Besigye’s car. I would like to know who the senior police officer who was at site is, whom he has not identified. 

He even told us in his statement that this pepper spray is found on the market, meaning you and I can just access it. I am wondering where this can be found. Is it without any regulation? Does the Government equally buy it from any supermarket, Owino or downtown and then uses it on its citizens? How safe then are we as citizens? It is accessible and rampantly used by the Government and it is about to go into the hands of the civilians and it does not matter. What are you doing about that, hon. Minister?

I saw the spray that was sprayed on Dr Kiiza Besigye with different containers. I must say that I for one  cannot say for sure that I know that the container or the various containers of the spray that the Government has been using on its citizens, which the Minister has not enabled us as peoples’ representatives to know, was either tear gas or pepper. I saw one of the sprays - there were different types - and it was in a black container. I am asking the Minister to explain what type of spray was used on Dr Kiiza Besigye, to allay the fears that the poisonous spray which the doctors said was too much and unknown has been used on Dr Kiiza Besigye. Can he give us those details of what type of spray was sprayed on Dr Kiiza Besigye?

Another thing that I want the Minister to explain is, when Dr Kiiza Besigye was supposed to be flown out for medication, there was a problem at the airport. They blocked him from being flown out of this country to seek medical attention. I personally made all efforts to even ring my good brother, the Minister of Security, hon. Amama Mbabazi. I made efforts to ring my brother, the state minister himself, desperately looking to somebody to come up and give reason as to why he should be blocked when he is in that sorry state. I would like the Minister to help us explain the reason why somebody who was in the state of Dr Kiiza Besigye, who needed emergency medical attention, should be blocked from accessing his doctors in Nairobi.   

I also want the Minister to explain the circumstances under which one can access the assistance offered by the Government. I saw and read when His Excellency, the President, was now saying his Government is going to assist the victims of the riots. In what form is this? Are Dr Kiiza Besigye’s bills and his damaged vehicle among those you have arranged for because he is also a victim of the riots? I want this clarification.

Lastly, when the footage was played, it was me who was screened. I would like the Minister to explain why my brutal arrest by the Police - thrown on a pick-up like a sack of charcoal - was used as a curtain raiser to the footage. What did he exactly want to portray? I am still under pain. If I, as a legislator, can be treated in that form with Dr Kiiza Besigye, what about an ordinary Ugandan out there? It is very unfortunate -(Interruptions)

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, we watched the footage and we saw a lady resembling hon. Anywar - she has actually confirmed that she is the one - jumping from a pick-up and assaulting a police officer. This was a woman in uniform, clearly identified as a police officer in uniform on duty. Is she in order -

THE SPEAKER: I think you are seeking clarification whether that person you saw is the Member. Isn’t that clarification?

MS NANKABIRWA: No, Sir. I just want to know whether it is in order for her to escape giving accountability for her actions when she was seen assaulting a police officer in uniform. She said she was concluding and I detected that she was not going to give that accountability. Is she in order to end without at least telling us what made her jump from a pick-up where she had been lumped and injured, but the injury was put aside, and she assaulted a lady police officer in uniform?

THE SPEAKER: It is not in order for any person to assault a police officer in uniform.

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate that I continue to be traumatised by my colleagues after what I went through. The Minister would have been fair to this august House if he showed how I was walking alone and the police vehicle came and parked before me. I was picked, carried and thrown onto the pick-up, pushed under the vehicle as my boss, Dr Kiiza Besigye, and left to fall from the pick-up at the police station without anybody supporting me. I thought my colleagues in this House would have some remorse. Really, for fellow colleagues to be treated in that way and you turn it into a laughable matter is very unfortunate.

I would like to proceed that the honourable -(Mr Okupa rose_)

THE SPEAKER: She says that she is concluding. You know, according to our rules, ministerial statements should be debated for not more than an hour but you can imagine the time we have spent. Therefore, you should be brief and conclude.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, it is on that point that I am rising on a point of procedure. We know the time that is given for the report. Members should be concerned that other people also want to contribute. Can you please dictate that let it be three minutes each?

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Member, conclude.

MS ANYWAR: Yes, I am concluding. I just wanted to say that as much as I suffered that brutality, my colleague, hon. Nabilah, was literally undressed in the process of arrest. I stood as surety and I found her in a very sorry state. The journalist who covered that brutal undressing of a Member of Parliament had the camera confiscated. The journalists are all in panic and fear; they cannot do their work freely and they were warned to delete that part which was showing hon. Nabilah being undressed in the process of arresting her. This is a shame and therefore -

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MS ANYWAR: As I am about to sit down, in the statement of the Minister I could not see any apology to this country for what happened. It was a dark day in this country but I could not see any projection of a sense of reconciliation in the Minister’s statement to this House. Therefore, I find this statement very lacking and empty and I do not want to take it as a serious submission. I would like to just call the whole thing not right for me because it is not reconciling. As a country, we need a lot of reconciliation, we need a lot and the Minister has not done it and I just leave it to you. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Ruhaama. You know, the shadow minister indicated that the solution is in what she says. Let us get it.

4.57
MRS JANET MUSEVENI (NRM, Ruhaama County, Ntungamo): Mr Speaker, I just wanted to say that when these videos started showing, we started off with an American mayor and I wondered what the relevance was. However, when I saw Mr Besigye, I had a chance to compare the two leaders who were being arrested by the police or stopped by the police. Mr Besigye is a more senior category of a leader than a mayor but when a mayor was stopped by police, he did not have to abuse the police. He did not have to do anything that would really threaten or provoke the police because he knew that it is only right that when the police stop you, whatever category of leader you are, you stop and do as you are told. So for me -(Interjections)- please, Mr Speaker, I am here as a Member of Parliament for Ruhaama; I am not here as a wife of a man.

THE SPEAKER: Please, you should leave the private life of people out of this House.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I rise up on a point of order which is clearly taken care of in our rules. I have heard the Member for Ruhaama saying that when Dr Besigye was arrested, he abused the Police. Is it in order for her to make such a statement without substantiating what words Dr Besigye said which abused the Police? Is she in order to just proceed?

THE SPEAKER: Didn’t you watch what happened?

MS ALASO: I watched and I did not hear any abuse. I watched but I did not see any abuse to the Police. 

MRS MUSEVENI: Mr Speaker, I think it is only right that we agree because we were all watching the film here; we heard what Mr Besigye was saying and we saw what he was doing with a hammer. That is supposed to be a leader! He was not alone; he had so many people around him and they were doing all sorts of things to the Police. 

I think this film showed something about what has really been going on in this circus. The Opposition, I am sorry to say, have learnt to craft a language that explains what somebody already said is unexplainable. It is so easy for a leader to just do what the Police ask and then they can go and challenge it. That is what a leader would do. That is what we saw before Mr Besigye’s video. When you have a former presidential candidate behave in the way Mr Besigye was behaving as we saw there, and then a Member of Parliament from the same party comes after that and also grabs a police officer and -(Interjections)  

Mr Speaker, the Government Members of Parliament have to split their time to serve this nation and spare some of the time to come here and answer some of these queries. However, I think the Members of Parliament from the Opposition use all their time to craft a language so that when they come here, they really explain things that seem convincing yet many times we do not have something that can prove and lead us to believe what they are saying. 

I think Mr Besigye did not show any leadership capacity there because if he had just agreed to do what the Police was asking him to do – this is even a step further because initially, it started off by being a demonstration. What is supposed to happen in this country when a group of people or an individual wants to demonstrate? There are regulations for demonstrations in this city and in countries around the globe. Mr Besigye has refused at every point to follow what the regulations say about what people should do in order to carry out a demonstration. So, following that, I think the Police have been led – (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I have been holding out as my honourable colleague gives her submission but I am standing up on a point of order. When the hon. Minister referred to the Rtd Col Dr Kiiza Besigye as a leader without capacity while this very Government, where the honourable member is a First Lady, found him competent to appoint him as a personal physician of the President of this country, and he was equally appointed as a national commissar of this country because of his capabilities; is the honourable member in order to refer to a physician of the President of this country as an incompetent leader? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we should know when to raise a point of order. Do not raise a point of order for purposes of making somebody holding the Floor to give you space. I have always told you this Chair will never say that a Member is out of order simply because you differ in opinion or assessment of a situation. So, if according to her he is not a capable leader, I cannot say she is out of order because ten years ago or so he was this and the other. I cannot do that. Let us learn when to use the point of order. It should not be to stop somebody from proceeding but to clearly raise something, which is in the competence of the Chair to decide upon because the Chair, must be seized of the facts you use to rule somebody out of order.

MRS MUSEVENI: Mr Speaker, I want to conclude by saying that I think it is unfortunate for a leader of the category of Mr Besigye to show the behaviour he has shown in all these days, day after day. He has caused many people trouble. So many people have suffered a lot of pain and all that would have been stopped. So I think that for Members of Parliament to come here and try to defend that behaviour is unfortunate. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Maj. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker -(Interjections)- I want to thank the minister for the statement. I also want to thank the Opposition for the CD they brought to supplement what the minister showed. It was more informative and showed some aspects the CD our minister presented did not show. 

I am very grieved and hurt that Rtd Col Kiiza Besigye, my long time friend, had to get involved in what I saw in the video. I am also hurt that we leaders can get involved to that level and cause a lot of suffering for many people, cause sterility and bring business to a halt. When we come to this House, as soon as we are sworn in we are referred to as “honourable members”. I am always very cautious because whenever we do something, we are being watched. We cease to live our own lives and we become public figures. From the way we are moving, we need prayers! 

When hon. Alaso spoke, I listened and I will come to the issues she has raised. Recently, we had elections and the results are there to show for themselves. We are lucky that some of us are here. We need each other because Uganda is for all of us. We would be sitting here and finding solutions to every problem. I know there are some of you on the Opposition who support us when we come to Parliament, in the committees and in decisions; but the way we are moving, we are not mindful of the people who voted for us. 

I have seen the video and the pictures. For the record of the Hansard, I want to say that a hammer – yesterday there was a picture of somebody using a hammer on the glass of the door. Unless that car is bullet proof, but those of you who know, a flying stone will smash a windshield yet a windshield has a thin layer to hold it in place. If you knock this glass once on the side, it will certainly break. (Interjections) Please, I am looking at the video you gave us. We did not see somebody hitting with a hammer; we saw the hammer inside the car. 

I want to say that for the record, this picture which appeared in the Daily Monitor needs to be investigated -(Interjections)- please! On the picture in the Daily Monitor, I think the glass which was hit by the pistol of the police detective was on the right side and you noticed that when he knocked it, it gave way and he knocked again and it crumbled. I do not see a scenario of a hammer hitting three times and the glass failing to break; there must be magic. [MR ODONGA OTTO: “You are campaigning for a ministerial post now.”] I am already one. (Interjections)

There are people who are not in this House who have been mentioned. I want to set the record correct. Hon. Alaso was condemning Turyagumanawe for having featured in the report. When people are condemned, they appeal. When you are sentenced, you have a right to appeal and you can be heard. At one time you were judged harshly by the press and we stood by you and the Bishop was there to say, “No, she has a right”, and you are here. (Interjections) Yes! So, Mr Arinaitwe as a police officer should not be condemned –(Interjections)- Yes! Mr Turyagumanawe as a police officer - because at one time he was featured in a report, should that mean that he should go to the gallows? 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, hon. Minister, for giving way. I just wanted to give information in respect of Mr Turyagumanawe who comes from my constituency. It is true Mr Turyagumanawe was investigated by the IGG. It is also true that he was suspended. He was investigated by Justice Ssebutinde. After his suspension, he was investigated by the IGG and was found innocent after which he was reinstated. (Applause) 

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, I want to say that demonstrations are held to express displeasure. When you do it, it should be within your means to control. Even in our homes, you can express displeasure. You can cross from one room to another and make a point. However, when it becomes continuous and involves death -(Interjections)- there was this famous Mabira demonstration where two foreigners lost their lives, a truck ferrying petrol was burnt, a businessman in Katwe of Asian origin lost 40 motorcycles. 

What I saw in this video and what I have been seeing on TV in these demonstrations where people steal property, eat food, hit people – really, you should demonstrate within the regulations of the Police. (Interjections) Yes, there is no law and order. I think the Police was right to come in. 

I am appealing to you, hon. Members, when we want to demonstrate, we should follow the guidelines and when you want to demonstrate, we should be able to control the rioters. If you cannot control them, do not venture. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if you agree that whoever makes a contribution should not take more than four minutes – three minutes? Okay, we have agreed on three minutes.

5.19
MR SULAIMAN MADADA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Mr Speaker and colleagues, when I started watching this video, I started identifying myself with a political class in Uganda that is becoming indifferent. One, I saw that the politicians today will cause the other sectors of society to suffer because of our decisions. I saw journalists and I saw the business community but the decisions and the acts of the politicians are the cause of what is happening today. It becomes our responsibility as politicians today to take decisions that will not cause this country the problems that we are facing.

I happened to have had an opportunity to study what we call photojournalism but also TV -(Interjections)- you know people are talking -(Interjections)- this is the language expected of some people - I could see some –

THE SPEAKER: You are eating into his time.

MR MADADA: I heard the shadow Minister of Internal Affairs asking, “Would this be the appropriate manner in which a policeman would arrest a person?” The other question would be, “Would this be the appropriate manner in which a leader or a politician would behave?” These are issues that we must remain with. You are asking a policeman, “Is this the appropriate manner in which you could act?”, but what about you as a politician, is this the appropriate manner in which you would behave? These are some of the issues with we should leave ourselves to interpret. 

Every situation must not be judged in isolation of other events. When you look at a video, you do not just have footage without the history of the footage. Once you have this, you will have a problem. Analyse a video from a situation. I saw a situation building up from Mulago to some place, and these actions prompted what happened. This interpretation must be understood. The problem today is that people are looking at footage from where action started. A situation is built. This is the interpretation we should have today -(Member timed out_)

5.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Jessica Alupo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In debating the statement of the internal affairs minister, I would like straight away to refer to page 1, the first paragraph which reads, “I want to inform the House and the country that Government is equally if not more concerned about the high costs. This is why Government has stated on several occasions that the matter is under active consideration and action will be taken.” 

This reminds me of the meeting which the Opposition held at Fairway Hotel. In that meeting, according to the press, they had called the members of the press to declare that they were going to start to the Walk-to-Work campaigns because of high costs of commodity items and high fuel prices. Initially, I thought that they were going to protest under the law and that means that they were supposed to be in consultation with other agencies like the Police so that they draw common guidelines. Unfortunately, what I have just watched in the footage has given me the impression that the Fairway Hotel meeting and their declaration had a different agenda from what they were declaring on that day.

That notwithstanding, I thank the Minister for coming out very clearly to demonstrate to the Ugandan people that Government is aware of the high fuel prices and the commodity prices and Government is working very hard to ensure that the matter is sorted out. 

Mr Speaker, I want to draw the attention of this House to the items which I saw the rioters holding - the rioters who hitherto, in the Fairway Hotel meeting, were supposed to have given Government a message about this statement which I have just read. When I saw them holding sticks, stones, hammers, used car tyres - (Member timed out_)   

5.26
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Footage or not, two wrongs do not make a right. I stand here with concern. If you go to Mulago or any other hospital, or the prisons, you will hardly find a victim who is beyond 30 years. Stop using young people! Leave the young people alone! Do not take advantage of them because they have no jobs and no education. We are bleeding as leaders of the young generation. Whoever wants to fight his war, if your children are not enough for you to cover you up, please, forget about it and do not destroy our generation! That is all I have to say. Let us be civil. Let us think twice. We need sanity in our country.

Mr Speaker, my humble plea to everybody, all the leaders, is to leave the young people alone. Thank you.   

5.27
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT IN CHARGE OF SECURITY (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker -(Interjections)- even me? It is true that I intended to speak for more than three minutes but if it is the desire of Parliament not to have all the information I have, I will give you what I can only give in three minutes.

First of all, I would like to talk about the question of the law. What is the law regarding demonstrations or assemblies in Uganda? That is one question. The second question I want to talk about is the arrest of Dr Kiiza Besigye last Thursday by the Police. Was the Police right to do so or not?

On the law, I think there is no dispute about the law because the Constitution is clear in Article 29, clause (1), paragraph (d) which says, “Every person shall have the right to: 
(d) Freedom to assemble and to demonstrate together with others peacefully and unarmed and to petition ….” This is the right and freedom you and I have – to assemble, to demonstrate peacefully and unarmed. However, as you know, in exercising this freedom and in accordance with Article 43 of the Constitution of Uganda, clause 1, it says: “In the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms prescribed in this chapter, no person shall prejudice the fundamental or other human rights and freedoms of others or the public interest.” So, it is very clear; you can demonstrate but you must do it peacefully, without being armed. 

Secondly, when you are demonstrating, make sure that you do not prejudice the rights of others. 

Who is supposed to ensure how a demonstration is carried out? The answer is in the Constitution in Article 212 – 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister for giving way. As far as I know, there was no demonstration – 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: You cannot take my time. Mr Speaker, this is not just a matter of debate; it is a crucial matter. I beg that for the sake of clarifying this very critical point let him raise his point of clarification but I should be given time to respond to it.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you for your indulgence, Mr Speaker. Mr Besigye left his house in Kasangati in a car and he was travelling with his aides, knowing well that previously he had been stopped from walking. One thing the Minister is referring to is a demonstration. Moving in a car does not constitute a demonstration. Even previous attempts by Dr Besigye to walk would not amount to a demonstration because he walked out of his house alone. Considering what the minister has just made reference to, I do not understand how else Dr Besigye should move. When he walks, Police run after him; when he is in a car, Police harasses him, spraying him as though he were a bedbug. How do you expect Besigye to access facilities? 

THE SPEAKER: That is a contribution. 

MR AMURIAT: It is not, Sir. (Laughter) I want clarification from the Minister; he has talked about fundamental freedoms which are enshrined in the Constitution. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I think hon. Amuriat has simply seized the Floor under the guise of a clarification and made his presentation in three minutes. However, for the benefit of hon. Amuriat and others who may be like him now, in understanding this question of demonstration or assembling, I do not understand demonstration to mean demonstrating on foot. You can demonstrate on foot and in many other ways. I am talking about demonstration as a concept and I am talking about the law. That is the essence of my presentation now. 

As far as the law in Uganda is concerned, you can demonstrate provided you do it lawfully. Who has the duty to ensure that your demonstration is lawful? It is the Police as stipulated in Article 212, as the minister clearly stated in his statement yesterday, that “it shall be the duty of the Police to protect life and property and to preserve law and order”. So, it is clear.

There is a point which was made in this House, and I have heard it being made by many people outside there, that the Constitutional Court annulled a provision in the Police Act, Section 32. This is not true. The issue which was before the Constitutional Court was whether Section 32(1)(b) of the Police Act was constitutional. That paragraph gave powers to the Police to grant permission for people to demonstrate - (Member timed out_) Mr Speaker, I thought we had agreed on time? 

THE SPEAKER: I give you one and half minutes. Proceed.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: One and half minutes? Okay, I can conclude this point. What the Constitutional Court ruled was that it is not up to the Police to grant permission or not to grant permission; the court clearly stated that the Police has power to regulate and it makes sense to regulate demonstrations. 

I am very happy that the lawyers – my brother, hon. Katuntu and there are few learned friends the other side, and I can see another one who is trying - (Laughter) As you know, today they carried out what you could call a demonstration but they notified the Police and everything went well. So if you want to demonstrate, just follow the law.

In this case, was the Police right to arrest Dr Besigye? My answer is this: Dr Besigye left his home at 6.30 a.m. By the time the Police arrested him, it was six hours later and there had been a stand-off as you could see in the brief footage. You know, we have the entire footage showing everything that happened that day but we did not have time to present it. [HON. MEMBERS: “Where is it?”] If we have time, we can show it. Six hours’ stand-off between Dr Besigye and the Police! Moreover the Police was kindly pleading with him not to use that particular route. Instead, he was saying, “No, no, no.” He then parked his vehicle in the middle of the road and the obvious consequences of that are known to you (Member timed out_) 

5.38
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think we are missing the point in this debate. The issue is we are now discussing, even the minister’s presentation he gave us was discussing how Dr Kiiza Besigye was arrested. The question that we think all of us must ask is: what was the intention of this demonstration? The demonstration did not occur once or twice but three or four times. (Interjection) Yes, if we have to be honest, we need to ask this question. 

Let us assume for once that it was about the high fuel prices. What would be the possibilities in terms of solving the issues of fuel prices? What were the suggestions given by the people who were demonstrating? They were asking for a reduction. However, the issue now is not about the fuel prices; we are just being hoodwinked to discuss how someone was arrested, how someone jumped out of the car and attacked a police officer; whether it was right or wrong and we are missing the intentions of those who consistently and persistently came to the streets, disrupted business, got many people beaten, not only once but twice, thrice and the implications of that.  

Government and those involved must be honest with each other. Those demonstrating were not honest about their motives for demonstrating. If they had been, they would have listened to government when it said it would take action. They were arrested and released on bail but they came back on the streets with different intentions. I live somewhere near Kireka and I saw some of our members being actively involved in helping people get tyres on the road. (Interjection) Mr Speaker, some of them are yet to be sworn in. I live with them in Kirinya. 

If we want to find solutions to the problem of high fuel prices, we need to work as a team. If you are going to hoodwink people who are as smart as you to think that the reason why you are demonstrating was to bring down fuel prices, first of all we would be starting on a wrong footing by being dishonest.

My colleagues and hon. Members, if you have a motive and intention, make it clear and make proposals. Up to today, we have not seen substantive proposals by those demonstrating on the way forward with regard to fuel prices. (Member timed out_)

5.42
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. One thing is very clear, both sides made some mistakes; the Police made some mistakes and Dr Kiiza Besigye and his group also made some mistakes. What we should be doing now is not to put a lot of effort on what happened but on what is going to happen in future. Our efforts should be focused on the future - how should we handle this thing and how should we move? 

In that respect, Dr Kiiza Besigye has walked and has made a point and everybody has understood the point. Fuel and food prices are high and we all know this. I think it is time he stopped because each time he moves, people suffer. He is not making any other point but the same point of high prices and high fuel prices and citizens are suffering. 

So, I am appealing to hon. Kiiza Besigye; he has made his point and we should now move forward. We should sit and discuss and see what can be done for this country. The more he moves in that direction, the more we are going to suffer. It does not pay to be insincere with each other. We have seen what was happening, but when we come here and start telling lies that there was no hammer or there was a hammer, that will not assist us. 

Let us get Besigye and his group to come, sit and discuss. They may be having ideas, not knowing that they might not work. You come and sit with the government, we discuss and then you will see that things that you may think are feasible may not be feasible. I thank you.

5.44
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the minister for the statement. 

In my opinion, the two CDs are not different; they showed us the same facts. However, my question is: how have we come to this point? This is what we should ask ourselves. How have we come to this point? Let us not just look at one incident when Dr Kiiza Besigye was arrested or when hon. Anywar jumped on a policewoman but let us see how we came to this point.

Before elections, Dr Kiiza Besigye made it clear that when elections are over, he would not go to court. (Interjection) Those who are talking about the rule of law and the Constitution, there is a constitutional path that you can take when you lose elections. We know that this cannot be just an innocent walk to work or walk prices down. That is why after elections when the Opposition tried to arrange for protests, people rejected them because they were satisfied with the elections. The next thing we see, the high prices all over the world handed the so called Activists for Change (A4C) – I do not think that change means change of prices. I think Activists for Change is a serious threat to the stability of this country. 

Hon. Members, we were elected to come here and solve the problems of this country. [MR ODONGA OTTO: “We also want power”] You want power? Continue convincing people until they give you the majority so that you have power. That film clearly showed that even before Arinaitwe broke the other side of the glass, the first policeman who grabbed the hammer from Dr Kiiza Besigye had some chemical sprayed in his eyes when he went back to the car window. The next thing now was action by the Police to spray so that those in the vehicle get out. So, two wrongs, if you want to call them wrongs, do not make a right. 

Let us get back to our senses. Let us discuss what we were elected to do here and whatever problems that we have in the country. We have this forum and other fora to use. Causing riots on the streets will not solve the problems of Uganda.

If you come with force – in any developed country by the way, you cannot just touch a policeman. You touch a policeman in the United States or the UK; you are grabbed. (Interjection) Yes! So, you cannot come out everyday and abuse policemen, kicking them and jumping on them and when they touch you, you say you are being mistreated. Let us come back to our senses (Member timed out_)

5.48
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, you will remember it was me who broke this news to this House last Thursday. It was in the same spirit that I asked Government to come up with a statement, for which I am grateful that they have given us, as a basis to debate, however inadequate in content the statement may be.

In Africa and Asian communities, respect is always given to age. That is the reason why even here where we are they say obukadde magezi - old age is wisdom. In Kiswahili they say, Uzee ni akili. Therefore, when I look at this statement and compare it with the footage that we have seen, both in our local TV stations and in the international TV stations, a lot of harm and ridicule has been earned to this country by the actions of the Police Force. 

I think the most important thing which we need to appreciate at this point is not to just generalise. By coincidence, when we started watching the videos, there was civility shown in one of the videos, which depicted the arrest of the Mayor of New York in the United States of America -(Interjections)- yes, they didn’t kick him; they handicapped him and then dragged him. Therefore, we would have expected similar civility on the part of our Police. We are not saying that those of us in the Opposition are immune to prosecution. It is far from that. All we are saying is that let there be civility in the manner in which a human being is arrested. 

If Dr Kiiza Besigye were arrested from his house or from his vehicle and the vehicle was towed since the Police have the capacity to tow that vehicle, but they could not do that. Instead they chose to use force that the honourable minister in his statement describes as “reasonable force.” But I don’t know whether that was really “reasonable force,” especially after watching the destruction meted on him first by breaking his vehicle. I do not think that was “reasonable force.” I think that whether the truth is bitter or not, we must own up.  

That is the reason why my friend here, hon. Father Lotodo will agree with me that when Jesus Christ was carrying out His ministry he said, “Whoever has got eyes, let him see; he who has got ears, let him listen.” Therefore, we have got a lot to learn from what we experience; what we saw and what we have heard. But unfortunately even in an attempt to cut and paste the video, we saw three different scenes -(Interjections)- yes! We saw the scene of arrest of hon. Beatrice Anywar, which was quite different and took place a week earlier on Entebbe road -(Interjections)- yes; it was in Kajjansi along Entebbe road -(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Leader of Opposition, two more minutes.

MR WADRI: Even the scene of when we went to bail him out of Nakasongola was also pasted there. So, really let us own up where we have gone wrong. I, therefore, have the following demands to put across to Government to consider and they should really consider them in the way I put them:

We have seen the destruction which has been meted on Dr Kiiza Besigye’s vehicle. This morning I was told that Police has stealthily towed that vehicle and took it to a garage and replaced the glasses -(Interjections)- yes, but that is not enough. The harm which has been caused to that vehicle due to the fact that it was damaged, has already caused a lot of mechanical damage -(Interjections)- therefore, we demand full restitution and replacement of that vehicle; mechanically  that vehicle is no longer the same. 

Two, we demand resignation of Al-Hajji Kirunda Kivejinja, the Minister of Internal Affairs who should take responsibility for the behaviour of his officers. 

Three, together with the Minister of Internal Affairs, we demand the resignation of the IGP  under whose direct command the likes of Grace Turyagumanawe and Arinaitwe acted. 

Four, we demand that those who were directly involved in the misconduct be brought to book so that from there we can know that Uganda has got an image to protect. 

Mr Speaker, over the last one week, Uganda has lost its name because of a few people. I can ably say that those who actually carried out that violent arrest do not love this Government. If they had loved this Government, then they would not have portrayed it so negatively in the international media.  

Therefore, I would like to say that before elections, we had the British and Irish Police here training the Uganda Police Force. Unfortunately, I don’t think that is the curriculum through which they underwent. Even as I talk right now, a lot of military hardware of the Police is being driven on the roads without registration. There are very many vehicles labelled “Police” but if they get involved in any criminal act of traffic nature, you have no registration number to quote. I don’t know whether the honourable minister is aware. I thank you.

5.55
DR LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been looking at this report and come up with three criticisms which I would like the Minister to register. One, this report is short of three things: one is an apology for what went wrong; very many people have been killed; a number of them are in hospitals while others are languishing in prisons. Peoples’ businesses have also been destroyed under the strong arm of the military and the police acting unprofessionally. 

Two, the number of people who have been arrested and are in prison and those who have lost lives are nowhere to be seen in this report. 

Three, shall we as individuals always request for permission from the Police wherever we come from for permission to walk to work because this is not going to stop just like that? Many people are continuing to walk. I was personally involved in a kind of skirmish in Kyaliwajjala; I was not walking to work but had just picked my daughter from school and I was prevented from movement. No sooner had I left the scene than two pick-ups of soldiers came looking for me under instructions from the Police. So, this kind of intimidation of everybody cannot be acceptable. 

People have continued to define different kinds of “demonstrations,” but who tells you that I come from my home to demonstrate? I may not be demonstrating, Mr Speaker. I may be coming as an individual from my home with no intention to demonstrate whatsoever. 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, I think when you declare it as a demonstration, much as it may be walking, they capture it as a demonstration. So, if you don’t want to term it a “demonstration,” you just walk and nobody will bother you. (Laughter)

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, nobody comes from their house saying that, “I am demonstrating; I am walking to work,” you simply do it and there is no way individuals are going to pounce on the Police asking for permission to walk to their homes.

THE SPEAKER: No. 

DR BAYIGGA: It is impossible; the Police cannot handle that; this is the reality.  

THE SPEAKER: I agree with you. 

DR BAYIGGA: If at all I have intentions of organising a demonstration, Mr Speaker, I can inform Police and we organise it together very well as a demonstration. But a diffused mechanism under which people walk from their houses wherever they come from makes it impossible to ask for permission. In any case, there is no need to. (Member timed out_)

5.58
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County, South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. We are faced with a situation where we have watched films, heard the other side submitting and also this side submitting. Each side is trying to prove a point that it is “smart and clean.” But we must realise that out of this, Uganda as a country   has lost something and nobody has addressed the issue of the country. 

I had expected that we should come here not because we would want to win an argument but we would find a solution to the current challenges that we have. 

There is a problem; I can understand that in this we have a difference between politicians and leaders. Politicians will simply argue because they want to win a point and shine. A leader would stand here and find solutions to what we have been seeing. Someone has just asked us how we have gotten to that point?  Twenty years ago, we won the people’s hearts by discussing with them. Twenty five years later; we can only win them by lining military police along the streets. Where is the problem? You say, “Besigye.” You can destroy Besigye now but the problem that is confronting us cannot end by killing people. 

You ask what Amin did to Jonan Luwum, a few meters from where they wanted to assassinate Dr Besigye; Amin staged an accident and said that Jonan Luwum was a problem. He was using madowadowa dressed people like what I have seen here. Did it solve the problem? The reputation of our country is at stake. The foundational values of Uganda were attacked, no matter who started it. That is why we are here; I am surprised that people are not offering solutions.

You know the reasons why people are walking and they are within your reach - the biggest problem is for a man to meet his challenges with a negative attitude. People are saying that the cost of living is so high. You are the people levying taxes on every item in this country. They are saying that the cost of administration is so high and you are the people creating organs of the state that are sucking money from circulation. You are here just debating to win? Who has won in this debate? You, Kasaija; or me? The country’s reputation is at stake, people are suffering, let us address the problem.

6.02
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, I am so happy that the Minister accepts that the man who had a hood was a Policeman –(Interjection)- yes, he said so and we have pictures. It is very important that once in a blue moon we should be realistic with one another. I thought hon. Janet Museveni was saved but she is also coming to tell a lie because you can see for yourself that some young men were hit with guns, they were boxed inside cars and nobody is coming to say anything about that. 

You can talk about high prices but when you are comparing Rwanda, Uganda and the United Kingdom about their fuel prices, you do not compare the salaries because people who earn salaries are the ones who buy fuel. In UK somebody gets 4,000 Pounds that is Shs 16 million, so he can afford to pay Shs 4,000 for a litre. In Rwanda somebody gets US $250 that is Shs 1.6 million, he can afford to pay Shs 3,250 per litre but in Uganda the lowest paid person say a teacher gets Shs 200,000. Compare the comparables. If it is true that food prices have increased and farmers are enjoying, they are the ones who are buying the products; why are they complaining? I think we should be realistic to ourselves. 

How did they arrest Dr Kiiza Besigye? You can see for yourself. The manner was bad and the Minister says on page 3 that he had been given bail conditions in the Kasangati Court. Yes, it is not you to determine the conditions, you are supposed to take him to court and court would have determined whether he had broken the conditions but not Police if you do not know the law. Even Amama knows about this.

So having said that, Mr Speaker, I think we should face the true story, a hammer was there, if you go on YouTube, it will show you who had the hammer. We had a CD here which we were not allowed to show but if they did, we would demonstrate who had the hammer. We should be realistic who had the hammer and the person who had the hammer was a policeman who used it and it fell inside. Dr Kiiza Besigye said that it landed in. Let me tell you today, Uganda belongs to all of us, the moment you try to suppress people and they go under, it is very dangerous; some of you will walk on the way and they will harm you. 

The best thing is to let these things come out and we deal with them at the surface. Do not try to suppress people. We went to the bush in 1980 when we had no guns but here we are and we have been trained in Mchaka Mchaka; we know what can happen. This country is for all of us. Dr Kiiza Besigye was walking. I have walked to this place with engineer Amuriat, we have never caused anything. Allow people to walk because it helps in physical fitness. There is no license for someone to walk. Why don’t you give opportunity to people to walk? They are saving for their future; there is no permit needed for us to walk.

I learnt recently that the Police are beating people because zonal leaders had stolen their food. If Policemen are happy, having food and their salary is good; there are people who are suffering. Police must know how to be professional and the same is true for the Army. It is not a matter of coming to hurt human beings.

6.06
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. One time I went to the United States to attend an international visitors’ programme, and I did go to a state called Oregon. We went to the Justice department; at the entrance it was written: “Injustice to anybody can never be justice to anyone.” We can sit here as leaders and posture and become dishonest to ourselves that injustice meted to somebody was okay. It is just a matter of time, it may not catch up with you but it may catch up with your child or your grandchild.

All leaders all of over the world who have planted seeds of injustice have paid in one way or the other. For those of you who were so much associated with the UPC regime -(Interjection)- certainly, no. They even went ahead to legislate but after the regime collapsed, they were the first victims. 

You people we are in this world for a while. We used to read books written by people who opposed the Amin and UPC regimes because of brutality; people being thrown into boots of vehicles, today we see it. I congratulate the press - I laughed since yesterday about this. This whole circus takes almost four or five hours, somebody has done it in five or ten minutes, why? Because he has edited it and left what he wanted people to view? 

They should have shown all the four hours for us to understand what happened. This is why I congratulate the press because somehow, it does not matter whether it came from there or this way because it is the same. The press is the hero in all this.

The truth is that before this video we have seen, the country has already seen the pictures [HON. MEMBERS: “The whole world”] they have run on NTV; we have seen them on Al-Jazeera and YouTube. So, really this acting does not sort out the problem.

The second point, my learned friend –(Member timed out_)

6.10
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by expressing my disappointment that the substantive Minister of Internal Affairs is not in the House. I am very disappointed.

In a situation where Ugandans are shot dead, many of them, and then a government minister publicly states that they blame those who manufacture the guns and bullets? It is very painful. I wish he were here. Our people are dead and you say that we should blame the manufacturers of the guns and the bullets! I do not think there is any factory in the world making guns and bullets to kill Ugandans. It is very unfortunate that we have a minister making this kind of statement.

Secondly, I am confused about what is happening in our country. Would it have been possible in 1990, 2000 or even in 2006? Why now? How do we interpret this? Could there have been a demonstration in Mbarara in 1990 or in Rukungiri in 2000? What it means is that the people of Uganda are tired. They are tired of this Government –(Interjections)- that what it means; we are tired! Yes –(Interjections)– I lived here under Idi Amin until the situation became unbearable, I left the country. I believe I will be –(Interruption) 

HON. MEMBERS: It is an order.

MR BYARUGABA: I had not intended in any way to disrupt my honourable colleague whom I do respect so much and he knows that. I had also not intended to make a comment on this but we also know that in our Constitution, power belongs to the people –(Interjections)- hold it. And we also know that it is just about two months ago when the people of Uganda spoke loud and clear and returned –(Interjections)– -(Applause)- this Government he alleges people are tired of. 

Surely is he in order to state on the Floor of this House that the people of Uganda are tired of me who got 70 percent of the votes? Are tired of you, him or His Excellency? They are tired of him –(Laughter)- is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Again, although you have some useful information, it should not have been a point of order. I think you should have given him information; that he should be aware that the people of Uganda have just recently elected a government. That is information rather than a point of order.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank you. I would like to inform my colleague, hon. Byarugaba that Hosni Mubarak got 99 percent not very many years ago but he is not there any more. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Members, as I said last week –

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Okay, I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: On your behalf, I do regret all the circumstances that gave rise to what happened. But now when you say that people are tired when there has been – then they read ulterior motives into what happened and that will be unfortunate because then you will be saying that people are tired and they want to overthrow a government they are tired of and that is dangerous. 

Let all of us, in my view, regret the circumstances that gave rise to what happened and then we find a solution rather than saying that this was a demonstration to show that they are tired of a government, which has not even been sworn in. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank you for that interpretation and advice. 

My next point is – I was saying that I lived here during Idi Amin and I fled the country when it became unbearable and I became a registered refugee somewhere. If you look at the way Kampala City is being patrolled by the Army now – those who lived under Amin would think that Idi Amin was right back here -(Applause)- right back here and it is very unfortunate.

Mr Speaker, after Amin 33 years ago, our leaders were saying, “Never again shall we be ruled by the gun,” including the present President, Mr Museveni. “We shall never again be ruled by the gun.” We now see the gun everywhere.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okello-Okello, that is why I am appealing to you; what are the circumstances that have brought those people in uniform into town. Have they come for nothing? You settle the issues so that they do not come. (Applause)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I -(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Maybe they have cut you short. Hon. Members, do we still continue with this? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

6.17
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): I thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members.

I stand to move a motion under rule 46(1)(k) –(Interjections)- and I have copies that will be circulated. I have been listening to the debate and there are three things that have come out clearly.

One is that we all know that whether you are from the Opposition or the Government, the prices have been increasing and there is inflation. 

Two, we also know that there are demonstrations, whether these demonstrations are connected to the current inflation, the collaboration tends to be zero. 

Three, we also know that people have questions on how the Police is reacting to these demonstrations and in that light, Mr Speaker, I want to move a motion that really looks at the common ground because as a Parliament, all of us have an obligation to find solutions to what we are facing. It is very easy to fix blames but I think we need to take a higher load and find solutions to this country. So I stand to move a motion if I am allowed.

THE SPEAKER: Then read and we hear it.

MR BAHATI: Okay. Mr Speaker, I move a motion for the resolution of Parliament urging the Government, the Opposition, the civil society and other stakeholders to handle the current inflation in a peaceful and non inflammatory manner:

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to promote peace, order, democracy and good governance and protect the Constitution;

AND WHEREAS the same Constitution in its National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy(Objective XXIX)calls upon the citizens of Uganda to promote democracy and the rule of law;

GIVEN THAT Chapter V of the Constitution provides for and guarantees the protection and promotion of fundamental and other human rights and freedoms of individuals;

AND GIVEN THAT Articles 99 and 111 of the Constitution empower the President and  Cabinet to manage the day-to-day activities of the state in accordance with the Constitution and the laws of Uganda and to abide by, uphold and safeguard the Constitution and the laws of Uganda and to promote the welfare of the citizens of Uganda;

CONSIDERING THAT since the beginning of the year 2011,there has been rising prices of food and other essential commodities and services in Uganda and in the whole world;

AND FURTHER CONSIDERING THAT the high prices of even basic commodities and services have led to a high cost of living;

AWARE THAT Government through Police and other state security agencies have swung into action to contain the protests and keep law and order;

AND AWARE THAT all parties that are represented in Parliament signed a Memorandum of Understanding under the Inter-Party Organisation for Dialogue;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:
1. Government takes practical steps to intervene and manage the current inflation.
2. Government investigates some alleged use of excessive force by Police and security agents in containing the protests and disciplinary action be taken on them.
3. Leaders of the Action for Change and political leaders exercise restraint, take appropriate measures to ensure that protesters are civil and acting within the ambits of the law in their activism.
4. Government continues engaging political parties under the Political Parties Forum arrangement which is provided for in the Constitution”. 

I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded? Right; isn’t this clear? Do you want to say something?

6.22
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I also want to talk but since there is a motion, I want to state that I support it. I do support it because Government is already taking steps to handle the current financial problems. The Minister of Finance will be making statements to this regard and I want to call upon all Members who are here, to make proposals because what I saw last Friday hurt me a lot. 

I went to Mulago Hospital and spoke to the Director of Mulago Hospital and many people were wounded. But some of the doctors who wanted to go to some places to treat those who were afflicted were reluctant to move and I had to give them a lift and that was really sad. 

So, it is important for all of us to restrain ourselves. It is the only way of ensuring that we enjoy political sobriety and I am calling upon all those Members of Parliament and other people outside this legislative body to make practical proposals. We shall consider them and we must ensure that our country flourishes. I support this motion.

6.24
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Of course, this motion is arising out of the statement that has been given by the minister but when you look at the resolutions we are looking at and then you also read the Minister’s statement, they are two worlds apart. This one seeks to find a common ground, the other one is merely whitewashing -

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, we are not bound by the Minister. The Minister gave us a statement on what happened. Now this motion apparently is bringing a solution because what we need is a solution to the problem we are facing so that what has happened is not repeated. 

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, how I bring my issues really does not matter because at the end of the day the conclusion is important. That is why I said, whatever the minister brought is really to whitewash and it will not change anything. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to seek a clarification. The motion has been brought and it is talking of high prices of commodities and security things. We are going to deal with the motion and nobody on the Government has agreed. I see the Prime Minister coming up and saying, “I agree” yet the Minister came up and said, “There was no excessive force, they acted in the right way”.

I heard the MP for youth saying, “Do not use the youth” yet a few minutes ago, we also received mail from a certain No.82/83 which was saying every year 460,000 youth leave formal education and only 86,000 are employed. If this motion is coming, the clarification I want to seek is how you are going to deal with the issue of this unemployment -

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, the circumstances under which the things we have seen in the last two weeks or so is because of the prices of goods. The motion is trying to find a way of solving the problem; and if the problem is solved, then even this programme of Walk-to-Work will not be necessary. Maybe, it will have achieved what was intended. So, let us conclude this problem rather than just making submissions pegged on it. I think he is asking you to peg whatever you say on the way forward. This is what I see in this motion.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I was already debating the motion and I am saying whitewashing will not solve any problem in this country. Everything is in the open. You know when you start hiding like a dog when the entire body is in the open and then you say I am fully hidden; you are really bringing shame to yourself.

My appeal to the Front Bench really because I have listened to them except the Prime Minister who did not speak; but I have listened to hon. Amama Mbabazi, the “super minister”. That is how we refer to him because we respect him. I have listened hon. Janet Kataaha Museveni who also happens to be the First Lady and I expected a motherly statement. For this nation to cool, I expected a motherly statement from her really to say, “Yes, there could be problems, there could be challenges but as a mother, there were problems here and there, let us get down and do this thing. But the way she put things; I start asking myself – you know, let us face the reality, some of us were not in the bush war. We found ourselves in the Opposition. We were young and we never belonged to any political party. Some of you on the other side were either in DP, UPC, UPM and others were in the bush war. You have had your own problems; therefore, do not bring your personal problems and embed them in national issues, because they are going to cause us problems. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, we are all yearning to debate, but a Member moved a motion which was seconded. That means the debate on the other subject was closed. The debate now ensuing should be on the motion; to have it debated and disposed. Is it procedurally right for a Member to refer to previous contributions; are we resuming the debate? If so some of us can rise up and debate because we had burning issues. 

THE SPEAKER: I think what we have is the motion; you either support it or oppose it.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I appreciate that there is a motion on the Floor and I want to assume that it is a motion emanating from the statement of the Minister as requested for by hon. Wadri. And the statement of the minister is in regard to recent riots, recent unlawful assemblies and processions. 

The request for the statement was in regard to the brutal manner in which the police handled the procession. The motion is in regard to the current inflation –(Interjections)– I find this –

THE SPEAKER: No. 2 “Government investigates incidents over excesses of police and security agencies in containing the protests and disciplinary action be taken on the offender.” 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I pray you allow me complete my submission.

THE SPEAKER: No, I am just guiding you.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I want to use this opportunity that you have kindly given me to state that ordinarily, to have this motion – I think it would be procedurally right if we had debated matters of – 

THE SPEAKER: Amend it.

MS ALASO: Yeah; that is my thinking. It would better inform the aspects of inflation and related matters if the minister had come here to present on that. The presentation we have heard is totally different. Therefore, the motion as presented now is moving in a different direction from the debates that we have had in the House.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Alaso, since the statement was made, and your statement made, we have been having a general debate, without reaching any conclusion. Arising from this debate, I think the movers are saying we have seen the problem. The problem that has given rise to what happened in the last week or so, and they think the solution is what is contained in the proposed motion. 

Otherwise, you were engaged in a general debate, and I did not know who we would conclude other than saying that we have debated the minister’s statement but this is now tangible that we end it by making these resolutions. But if you do not want, you can dismiss the motion. 

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I do not know what to say about this. In principle I support the motion but I think we need to amend and improve this motion. When we say, “Government investigates incidences of excesses of the police …” and yet we have seen police officers like Arinaitwe waiting to be investigated while some of the opposition leaders are behind bars being investigated. Why can’t we get Arinaitwe behind bars while investigations continue? This would sober – (Interruption) 

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, the motion was moved and seconded. I had expected that the mover of the motion would speak to the motion and the seconder would come –

THE SPEAKER: Was it really necessary?

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I would like to move towards that direction because this would harmonize it and we would know that Government is responsible for this side and also for the other side; because there are people behind bars on the Opposition side, but on Government side there are people who have clearly been culprits. They have done damage not only to this country but also to individuals. 

In my district, the Army came and apologized over the radio; it also appeared in the papers for killing three people. Is that apology going to bring back the lives of our three people who were shot by reckless people? So, I think we should be able to harmonise and sober up the country other than whitewashing. I support the motion and I will be rising up to make the necessary amendments. 

6.36
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would support the motion, but I want to make the following observations first. One, the fact that we could have two videos that are different shows that someone was ashamed of some acts. One of the movies removed certain bad parts. The other video brought out all the bad parts. So the fact that the video of the Government side removed some of the parts, I would say they are embarrassed about those facts and in my ordinary eyes, as an ex-seminarian, I would see that as remorse. 

But the challenge we have is to tell the king that you are naked. There is saying in my language that when the king is naked and seated badly, it takes an exceptional servant to say, “King, you are naked; people are seeing your nudity.” So, we are trying to do it in a fashion that does not embarrass the king but at the same time bringing it to the king that actually people are seeing his private parts. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, this motion is very good. My sister in law came from Ivory Coast on the day of the riots and could not leave Entebbe because of the fights. The next day we picked her from the airport and she told me something very interesting. When President Gbagbo was arrested, he was taken to the northern part of Ivory Coast for house arrest. But he made a request to the authorities that he should not be jailed with his wife because it was his wife misleading him. And as we talk now, the wife is in a separate cell from where the President is. 

So when we come to such parliaments, we would expect all MPs, especially those who have capacity to advise the presidents of this country to tell them that Ugandans are not happy with the riots and the manner in which police is treating innocent civilians. 

Mr Speaker, I have a very rare lifestyle and I am proud of it. I play pool and to get the best – 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, we saw on the video there people other than the security bringing big stones and the like. What do you say about that; would you like to comment on that?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, Besigye was arrested on Thursday and the riots happened on Friday. I do not know if I am just not normal, but I was very happy about what happened on Friday. I want to be very honest because Ugandans were showing you that please, stop taking us for a balloon ride. We are also there. You sprayed tear gas until you got tired in order to pass a message that, “Do it again and expect more next time”.

Now that this motion asked the Police to be investigated; I know the investigations will not go anywhere. The people I play pool with downtown are saying the rule of law is not there. They want to take the law in their hands. I have seen on Facebook - I have informed the IGP – they have already started listing the profiles of all those police officers, their phone numbers, family members and the schools their children go to. This is very worrying because people want to start taking the law in their hands. I have been telling them not to do so but I cannot go to all the pool joints in the country. (Laughter)  

What I am saying is that if the Government could use this motion and expedite investigations, it would help. To hear that Arinaitwe is being investigated in the headlines; to hear that Grace Turyagumanawe is being investigated and arrested would bring general relief in the mindset of the ordinary Ugandan. Otherwise, last night, I was at one of the pool joints called Steak Out and one guy called me and asked, “You are honourable Otto?” I said, “Yes”. He said he was having a lot of problems with westerners. I asked why. He said the way they are handling this Government. I said, “No, no my friend, it is not about western Uganda.” And he said, “Okay, I have a problem with Banyankole.” I told him, “No, no, it is not the problem with Banyankole; there are very many good Banyankole who even know nothing in this Government.” Then he said, “Okay, I have a problem with the Bahima.” (Interjections) Yes –(Interjections)- why don’t you want to listen? I am just helping you. You are the one on the firing line. (Laughter) I am just helping you. Okay, you leave it now -(Interjections)- I am just helping you. (Interjections)

So, Mr Speaker, if we do not want the Mungiki to emerge in Uganda where police officers are going to be stabbed at night and their relatives killed; if you do not want mafias to emerge in this country where people are going to be handled the Italy way; bring these people to book. If you don’t arrest Arinaitwe, he is not a free man in this country no matter how long it takes. You do not handle Grace Turyagumanawe and bring him to book; they will die. The people I have been talking to are planning to kill them. Let me tell you a secret, people want to kill them. If you are saying nothing happened, you have made Arinaitwe a prisoner. He is not in Luzira but he is in prison in the whole country. After five years when you hear he has landed with a knife in the back, do not blame anyone because to you, nothing is wrong. 

Lastly, as I sit down, those who pray, please pray. I do not expect someone to be a mulokole and come here and start blaming the victims. I have seen the First Lady opening very big functions where people are praying very seriously to God –(Laughter)- but today, they are closing their eyes. Today she is the first person to condemn the victims and not even say that blood which poured was not necessary and you said you are saved? You say you are a mulokole –(Interjections)- No, I think I am lost. If you are going to pray, pray for all of us. Do not blame the victims.

I support the motion. If this Parliament cannot complete it, in the next Parliament we want to be told whether Arinaitwe and whether Grace Turyagumanawe were arrested. If you do not do it, the ordinary people, I pray, will do it on your behalf. (Laughter) I can assure you. Thank you so much.

6.43
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Kumi): Thank you Mr Speaker - 

THE SPEAKER: Should we limit the duration again? 

MR OKUPA: No. (Interjections) Mr Speaker, my nieces are finding problems in school. Why? Because my brothers are in the Army and others in the Police and my nieces are ashamed to be identified with their parents in school. It is not only those relatives of mine; there is one senior police officer who sent junior officers to see his daughter in Nabbingo and found the children at a general assembly. She was informed that, “Your father has sent these people to pick you up”, but the girl refused to identify herself. Let us not take this so lightly. Our children, and grandchildren are suffering and we are taking it lightly. I stand here to support this motion; but it should not just be us to support and pass it and it ends there. Ugandans should see action being taken.

We are talking about Government taking practical steps, what are these steps you are talking about? We are in the East African Community. When this matter came up the Kenyan Government - when the civil society threatened to demonstrate - cut taxes on fuel very fast by 30 percent. As if that was not enough, on Thursday last week, they cut taxes on kerosene to zero. What are we doing? We should also be doing something. It should not take this Parliament; it should not take the blood of Ugandans for us to reduce taxes on fuel, diesel, petrol and kerosene. It should not. It should not even need you to constitute a sub-committee of Cabinet. We have very effective economists in the Ministry of Finance and Bank of Uganda. I was reading the newspaper and one official; a director in Bank of Uganda said we must blame all this inflation on the Government. That was an official from Bank of Uganda. I do not know whether he still has his job.  

Let us not fear saying these are the steps we have taken whether subsidising or cutting the taxes because those who have been demonstrating will take credit. No. I think those are the critical issues the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister must take into consideration.

About investigating excessive force applied by the Police and other security organisations; so many investigations have been done. I want to start with the one of the Police. On the 29 April 1999, hon. Col Tom Butime constituted a Judicial Commission of Inquiry headed by Justice Ssebutinde. On page 415 of that report, Grace Turyagumanawe was one of those who was recommended to be disciplined, suspended and he was not alone. He was with four other officers: Alex Agaba was Assistant Commissioner, Finance, Oyo Stephen, Special Branch and Mudumba who was the head of personnel -(Interjections)- those ones went, Grace Turyagumanawe remained. 

Grace was very influential in the Kayunga riots stopping the Katikkiro. When Sorowen was removed, Grace Turyagumanawe was there. Last week, he was the one commanding. What is so special about Grace Turyagumanawe? Is it because - as how my colleague was putting it, hon. Tashobya –(Interjections)- please, please, we have the records of this. These people should not be commanding the Police given their record. Was he the only one whom the IGG, as purportedly said by hon. Tashobya, cleared? So he was the only one who was cleared and the rest - because he was the one heading traffic and we all knew how corrupt the Traffic Department was. It is just in these recent days that there has been some improvement. We should not just talk but action must be taken and Ugandans must see action being taken. 

Two, this brother of ours, this Ugandan, Bwana Arinaitwe, those who go to Miracle Centre have been seeing him there praying and translating as Pastor Kayanja preaches. For us who believe in God we feel so bad and so hurt that the person whom so many young people were looking up to was seen - I hope he has repented because that is the good thing with the Bible - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, time please.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I am concluding. We have seen what the tormenter’s wife has been undergoing because of the actions of one person. We should not misuse the word of God. We should not misuse the Church. In fact God will curse you and He will curse me if I misused His name. I grew up in a Pentecostal family. It shaped me

DR LYOMOKI: Order!

THE SPEAKER: Please, please, we do not have time. Please, conclude. 

MR OKUPA: As I conclude, I know hon. Lyomoki was arrested demonstrating inside the theatre. I do not know what he was doing in the women’s theatre in Mbale Hospital. Thank you. 

6.52
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion because it has demonstrated that we can discuss any matter and come to an agreement. I was happy when it was seconded by the Opposition. Time has come when both Government and the Opposition should agree on the way forward on the four main points that I think are at stake: the prices of fuel and food, the demonstrations, the way they are being handled and the important one, the way forward. 

I think what we have seen and heard from both sides continues to emphasis the point - like I saw on the T-shirt of my son this morning a phrase, “What has been proven now was once imagined.” Because a few weeks after a generally peaceful election that was in this country, we have seen chaos, circus, people’s hearts worried, pain, showing that all the investments and efforts that have been put into bringing about a peaceful and decent country could be wasted in such a short time. 

On BBC they always quote some wise words and this morning they said, “Everyone has a plan until he is punched in the face.” Uganda has had a plan for a long time at a high cost to bring about a peaceful environment for everybody to enjoy. But once you are punched in the face - and here I want to represent the Armed Forces that I represent because I have also heard - as we blame commanders who are appointed; as we dig into their history - I want to give you my example. I do not blame the person who shot me. I do not blame him because, first of all, I did not have anger against him as a person and I do not think he knew that he was shooting me.

When Turyagumanawe is on Police duty by law, by the Constitution, he is executing his duty. He is begging somebody -

THE SPEAKER: Gen. Tumwine, instead of debating particular individuals who are going to be investigated why don’t you leave that for investigation? You speak about the motion.

GEN. TUMWINE: Mr Speaker, everybody has had freedom to speak on this matter. I am representing the Armed Forces to make you aware of how our work can be made very difficult.

THE SPEAKER: No. What I am saying is that you are right but let us now deal with the motion.

GEN. TUMWINE: That is the one I am talking about, Mr Speaker. On the question of dealing with those who applied excessive force, I want to differentiate between the excessive force applied and when somebody is assigned a duty. I am assigned a duty in this Parliament to guide on issues of national security so that we deal with individual members of the Armed Forces who are violating the law as opposed to those who are doing their work. 

There is a common saying that when persuasion fails, you use force. We are called “Armed Forces”. Armed by law and by the Constitution and when you start a fight, do not say, “Beat me nicely.” You start a fight and you do not dictate. It is only brothers - and that is what I would like to bring in this Parliament. The Banyankole have a saying that when two brothers are wrestling, they show each other the pits so that they do not break each other and they do not fracture each other. In Parliament we are brothers and sisters -(Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am one of the movers of this motion. The motion is trying to find a middle ground so that we get out of this circus. We have heard you. You are not making a point. You have heard us. We are not making a point. The country is injured. We are trying to find a solution. Is it procedurally right really to go and unearth the dirty linen we are trying to cure out of this motion? Can’t you allow the country to move forward? How can we allow individuals to drag the whole reputation of 25 years for which you were shot into the mud? How do we do it? How can we allow that? Mr Speaker, I propose that really let us move forward to find a way out of this circus. 

GEN. TUMWINE: I am waiting for the ruling, Mr Speaker. I do not think that was anywhere related to the procedure. I would like to say that when people are humble it does not mean that they cannot defend themselves. The Government has an obligation. Hon. Katuntu said that one injustice is not justice. The more than 30 million peaceful Ugandans who would like to go about their hard work in peace, the injustice done to them by a few who want to disrupt it at any cost forces Government to have no choice. I hope - that is why I am supporting this motion – that we shall use available civilised ways to resolve all our conflicts so that anybody who goes against that - that is why the Armed Forces have been prepared, trained, equipped to deal with the situation accordingly, and do not complain.

7.00
MRS MARY OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sorry? I thought you had given me permission to speak. It is okay -(Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I hate to interrupt, especially hon. Okurut but in light of the fact that we had had a general debate, I want to move under rule 68 that the question be put. 

HON. MEMBERS: We want amendments.

THE SPEAKER: What I will do since some people still want to debate is to give four Members from this side and three from the other before I put the question.

MRS OKURUT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am sorry, hon. Amama Mbabazi, but there are certain fundamental issues in life where people should be given a chance, if possible, to express themselves.  

I stand to support the motion but with amendments. This footage which we saw was very important and I thank the Minister but I wish you had brought it a little earlier because there has been contention over whether Dr Besigye had the hammer or it was thrown into the car. I looked at both footages – my colleague there said that he studied, I do not know what but I did a study in cinematology – and when I looked at both footages, I saw clearly that Dr Besigye had a hammer -(Interjection)- I am asking members of the Opposition to be tolerant by listening to each other if we are going to find a solution to these problems.

I am supporting the motion but with an amendment. We are all feeling the pinch of the inflation. Some people are talking as though they were the only ones yet we are all either affected or “infected” by these high prices. It is on No.3: “Leaders of the Action for Change and political leaders should exercise restraint and appropriate measures to ensure that protesters are civil and acting within the ambits of the law.” 

Mr Speaker, from experience, we have not had any of these protesters acting in a civil manner; we have all witnessed this. In Kireka, I shed tears when I saw ordinary Ugandans who make furniture having their pieces of furniture put in the middle of the road and set ablaze because the protesters were barricading the road. 

I personally got more than 10,000 women from the market – hon. Otto is talking of people who are sitting badly – actually these women said, “We are feeling the pinch. For us, tukolera mmere ya leero – our daily bread - but we are being disrupted. We want the prices to come down but these riots are not helping us.” These women wanted to strip naked to protest.

THE SPEAKER: What is the amendment?

MRS OKURUT: The amendment is that I agree with everything else but on No. 3, we should say that this Walk-to-Work – and we know the motive behind it – should stop as these other measures come into place. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But it seems that many of you want to make amendments to the motion. In view of that, should we adjourn so that you go and prepare your amendments? You think about it; if you want more time then I can – you can debate now and then amendments come tomorrow because we also have to debate the amendments.

7.06
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion but I will also suggest –

THE SPEAKER: No, what have we done with the first amendment? Don’t we debate it and dispose of it?

7.07
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Mr Speaker, the motion which is on the Floor is very important to us and I believe it will pacify the situation. Knowing very well that the time we started this debate yesterday, tempers were very high. Even today it is evident that the Parliament administration feared that there would be violence in this Chamber – that is why you cannot see water glasses here, including one in front of the Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I had not realised that. (Laughter)

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, time has now proved us right that whereas tempers went up but Members have been able to act in a dignified manner while debating the statement and even considering this motion. I, therefore, propose that in light of the importance we attach to this motion and the fact that there are many of us who want to enrich that motion by making amendments, let us sleep over this motion and handle it tomorrow before we go to any other business. I wish to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Can we adjourn up to tomorrow morning so that we utilise the morning and afternoon?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and I will also comment on some amendments but I want to make one comment before touching on the proposed resolutions. 

First, we must admit that there is a problem in this country because when you look at the Order Paper we are discussing use of tear gas. Next we are going to discuss lack of oxygen. Where you have excessive tear gas and little oxygen in the country, it means there is a problem and I think we must be honest to ourselves as Parliament to find lasting solutions to some of these challenges, which we are facing.

The problem in the country is that there is political contestation of power. As Parliament, we should try to see how we can expand space, particularly at national level, for the Opposition and the Government to engage each other rather than engaging on the streets. 

It is in that spirit that I wanted to improve the resolutions, which are proposed so that we make them more practical because the way they appear, if we pass them, it will be business a usual. 

The public is looking at us, as Parliament, to see whether a solution can come from this House. I wanted to suggest but I am constrained by the life of this Parliament because in No. 1 and No. 2 where we are saying that Government should take practical steps and that investigations should take place; I wanted to improve it by putting a timeframe and we request Government to give a report to this House. But unfortunately we might be proroguing soon. So, I want your guidance that we say –

THE SPEAKER: It does not matter. You make the resolution; there will always be a government. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: I was wondering whether, for instance, we can recommend that Government reports to the Ninth Parliament but in that regard, I wanted to suggest an amendment to No. 1 because inflation has been on for close to half a year. I wanted to give Government a period of two weeks to come to Parliament and tell us the practical measures they have put in place. If that –

THE SPEAKER: The hon. Member has suggested good ideas but I think we should coordinate the amendments. Therefore, since there is a plea that we adjourn to enable Members study it, I would suggest that those who have amendments to the motion liaise with the movers and seconders so that tomorrow at around 10.00 a.m. they look through the amendments so that when we meet in the afternoon, the amendments should have been synchronised and we move faster. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: And I was saying if that is acceptable to Government, then we also amend No.3 to call upon –

THE SPEAKER: That is what I am suggesting; that you make those amendments tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. and you coordinate with the others so that we consider them together.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, I wanted the Hansard to be clear. I don’t want my speech to be cut short. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: But your speech is about the amendment and since it is part of the amendment, why don’t you liaise with others and then you bring them tomorrow so that we consider them. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Well, there is also nothing wrong for me to complete my suggestions. 

THE SPEAKER: In the circumstances, we conclude today’s business with a direction that those who have amendments to this motion before the House converges at 10.00 a.m. with the movers and seconders. Where? I don’t know the venue. Hon. Bahati, where could you meet?

MR BAHATI: In the Speaker’s dining room on the third floor. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay; and you will be entertained. You go there and work out the amendments and then we look at them. It will be our first business tomorrow. Can we meet at exactly 2.00 p.m.? Is it possible? So, the House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.13 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 5 May 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)