
Tuesday, 4 May 2010

Parliament met at 11.10 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. I have brief pieces of information. The first is to appeal to the sessional committees that have not yet completed their reports to complete and hand them over to the Budget Committee not later than Friday so that we can be able to meet the constitutional requirements. But I also would like to appeal to you to work expeditiously because I intend to prorogue the House on 14 May 2010. So, anything that needs to be done must be done before the 14th of May.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA RETIREMENT BENEFITS AUTHORITY BILL, 2010

11.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I wish to present to Parliament a Bill entitled, “The Uganda Retirement Benefits and Regulatory Authority Bill, 2010” for consideration and approval. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay but, hon. Minister, have you complied with the Budget Act?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes, Madam Speaker, the Bill is accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implication and it is hereby laid on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, can you read that Bill properly because what I have on the Order Paper does not include the word “Regulatory?”

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes, Madam Speaker, you are absolutely right. The title is supposed to read: “The Uganda Retirement Benefits Authority Bill.” It omitted the word “Regulatory” because that is exactly the very purpose of this Bill – its correction does not change the content.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please read the Bill as it appears on the Order Paper, clerk. 

THE UGANDA RETIREMENT BENEFITS AUTHORITY BILL, 2010

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, for perusal and report back.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

11.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, Article 259 of the Constitution of the Republic Uganda allows Government to borrow money from any source subject to the authority and approval of Parliament. Accordingly, I wish to lay on Table a proposal for Government to borrow SDR 19 Million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing of the Eastern Africa Agricultural Productivity Programme. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded? Okay, the request is committed to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

STATEMENT BY THE UGANDA PARLIAMENTARY FORUM FOR CHILDREN AND THE NETWORK OF AFRICAN WOMEN MINISTERS AND PARLIAMENTARIANS-UGANDA CHAPTER ON THE SITUATION OF NEWBORN, MATERNAL AND CHILD MORTALITY IN UGANDA

11.18
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE UGANDA PARLIAMENTARY FORUM FOR CHILDREN (Mrs Rebecca Lukwago): Madam Speaker, this is a statement by the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children and the Network of African Women Ministers and Parliamentarians-Uganda Chapter on the Situation of Newborn, Maternal and Child Mortality in Uganda (UPFC and NAWOMP).

I would like to start by informing you that UPFC in collaboration with NAWOMP would like to draw the attention of Government –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Epetait, do you have any problem?

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I had no intentions to disrupt my colleague, hon. Rebecca Lukwago, but she is just about to make a statement that I am sure most Members will be more than willing to follow. So, would it be possible to have copies circulated to Members to enable us move with hon. Rebecca Lukwago on the same pace? 

MRS LUKWAGO: The copies will be availed to you in due course.

As I was saying, UPFC in collaboration with NAWOMP would like to draw the attention of Government of Uganda in general and Parliament of Uganda in particular to the unacceptable high rates of newborn, maternal and child mortality in Uganda.

Currently, 193,000 children under the age of five die annually with 45,000 of them losing their lives during the first month of life. Furthermore, 6,000 mothers die every year during child birth. 

The persistent poor performance of our country against these development indicators greatly undermines the gains in socio-economic development that Uganda has made over the last two decades. 

What is most unacceptable about this situation is that so many mothers, newborn and children continue to die from illnesses that require simple and affordable solutions and could easily be prevented. The major causes of these deaths include: 
    • Limited access to skilled healthcare by women before, during and after birth;
    • Bleeding during and after birth;
    • Obstructed labour;
    • Malnutrition in newborns and children;
    • Malaria and HIV infection. 

The existing efforts by Government of Uganda and development partners to address this development challenge should be commended. 

The Government of Uganda has put in place the child survival strategy and the roadmap for accelerating reduction of newborn and maternal mortality and morbidity. These progressive policies combined with Government’s commitment to the Abuja Declaration to increase expenditure within the health sector from the current nine percent to 15 percent of the annual budget, provides Uganda with the required policy environment to reverse this trend.  

However, at the present rate of death, 335 per 100,000 live births, 29 per 1,000 and 137 per 1,000 live births for mothers, newborns and children respectively and without further investment by Government to translate the policies into programmes, Uganda will not be able to achieve its commitment to MDGs 4 and 5. 

In July this year, Uganda will host the next African Union Summit whose theme is, “Maternal, Infant and Child Health and Development in Africa.” This summit aims at devising strategies to further accelerate progress in improving both maternal and child health on the continent. 

As the host of this summit, Uganda should be a leading example to the other AU member states in which practical steps are being taken to further reduce maternal, newborn and infant mortality.

It is in light of this situation that the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children and NAWOMP welcome the Ministry of Health-led five year campaign to reduce maternal, newborn and child mortality and morbidity to be launched on 5 May 2010 at Nambole Stadium.

The campaign which will involve Government, development partners, civil society organisations, private sector and the general public in a concerted effort to achieve MDGs 4 and 5; requires everyone’s support, you and I inclusive. 

Aware of our privileged position, in appropriating Government resources, we call for the following in support of the campaign:
    • Parliament of Uganda puts in place a standing committee on maternal, newborn and child health, as we are looking at 2015, the time target for achieving all the MDGs. 

    • Parliament of Uganda appropriates 15 percent of the national budget to the health sector.

    • Government of Uganda prioritises implementation of the child survival strategy and the roadmap for accelerating reduction in newborn and maternal mortality within the health sector. 

While the task of achieving MDGs 4 and 5 may seem insurmountable, measures to tackle this challenge through collective efforts by everyone will yield the milestones necessary to achieve these MDGs.

It is at this moment that I would like to thank all the partners who are involved in the campaign including POPSEC, Save the Children Uganda, and many other civil societies, for the launch and the activities they are doing towards achieving MDGs 4 and 5.

I know together we shall make a difference as Ugandans. Thank you so much. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

11.30
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Dr Francis Epetait): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for the report that she has just delivered to Parliament. The tantalising figures of newborn deaths and maternal deaths in Uganda are a cause for worry. 

The report had a prayer that we need to create a standing committee for maternal, newborn and child health in our Parliament. To me, this is a matter that could still be handled by the existing Committee on Social Services. 

However, our major challenge is not the inexistence or lack of such a committee. The challenge is poor focus on budgeting. For as long as we keep shying away from mainstreaming a budget intended to lower or to curb maternal deaths and newborn mortalities in Uganda, we shall continue lamenting. The problem is not the lack of a committee but the problem is the will to finance the health sector. As we speak now, some of the development partners who have been giving us a hand are pulling out. DANIDA, for example, is pulling out. And as we speak, the Ministry of Health has a funding gap of close to Shs 12.8 billion for medicine and medical equipment. And what does the Ministry of Finance provide in its budget framework paper - a mere Shs 2.0 billion to cover up that gap of Shs 12.8 billion!

Uganda’s health indicators will continue to deteriorate for as long as there is no focused budgeting to the health sector. And I really want to call upon Government that we should be mindful about our mothers. In fact, it is the mother who makes the state. Without putting emphasis to curb maternal and newborn deaths in Uganda, I think we are just being dodgy of our responsibility.  

We require a focused budget on health. In fact, I have even been trying to make a suggestion to the Ministry of Health that can we come up with a proposal – let us state exactly what we require. I do not think this Parliament will let down Government by blocking an attempt to borrow to finance health. We sometimes come here to just borrow and borrow and channel money to sectors that even poorly utilise the little resources that we get. I am yet to be convinced by the Ministry of Health that we are up to date with the financial requirements for the ministry so that collectively or together we can chart a way forward to reduce on the burden that we have in the sector.

I did pray earlier that we required a certain session, and indeed the Ministry of Health agrees to that, for us to discuss matters on health. However, I also want to challenge the health sector to come up with a focused budget of what we really require in terms of financing. Without that, I think we are just here to keep lamenting every other day – when somebody dies we say, “We need money, we need money”.

The Ministry of Health itself is also not able to tell us exactly how much we need. Madam Speaker, I beg to support the report save for that prayer of creating a standing committee to deal with maternal health. I do not see of how much help it will be. For as long as there is a will to finance the sector and issues to do with maternal and new born health, I think we will then be able to achieve the intended MDG targets. I thank you.

11.35
MRS SARAH NYOMBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): I thank you very much -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Five minutes, please.

MRS NYOMBI: I would like to thank my colleague for the statement. I would also like to plead with my colleague hon. Epetait – a standing committee would do wonders. When we started this network and we focus – we have UWOPA for all women but we got a network only focusing on maternal health issues and they are really coming up on the agenda. We feel that when we have social services like health and education, maternal health issues get lost in there – maybe we will think about it and we will see how important it can be. I would like to thank the Deputy Speaker as our patron in this network. 

I remember when I had my baby it was the sad moment when hon. Mulengani’s wife died in the same act of giving life. Why should we lose a mother or child when actually the statement is clearly saying, “They die from illnesses that have simple and affordable solutions and could be easily prevented?” Isn’t it high time that we now got everyone in on this campaign? What I have realised is that everybody gets into groupings and everyone does almost similar things but they are not co-ordinated. Now the campaign comes for everyone – even the mother we are trying to protect in this Parliament. Everyone should be in Nambole tomorrow and be a stakeholder in reducing maternal death and I believe we will go a long way. Let us mobilise our people and everyone we can come across to launch that campaign for everyone to improve this. 

I have good news that the Ministry of Health has secured a loan of US $120 million and we have been promised that US $30 million out of this will address reproductive health issues –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: I am just getting flabbergasted with that information because just three days ago, the Ministry of Health officials were telling us that they have secured US $30 million and yet she is telling us it is US $130 million? Which one is right? I want to know: is that information authentic because we have talked about maternal health for so long? And if it was music, people would have got bored. Is it a question of money or it is a question of utilisation? About three years ago the Ministry of Health said that if they are given US $680 billion, they would actually close all gaps and retain all the doctors running away. As we talk now, we are at around US $650 billion and there is not much change because from US $680 billion to US $650 billion is just US $30 billion but on the ground we are talking about maternal deaths and people dying of Malaria. Is it a question of money or a question of utilisation? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information from the Minister of Health.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (Mr James Kakooza): I thank my colleague for giving me way. I want to set the record straight about what hon. Nyombi said - about the figure. The Ministry of Health is processing a loan of US $130 million. US $100 million is from the World Bank and US $30 million is from the East African Development Bank. I wanted to put this on record so that the figure is – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, are there two loans?

MR KAKOOZA: Yes, they are two loans but the amount is totalling to US $130 million. I will come back and respond to what has been said. I wanted to give this information so that the Hansard can capture it correctly. 

MRS NYOMBI: I thank you, hon. Minister. We can now leave that aside. I know we do not have time but one appeal I have to make here is that all husbands seated here and even outside – when their wives get a baby, they feel so excited but imagine that happiness taken away by that baby or mother dying from a preventable cause. That is what I am really feeling and it hurts. 

We have a very good roadmap which when you look at its pillars – everything, if we get funding into that, is so beautiful. When we talk of family planning, people think we do not want them to have children. Just have them as hon. Sarah Nyombi; you space - that is what it means to do family planning. Family planning will reduce these deaths by 30 percent. So, hon. Members, support this campaign and it will make a difference. I thank you very much.  

11.41
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Central): I thank you so much. Madam Speaker, I beg to put on record my appreciation of the good work done by the chairperson and Members of the Parliamentary Forum for Children in the protection and promotion of the rights of our children and enhancing maternal health. 

In general, I support the chairperson of this forum fully! However, I have strong reservations when it comes to our appeal for establishing a standing committee to enable you address some of the issues you have ably articulated. As I speak right now, we have more than 22 committees of Parliament. They have done some good work when it comes to issues of children in this Parliament. More than four committees actually deal with the issues you have raised, for children and enhancing maternal health. 

Two of the committees have already been mentioned, including the Committee on Social Services. We also have the Committee on Equal Opportunities. If you look at the reports of these committees, it is quite clear that they have indeed done a commendable job. But where is the problem? Implementation and budget! Most of these committees have produced good recommendations but they are never implemented. Therefore, instead of establishing a new standing committee, I would strongly encourage you to look at reports of these committees and urge for implementation of their recommendations.

Lastly, I would strongly urge you to ensure that the budget that you pass every year is actually friendly to our children and also promotes maternal health in this country. Otherwise, I thank you so much.

11.44
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers’ Representative): I thank you, hon. Rebecca Lukwago for that statement. First of all, I want to thank the hon. Members of Parliament of the Parliamentary Forum for Children for this statement - just as a gesture to add on to the effort of trying to improve on the maternal and child health in this country. We know it is important to contribute to processes that help with improvement of situations in this country. 

Having said that, Madam Speaker, I take this statement as falling short of attempting to resolve the real issues that affect children and mothers in hospitals in this country. When the statement was read for the first time, I was happy that you will assist us in trying to come up with practical solutions. But on listening to the statement, it is just a statement with similar issues that we have pronounced ourselves on for the last many years. I think as Members of Parliament and as leaders of this country, we have a duty to protect children and mothers who continue dying due to our health system, which is sick. We must be able – (Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: I thank the hon. Member for giving way. Actually, we should not be talking of children and maternal health care alone. We also need to consider paternal health care because today so many men are afflicted by diseases associated with the same processes that we are talking about. Diseases like prostate cancer, diseases like strictures, which are preventable are also emanating from the same processes. 

So, I agree with the hon. Lyomoki that the matter should be looked at holistically so that we have maternal health care, paternal health care, child health care –(Interruptions)

MS NAMAGGWA: Madam Speaker, is the hon. Minister, who is actually expected to plan for Government, to plan for women, to plan for the nation, in order to stand up and say that the rate of death as far as women are concerned and men in terms of maternal health, is equal or the men’s is more or worse than that of women? Is it in order for the minister to assume that the mothers who have lost their children while giving birth would feel happy to really compare the rate of men’s death to that of women? Is he in order? Is it a laughing matter? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the statistics about maternal and infant health are well-documented. Can you give this House statistics about paternal death? (Applause)

MR RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: Madam Speaker, it is not a question of statistics; even if it were one or two men, as long as the deaths are associated with the same processes you are talking about, they are as entitled to protection as the women are. 

And to correct the honourable member, I did not say that the health of men is superior to that of women. I said that we need to look at the matter in a more holistic manner so that men, women and children are protected.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Minister, you are out of order. (Applause)

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much. Whereas my colleague was trying to maybe make us enjoy a joke this morning, I think we are handling a very serious issue. If you visited hospitals or looked at the health system and you see what women and children go through, it is not right for us to start joking about this matter.

You know, some of the men are even a problem. They even compound the situation of children and women. So, I think the point I was making is that our system needs a total overhaul. You know, the statement tries to come up with some solutions; we have an abscess and then you continue smearing Vaseline on it instead of working on that abscess; I think you are not really useful in this situation. Yes, they might make you feel better, become happy or have some hope but I think we need practical solutions to address the situation of mothers and children in this country.

They have recommended about 15 percent contribution to health from the budget. But this matter has been here for a long time and we, as Parliament, have never, at any one time, even said we shall not pass the budget without that contribution being there. Always year after year, we make such statements and go away then next year, we come and Government has not done anything and we go away. I think this time we must be serious and say if we do not see this contribution in the budget, we must not accept that budget. (Applause) We are lucky that right now, the budget is going to be read; but Government must know that we shall look at the real issues – how the allocation of that budget is done to such sectors. You know, coming here to make our people think that we are doing something when in actual terms we are not doing anything! 

Madam Speaker, there are issues like staff ceilings and decentralisation we have been pushing for. Even if we continue talking about corruption in hospitals and health systems, if we do not decentralise the health system we shall continue having the same situation of people being arrested over drugs, but we shall not have a solution to that situation. 

We have lowly attitudes and practices; internal rigidities within the system that must be dealt with. You know the health workers’ mentalities and so many other issues that we must deal with if we are to tackle the maternal and health factor in this country. 

We know that administrative structures are useful like the committee, which has been suggested, but I think that just coming up with structures might not be useful. I know it is good to show that we have commitment at a high level politically by having a committee in Parliament but if that committee is to be set up, it must be followed with serious decisions, serious practical measures both in the way we operate and in the way we supervise the system. Even the people who are administering the system should not have a situation where the majority of the money going to the health system goes into administration. 

Look at posh vehicles at the Ministry of Health yet we do not have ambulances! We have people carrying mothers to maternity using certain mats and all that and we are having four-wheel drive vehicles for officers who are sleeping in Bugolobi and working at the ministry. We have never come up and said that is wrong.

So, I am suggesting that if we are to support this measure, which has come in the form of a statement, as Parliament we must be able to monitor the budget that is coming to see that it comes up with these practical measures. We must be able to support the programmes and proposals that have come from the Ministry of Health, for instance, decentralisation not through just talking here, but through real action; amendment of the Constitution and the Local Government Act to cater for the decentralisation of health workers. We must also be able to come up with measures - I will be tabling measures here for overhauling the system. 

I went and camped in Mbale and I found a lot of issues there; even blood was being sold to dying mothers by medical workers! You know, the IV-lines were being sold and the patients told me, “Don’t talk because if you talk these people will not give us drugs.” So I told them that I am also the leader of the medical workers and if they refused to give them the drugs, they would give me their names - they told me a lot of things! Our drugs are being sold and if the patients do not buy, they tell them that the drugs are not there yet they are there. 

So, we have a situation which is real and we must deal with it. We must visit the hospitals and analyse what is on the ground and come up with tangible solutions in order to solve the problem. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before hon. Najjemba speaks I would like you to join me to welcome a delegation from the Parliament of Malawi. We have Goodall Gondwe, the Leader of House, hon. Ann Kachikho, the Deputy Government Chief Whip, hon. Ephraim Kayembe, the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Henry Njolomole, the Deputy Clerk (Parliamentary Service) and Mr Gerald Kampani, the Editor of Hansard. You are welcome to Parliament of Uganda! (Applause)

11.55
MS ROSEMARY NAJJEMBA (NRM, Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to be very brief and as usual, straight to the point. Where there is a will, there is always a way. 

First of all, I want to thank the honourable member who has presented this statement. There is what we have been talking about for so long. We know how to talk about it, we know each and every problem, but we lack the will – where there is a will there is always a way. 

When the President of Uganda came out strongly on the matter of HIV/AIDS, although I was a little younger than now, I remember everybody went out talking about HIV/AIDS. It was mainstreamed in almost all Government departments; everyone was talking about HIV/AIDS, on funerals and in schools because it was high on Government agenda – (Interruption) 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank my hon. Colleague. She has just told this House that where there is a will, there is a way. I wish she could tell me who does not have the will?

MS NAJJEMBA: All of us, including yourself because we are all stakeholders in this not only Government. We must all have the good will to see that our mothers have good health. 

So, if we come out strongly on maternal and child health as we did for HIV/AIDS and all countries admired Uganda, until recently when we changed – now we cannot be very proud because AIDS has changed face; it is now the married people we are mainly affected by HIV/AIDS. But we have been a model. 

So, let us put maternal and child health into all programmes including the Ministry of Works, because we talk about mothers going to the health centres, but the roads are so poor or non-existent; all of us have to work together. Unless we do as we did on HIV/AIDS, we shall just make good orators, and discuss issues without moving an inch. So what we need is the political will, the will of everybody, including the donors and other development partners, the communities and even us the Members of Parliament. 

I would also like to appreciate the proposal made by the mover of the statement to have a committee. Sometimes we need to focus on an issue; just as we have a standing committee on HIV/AIDS and related matters. We have moved in big steps, people come from all over the world to come and see how Uganda is managing HIV/AIDS. So the standing committee is welcome. But as long as we do not make a focus and put everything into Social Services - there is health, education – we shall not move. And we know that 14 minibuses full of women crush every day - translate that and see how many women and children we lose everyday. 

So, this matter is about political will, it is about all of us coming out strongly. We should forget the political colours we put on, this is not a political matter; it is a matter that is going to help everybody; it is a common good.

So, Madam Speaker, I welcome the issue of having a standing committee. But I also propose to Government that they should also think about a hospital for only women, because our problems are many yet the medical workers get confused in the other health problems at Mulago and other referral health centres. If we could have a referral hospital just for women and children – it is not new, it has been practices in other country, the hospitals are there; that can be relief towards the right directions. But for as long as we still lose mothers and children, we are not moving an inch as a country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.02
MR JACK WAMAYI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a very important topic. I want to thank the honourable member who has presented the statement. At times when I listen to such statements, I keep wondering whether the Government really takes these statements seriously. Today, if I asked everybody around here, I would get about 100 percent support. 

Madam Speaker, I will endeavour to speak without the statement because the presenter did not give us copies. When you hear of 6,000 deaths annually, it is a very big shame to this country, the children that we lose everyday to Malaria; it is so sad. 

Last week different ministries presented their budgets for this Parliament to approve. But I was shocked when the Minister for the Presidency came up and said that she wanted to recruit 111 deputy RDCs who are going to be paid Shs 1.7 million each plus an extra of Shs 1.1 million to go and teach patriotism. I started wondering if the people on the other side are really patriotic? We see people losing life everyday in our hospitals, there are no drugs; how can somebody tell the people of Uganda that they want to recruit 111 RDCs to go and teach patriotism? I wonder: does this Government have feelings for our people, the women and children who are dying everyday? It is so sad!

I come from Mbale, and if you went to Mbale today and you visited the Missionary Hospital, you would find three children on one bed: one child suffering from Malaria, another one from Diarrhoea and another one from Measles. Today, the children are immunised against Measles, but our children still suffer from Measles. The situation across the whole country is so bad. It is so bad that Government does not address the issue year in year out. They come and tell this Parliament that we want to increase, we are doing this and that and there is no change and we keep losing people.

On the 31st of March –(Interruption)

MS NAMUYANGU: I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank my colleague for giving way. I want to be assisted. My honourable colleague who is really raising a very important issue about health is also bringing up the issue of RDCs. Has the money from the President’s Office been taken from the Ministry of Health? What I would imagine is that we should be able as Parliament to allocate money to the Ministry of Health to handle issues of health otherwise the issue of patriotism is very important to this country.

MR WAMAYI: Madam Speaker, I am even shocked that the honourable minister does not know that money comes from this Parliament and the budget comes from the Ministry of Finance. When you bring in 101 RDCs, you are encroaching on the budget and part of that budget that should go to the Ministry of Health —(Interruption)

MR WOPUWA: I want to thank my colleague for allowing me to give information. We as a party have sat down and done a lot of research. We have identified that the problem of our country is not mainly resources but the attitude. So, the recruitment of the RDCs will help address the issue of attitude in hospitals so that services are properly delivered. It is not a waste of resources and even among the 101 RDCs, we are going to have women including those from the Opposition who have a positive thinking. (Laughter)

MR WAMAYI: Madam Speaker, I do not think the information was really very useful because what I maintain is that when you create more districts and create more RDCs, you are encroaching on the budget and you know that this government does not finance the budget wholly. You know that we get funding from our donor friends who support the budget in Uganda. Now, when you come in and waste money on the RDCs who are going to do nothing, to teach patriotism when the people themselves are not patriotic!

That aside, I was trying to tell the august House that on 31st March, after looking at the situation of Mbale Hospital which is so sad and absurd, I went to donate wheel chairs to the hospital and somebody came up with outbursts and said [Mr Kakooza: “Information.”] I am not taking the information from the Minister of Health. The situation is so bad that as an individual, I could go and donate to a government referral hospital when the government is wasting money left and right.

After the terrible incident in Bududa, when we had the landslides, Bududa Hospital had nothing. When I visited, I found people who had broken limbs and there were no x-ray films in the hospital. For three days, people were lying in pain. You can imagine such a situation. So, it is not a question of unskilled health people; the doctors are there but they are not paid. You can imagine a qualified doctor getting Shs 640,000 -(Member timed out_)

12.09
DR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE (NRM, Sheema County North, Bushenyi): Thank you. I also want to add my voice to those who are thanking the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Forum on Children for the good statement. I also want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for championing the cause of saving lives of so many women -(Applause)- because we have seen you championing the fight against cancer of the cervix. I think you are on record this week or last week, urging Government and all stakeholders to increase on training of doctors and other health workers. We want to thank you for that and it makes us, as Parliament, proud of you as our Speaker.

It is not only training of doctors that is crucial but even training of paramedics. Right now, we find many people dying in theatre because we do not have anaesthesiologists, we do not have theatre attendants; people who can help manage a case, people who can manage a woman who is pregnant and is coming under caesarean section. So, we need to really increase on the training of health workers, as you stated. We also need to change our mindset; it is not only money that will make everything work. We have examples of countries like Cuba; Cuba has one of the best indicators and when you compare it to the United States, it has less money than the United States. You see countries like Costa Rica and Sri Lanka; they have much better health indicators than most of the countries that have money. So, it is a question of mindset, it is a question of planning.

On the question of maternal mortality, newborn morbidity and child morbidity, we need both long term and short term solutions and we must thank the government, for example, for coming out with Universal Secondary Education because it is on record that once you educate a child up to senior four, you reduce on child morbidity and you also reduce on maternal mortality. That is a long term measure.

We have to tackle the question of nutrition. Right now, because of poor nutrition, many children or many girls are stunted and they cannot push; they cannot deliver normally when they are pregnant. They get obstructed labour that is why we have an increase in caesarean sections throughout the country because of stunting and because of early marriages. So, some of these need long term measures which are of development in nature.

When we look at what is being suggested today, a standing committee could be one of the short term measures. There are also other short term measures that we need to have like increasing services. As we speak, 41 percent of women would want to practice family planning but they cannot access the family planning services. They cannot get the commodities.

We need to think beyond donors providing our reproductive health commodities but actually putting in significant resources to make sure we have enough reproductive health commodities in our areas. We also need to look at issues like community work programme. We know in many countries that have succeeded, they have a person at village level and at parish level who is paid to go and deliver services in a home because we know that health issues are discussed in the home under a concept of household production of health. You can intervene and have an impact on health by looking at a home and not looking at a health facility necessarily.

It is unfortunate that to become pregnant in Uganda is more risky than getting some of the serious diseases because for every 100,000 people who become pregnant, 435 - after carrying the pregnancy for that long - will die. And even those who manage to produce their children, 137 of them will die before they can reach the age of five. It is very pathetic!

Therefore, any measure that can help to reduce on that unnecessary risk should be welcomed. Saving a life is the highest ethical act one can ever do in this world and as Parliament we need to save those lives. So, if a standing committee can help at least save a few more lives, so be it. 

But we need to also see that the standing committee does not come in the way of other initiatives in Parliament because we have seen that committees tend to be rigid; committees have rules. For example, you cannot get money to a committee easily to go and do an activity. So, you must see that if we have a forum on children, we even have a forum on population, food security and something else; it should not be such that once we have a standing committee then the other fora should relax and say, “Now that there is a standing committee we do not have to do our work” -(Member timed out_)

12.16
MRS RUTH KAVUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Lukwago for the presentation of this statement. I would like to focus very briefly on the need for the standing committee because I feel maternal health is a crosscutting issue. All these different issues we have talked about, when it comes to works, access to proper services, it is very important; education is very important. All the different ministries need to be brought on board about the issue.

When it comes to education, if a mother stays longer in school and gets proper education, then her child is not likely to die before the age of five and she is also not likely to get a child before she is 18 because she will be spending her time at school other than just making babies. So, it is really important and a bit disappointing that it is the Minister of Education who did not think that we were serious and yet it matters a lot.

So, when it comes to budgeting, I really think we should not be focusing only on what Health is doing. We should be looking at all the others. Health should take the lead and put in a lot. They are not exempted. But all the other ministries like Ministry of Gender, when we look at early childhood development - one time we had a presentation on early childhood development from the Ministry of Education. They were only talking about ABC and how they should learn the ABC and yet development is how the child is fed and that falls under Gender. So, I think these two sides need to be balanced in order for us to look at the standing committee and seriously have it just like we have for all the other important issues. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.18
MS MARGARET ANGUFIRU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to add my voice to the rest of the Members’ of Parliament who have been talking about maternal health. I want to thank the forum for the very elaborate presentation and how they brought out each and every problem that causes maternal and children death in this country.

The issue of women in this country should be looked at very crucially. I would like to ask my colleagues, Members of Parliament, to look at women as human beings and fight for the women to see that our women deliver very safely and do not die during delivery. Why do I say this? I understand a lot of negative attitude and I am saying that we the leaders, Members of Parliament, are the ones to sensitise our population about the importance of going to deliver in the hospitals, about the importance of attending antenatal clinics and about the importance of being handled by skilled people. 

The Members of Parliament have a lot of responsibility. It is our responsibility to make laws that can make our women attend hospitals so that the death rate of mothers in our country reduces. What am I saying? The number of women who die everyday in this country due to bleeding during delivery is compared to a minibus full of people crashing. And if that accident took place we would say that, “Many people have died”. But why are we ignoring the deaths of so many women who die in this country? So, what can we do as Members of Parliament to ensure that maternal death is reduced and that the number of children who die is also reduced?

One: we need to do a lot of sensitisation in our communities so that they know about the importance of going to deliver in the hospitals. 

We also need to educate our children. There is a saying that when you educate a woman you educate the nation and when a woman is educated this woman will be aware of the surroundings and want to go and attend the hospital. So, education is very important in this county right now.

I want to thank the Ministry for trying their best to see that most of the hospital structures are there. But now we need to equip our hospitals. We need to equip them with staff and even train more staff. We also need to give more equipment to the hospital wards and we need to motivate the staff so that they can attend to our mothers and so that many of these mothers will be saved.

The children in this country are really in trouble because they can be sacrificed any time, for witchcraft. We need to come up with laws that can protect our children so that these children can grow up and be useful citizens in future. 

We also need to have a budget that can be enough to implement the activities of Health. Our budget in Health is very limited and I would like to ask the hon. Minister of Health to come up with the budget so that we can approve a loan. We are approving very many loans here for other ministries but we have not been approving loans for the Ministry of Health and yet we need that money because we need to have our people healthy. We need to have our mothers attended to. 

We the Members of Parliament are prepared to approve a loan for these people for Ministry of Health and we are also asking Ministry of Health to come up and include these things in the budget - (Member timed out_)

12.23
MR CHARLES EKEMU (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): I want to thank you first of all, Madam Speaker. You have been quite passionate in these matters of maternal and child health. And then I want to thank the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Forum for Children for this report on maternal health and newborn health. 

It is true the situation across the country is quite appalling. I listened to hon. Lyomoki; I listened to hon. Jack Wamayi and the situation in Soroti Referral Hospital is not any different. You need to visit the women’s ward and the children’s ward after 8.00 O’clock in the evening and then you may begin to appreciate that the situation is actually serious. The mothers are spread all over the floor and when you inquire from them whether they have been attended to they say, “Yes, we have been attended to but we have not got any medication.”

The same thing applies to the children. It is the same thing as hon. Jack Wamayi was saying. Three or so children share a bed and so I think that we must look at the issue of maternal health and newborn deaths right from its root cause. 

I appreciate that the forum is proposing that we have a standing committee to specially focus on this matter, but I do not think that is the real solution. I would rather we desisted from being tempted to focus on the symptoms other than the real problem. In as far as I am concerned the real problem is inadequate financing. It is actually a budgetary problem, which this august House can handle. We can for once speak out with one voice that this problem is real and not allow the Ministry of Finance to get away with it. We can put our foot down and say that we are not passing this budget if we have not seen the budget of the Ministry of Health stepped up and the re-allocation addressing issues to do with maternal health made. 

In that regard, I am also appealing to the Ministry of Health to come up with actual figures because the budget is all about that. That will be required to mitigate this maternal health, and newborn deaths.

I listened into the statistics, which we are now aware of - I have heard people talk about 14 minibuses crashing daily, 137 children dying before the age of five and 6,000 deaths annually. I think that is just enough to cause all of us to think together, act together and make sure that we realign our budget and prioritise issues of maternal and child health.  

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give is that yes, I do agree with my colleague that we should really focus on Government to add more resources but as Members of Parliament, we should also prioritise maternal health. 

I, Madam Speaker, initiated a programme in my constituency where the work of men is merely to impregnate women and I take over the care in Lacor Hospital. I care for them until the women have delivered and cater for these children up to the age of six years. So, it is a challenge to hon. Members to see where you put your CDF (Constituency Development Fund) and the money you are lobbying around for because it is good to lobby Government to add more resources but where are we putting our priorities as Members of Parliament? I thank you.  

MR EKEMU: Thank you, honourable colleague. I was simply saying that we must make very brave and painful budgetary decisions if we have to mitigate this situation. Unless we step up the budgetary allocation to Health - and not just to Health, we must ensure that reallocations are jeered towards maternal and child health. And the solution may not necessarily be to have or to go by the report’s recommendation that we have a standing committee because that one will also come with its own financial constraints, which is our overall problem. 

So, the big question that we must ask is: what proportion of our budget goes to health compared to other areas? I am sure that we shall discover that the proportion is not okay and thus needs stepping up. We must then drop or scale down on other parts of the budget.

I heard some Members allude to some items that we can actually drop if we have to really make sure that our mothers and children are to have a good life. For instance, when you look at the budget of the proposed projects like that one of the RDCs that is being talked about, then appeal to your moral conscience and look at the mothers that we are losing and the children that we are losing and then see whether we cannot do without those RDCs for the moment so that we can provide for the mothers and the children. Thank you very much.

12.32
PROF. WILLY ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity. Let me start by thanking the Chairperson of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children for her statement. It was a timely statement. 

There are issues, which can be laughed at. There are others, which require serious consideration and there are others, which can be dismissed. The question of the newborn and maternal mortality is an issue – a subject that requires our serious consideration. 

I would like to say that the Abuja Declaration, to which Uganda is a signatory, requires that member countries allocate 15 percent or more of their national budgets to health. Uganda is unfortunately far behind. 

I would like to borrow the words spoken by the hon. Member from Gomba: “Political will,” and I would like to add “focus”. If there is political will and focus in this Parliament, we would not be talking about the high rates of maternal deaths here. I have been in this Parliament for four and a half years and this issue has been discussed in almost every session and I should say nothing has been done. And, therefore, this Parliament is lacking political will on this very important issue.

Budgetary allocation for health should actually demand our attention. For me, health is priority No. 1. Without health there is no education; without health there is no agriculture; without health there is nothing. So, we should be focused. 

I would like to end by saying that I have been in resource-constrained countries where pregnant mothers are monitored on a daily basis and therefore the question of maternal deaths and neo-natal death is put under control. Uganda can do that if we are politically motivated to save the lives of our new born, of our mothers, of our children and I stand for that. Thank you. 

12.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (Mr James Kakooza): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to welcome all the contributions and concerns made here but I would like to summarise them with a few words. 

First of all, I would like to thank Parliament and all the people who have the will to support the health sector. I would like to say that nobody wants to see a child or a mother die because of poor health care but we need a holistic approach and I want to assure this Parliament that as stakeholders, we should participate in the policies and health-strengthening systems in order to achieve this goal. 

When you look at the public health sector, the number of mothers who attend antenatal care from the time of pregnancy to the time of delivery is still wanting. But who is supposed to do this? We need everybody to be on board but what about other agencies? You cannot tackle health on a piecemeal basis. It must be very corroborative and crosscutting. Look at the infrastructure that is provided and people who make use of it; look at the attitude of the health workers - it is very surprising that even the people who have been trained to do their job are not doing it! You find a doctor with integrity and morals hiding medicine meant for people who are sick. So, I appeal to the public that everybody must be on board and when handling health, the approach must be holistic. 

We are talking of infant mortality but it is very surprising that even at this time, mothers still feed their babies without washing their hands and they are aware of the hygiene standards, which must be set in a home. I would like to say that much as our focus is on construction of infrastructure and development of the human resources, everybody must be committed and have discipline in the way in which we handle health care. Parliament is financing and supporting us and I would like to say that we costed the road map and came up with a loan of US $130 million to have health-strengthening systems, to start rural community based health workers – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you brought that loan request to this House?

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, it is in Cabinet and we are going to bring it here. You know the processes that you go through when negotiating for a loan and I want to assure this House that by the end of the next financial year, this loan will be here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable minister. Three financial years ago you stood on the Floor of this House and assured this House that we should pass your budget because you were going to get that loan. This morning I told you that all the business must be done with before the 14th of May and we do not want to hear about the next financial year. This is the lack of will that Members are talking about. 

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I seek clarification from the honourable minister. I really listened to his lamentation and he said that there is a problem with the medical health service itself. He talks about the attitude, the doctors and the medical workers. Now in view of all of these problems, how sure are we that even when you get that loan, services will be delivered to our people? 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, if there was no political will, we couldn’t have gotten resources from 2006 up to 2010. As we talk, the budget of the Ministry of Health has been increasing since the Abuja Declaration. Our budget is higher than that of other countries that assented to it but to answer hon. Okumu’s concern, delivery of services and care is very important and that is why when you look at our health-strengthening policy, we are saying that if we can provide all the services at the lowest centres and improve management and increase supervision, then we think that things will improve. 

If we increase infrastructure, then people can have access to health centres right from the lowest health centre IIs and IIIs to health centre IVs. They are equipped with the facilities and mothers should attend antenatal care at the early stage of pregnancy and not at the time of delivery where complications may arise. People are still aborting and we address the issue of anaemia as a result of Malaria by giving mosquito nets to see that we stop the cause of all this.

MS NALUBEGA: In our last financial year budget for the Ministry Health, the priority in their policy statement was to recruit medical workers and to improve their conditions of work. There was a programme of refresher courses for the midwives, nursing aides and their assistants. Why is it that up to now the minister is still lamenting that there is poor attitude? I want to know whether these policy statements are on paper and they do not do anything to implement them.

What are their priorities this financial year? We want to address issues and not to just talk about them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, I want you to answer our questions but you will start with mine. You have been able to fast track other loans in Cabinet, why is it not possible for you to fast track this and bring it before the 14th of this month?

MRS MUKWAYA: I want to give information to the minister. We have heard - as Government - this beautiful contribution, and the Prime Minister’s Office has taken note. We shall come back to answer the Deputy Speaker’s issue and others. Thank very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Office of the Prime Minister, I indicated that I would prorogue the House on the 14th of this month. We are interested to know whether this loan will come before the 14th.

MRS MUKWAYA: I want to promise you that by that date the Ministry of Health will have answered your question.

MR KAKOOZA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. By 14th we will have come to you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, now that is a Government assurance. We are reviewing our Rules of Procedure; we have listened to some of the views and I hope that the Rules Committee was listening.

I want to thank hon. Okumu for supporting women and children in Aswa. I hope one day he will share his experience with us so that Members can learn.

I put the question that the House adopts the statement by the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Forum for children.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Statement adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I urge whips on both sides to hunt for your Members and make sure that they are here by 2.30 p.m.?

I suspend the House until 2.30 p.m.

(The House was suspended at 12.50 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.42 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

2.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2009” be read for the second time.

The objective of the Bill is to strengthen the existing legislation to smoothen the electoral process. As you know, a few days ago we passed the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill and during its debate we had the privilege of sharing ideas from both sides under the guidance of your Office. 

Also, a special committee was set up to harmonise our positions and debates went on very smoothly. Therefore, the Bill that we are considering today and the amendments proposed therein are more or less consequential. But I hope that Members will oblige. I beg to move. Thank you.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, you will pardon me for seeking guidance at the time when the Deputy Attorney-General has just left the Floor. My concern is about the laws we are passing here. We have passed the Presidential (Amendment) Bill and the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, but my worry is about the registration exercise, which has already started yet we instituted the tribunals where all the parties that are going to contest in the forthcoming elections are supposed to be represented. I notice that while we are passing new laws, we are still using these old laws and tribunals. 

The guidance I am seeking from you is about when the Bills we are passing here are going to be assented to by the President? This is important to know because the process has already started. We are here deliberating on new laws yet we are still using the old ones. I need to be assisted in that line.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, our work as Parliament is to make the law, send it to the President for assent – the law does not take effect until it has been assented to. So, until it has been assented to, we operate under the old law.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, it is true as you have put it, but what will be the timeframe for that to be done? Supposing it goes up to the time of the elections, our effort to pass these laws will have been rendered futile!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Really, the work of the Speaker is to transmit to the President. I cannot prevail over him and say, “Please, sign this now.” I really do not have an answer to that. Is it really possible for me to dictate the timeframe? It is difficult, hon. Sebuliba Mutumba. I cannot put a timeframe to it. All I can say is that I believe the Government must be aware of the urgency of these matters and that we are going to have general elections so the laws should be in place in good time. That is what I can say, unless the minister wants to say something?

2.48
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Sebuliba Muddu Awulira Mutumba for raising this very important matter. It is an issue that is of concern to everybody. But on our part as Government we are appealing to everybody who can play a part in passing these laws to make sure we all promptly do our work. Particularly for us as Parliament, we should ensure the Bills are passed and once that is done, the President should be in a position to do the needful. Therefore, attendance and the filling up of all these gaps are very critical, particularly this afternoon. I thank you.

2.49
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yes, I was satisfied with the advice you gave to hon. Sebuliba Mutumba, but the point at hand is that whereas the legislature is doing its best to make sure the laws are in place, the Executive should similarly take its work very seriously.

There was a time we passed the Land (Amendment) Bill and within a blink of the eye it had been assented to because it was considered very important. Equally so, if we go by the road map that was drawn by the Electoral Commission last year, which I believe has not changed, presidential nominations will take place in September –(Interjections)– no, parliamentary in October and I still have the copy of The New Vision newspaper in which it was published on the front page. So, if we are to live by that, it therefore means that all the three actors: the Executive, the Legislature and the Judiciary must put their houses in order. We believe that the Executive, which has got powers to assent to the laws that we pass, has an ear in this House through the ministers who should be able to assist His Excellency - we have passed the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill and done the same to the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill. So, please assist us. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the Attorney-General wish to say anything?

2.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I think we are now speculating. Our job here is to pass laws and there are constitutional limits within which laws should be assented to by the President. If any Member would want to raise that issue that the constitutional limits have been breached, then such a Member would have a ground. Otherwise, as we speak, we all know the urgency of this matter and we shall do everything possible to ensure that the Bills we are passing are assented to expeditiously, and implemented.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from the chairperson of the committee.

2.53
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am happy to present a report from the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, which is the fourth of the four Bills that we have been considering. I also would like to associate myself to what the Attorney-General has reported that in addition to this report, our committee was part of the committee that was constituted by the Speaker – we also associate ourselves with the proposed amendments that were made in that committee.

Allow me to present the committee report now.

The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2009 was read for the first time on 15 December 2009 and referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in accordance with rule 112 and rule 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

In analysing the Bill, the committee was guided by rule 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and of importance was rule 116(2), which states thus: “The committee may propose and accept proposed amendments in the Bill as it considers fit if the amendments including new clauses and new schedules are relevant to the subject matter of the Bill.”

In the process of analysing the Bill, the committee discussed it and received memoranda from the following stakeholder:
    1. The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs/ Attorney-General;
    2. The Electoral Commission;
    3. The Uganda Law Reform Commission;
    4. The Uganda Law Society;
    5. Uganda Joint Christian Council;
    6. Citizen Coalition for Electoral Democracy in  Uganda;
    7. Forum for Democratic Change;
    8. People’s Development Party;
    9. Political Parties Platform;
    10. The National Resistance Movement Organisation;
    11. Human Rights Network;
    12. The Inter-Party Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD);
    13. The Inter-Party Cooperation;
    14. Hon. Erias Lukwago;
    15. Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya;
    16. Hon. Moses Kabuusu; and 
    17. Hon. Akbar Godi.

Madam Speaker, the object of the Bill is:
    a) To amend the Parliamentary Elections Bill, 2005.
 
    b) To require the Electoral Commission declare a candidate elected unopposed where one of only two candidates withdraws from or is disqualified from the election.

    c) To require a returning officer to compile and submit to the Electoral Commission, within seven days after the conclusion of the election, a detailed report of the election within the returning officer’s electoral district; and

    d) To require the Electoral Commission declare the results of the parliamentary election within 48 hours from the closure of polling.

Observations

Madam Speaker, the committee made the following observations:

Most of the amendments that were brought before the committee were of a constitutional nature that required amendment by a Constitution (Amendment) Bill. Article 259(2) of the Constitution provides that the Constitution shall not be amended except by an Act of Parliament, the sole purpose of which is to amend the Constitution and the Act has been passed in accordance with Chapter 18. Some of those proposed amendments include: varying the voting age of citizens for the national and local elections, which would necessitate an amendment of Article 59 (1) and removal of representatives of the army from Parliament, which also necessitates an amendment to Article 78 of the Constitution.

The proposed provision 19(a) can be manipulated by unscrupulous candidates or their agents or supporters to the detriment of the electorate. This can be done by influencing a candidate to withdraw from an election or through bribery. 

The committee, therefore, proposes to strengthen this provision by providing for an appeal process to a candidate who has been disqualified or withdraws under circumstances he does not agree with. In addition to the appeal process, the committee proposes that a candidate sponsored by a political party or organisation who wishes to withdraw should have his/her notification signed by the returning officer and sealed by the secretary general of the political or organisation or person authorized by the political party or organisation.

The term “fundraising” is not defined in the proposed amendment. As it is now, it may be used to stop candidates from soliciting campaign funds.

Section 34 that allows a voter to vote without a voter’s card upon being identified by the presiding officer or polling assistant has caused many problems during the voting process and in many cases others are denied to vote while others are allowed depending on the circumstances. The committee proposed at that time that a person should not be allowed to vote if one does not have a voter’s card.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2009 be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments as put across by the committee and those that were agreed upon in the committee set up by the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR TOSKIN: Madam Speaker, this is a very important motion, which needs to be debated properly. Unfortunately, some of us do not have copies of the report. Can I be assisted to get a copy of the report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Sebuliba, but only five minutes.

3.00
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I have been enticed particularly by the information on page 3 of the report where it says that, “The committee therefore proposes that a person should not be allowed to vote, if he/she does not have a voter’s card. 

I do not agree with this position. First of all, some of us thought that everybody in Uganda is going to be registered afresh but now registration is about the new voters. However, most of us have lost voters’ cards, including Members of Parliament. Now here we are –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, the issue that the honourable member is raising is very important. It was considered in the committee that was set up by the Speaker. We adopted a position in the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill. In other words, if one does not come with a card, but can be identified both in terms of his/her photograph and name or if he/she comes with a card and his/her name is on the register, such a person can vote. That position was adopted and we shall consider it at the Committee Stage.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, I thank him for the information but when it appears here and it is read and becomes part of the debate we are having, then I have to react to it because I have seen it here and it has been read to us in the House. I am trying to react to it that it is not possible even from what we have been going through. That is why I do not agree with his position. If it was agreed upon, okay, but we should also expunge it from that. That is what I wanted to submit.

3.03
MR AKBAR GODI (FDC, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to seek clarification from the committee chairman. In the process of analysing this Bill, many stakeholders came with their proposals and I did not see any of the proposals reflected here, other than the names. I wanted to know because there has been fear expressed by hon. Erias Lukwago that some of the proposals, which were submitted to the committee, have been left out. I want to know whether that is true. And if that is not the case, he should give me an opportunity to present mine and we see whether it will feature. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But can’t that wait until we go into Committee Stage? We have not reached the Committee Stage yet.

MR GODI: Madam Speaker, the proposed amendments to the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2009 are all reflected here, that is, on pages 5 to 9 and I did not see any of those that I proposed. They might have been dropped maliciously. I wanted information on the same.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, when we come to the Committee Stage and we reach the section you want to amend, you will stand up and speak to your amendment.

3.05
MR MICHAEL NYEKO (FDC, Kilak County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The chair of the committee has ably put it that many of the amendments, which were proposed to the committee by some parties, needed constitutional amendments. If I look at some of the proposed amendments, since I was privy to them before they were taken to the committee, indeed they require constitutional amendments. In the committee report, they are only pointing out that they need constitutional amendments but they are not recommending that actually Parliament should go ahead to amend the Constitution. My question is, why did you not propose that Parliament should go ahead, if the proposals we gave to you were good enough, and require constitutional amendments? 

Secondly, this issue about the army representatives in Parliament keeps coming up all the time. It is very important for us to know why in the first place the army was allowed to be represented in elective offices. It arose from the CA. The reason being given at that time was that Uganda was just emerging from a volatile situation where the army was interfering too much in the politics of the country. The CA was here in 1994, this is now 2010 and the army is now, as they are saying, professional. They cannot meddle in the politics of the country. Why don’t we go ahead with the constitutional amendment to have the army removed from Parliament? 

Madam Speaker, even going by the attendance alone of army representatives, it is very wanting. I have done research – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Nyeko, you are debating something, which is not before this House. 

MR NYEKO: But there is something about it on page 2.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no proposal before this House to remove the army representatives. So, you cannot debate what is not before this House.

MR NYEKO: Madam Speaker, I am now recommending that let it be considered for the amendment of the Constitution so that army representatives are removed from the House. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, are there any other contributions? No? Shall I put the question? Yes, hon. Lukwago.

3.08
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the last two weeks we have been handling the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill and there are a number of amendments, which were made to the Act. We passed it last week as per the record. When the committee presented its report, it transpired that a number of amendments, which we proposed and agreed upon under the arrangement of IPOD, were left out.

The Speaker deemed it necessary after –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Lukwago, I think the Attorney-General has already reported about your joint committee. Why don’t you allow us to go to the Committee Stage? 

MR LUKWAGO: I was building on that background, Madam Speaker, because we need to go back and look at these amendments. The sections –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You want more time?

MR LUKWAGO: We need some time, Madam Speaker. I had requested the Leader of the Opposition –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I have been constrained to rise on a point of order because procedurally, hon. Lukwago is a member of this committee but last time he took us for granted and we wasted a whole three weeks forming up committees that were not even supposed to be formed. Is he really in order to again continue dragging us behind that we should have some informal meetings of this Parliament when we have a committee here for purposes of IPOD, which is not even - he is a member of the committee but he drags us and wants us to have impromptu committees, kangaroo committees. Is he really in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukwago, if you have amendments bring them at the Committee Stage. You have not justified why you want to delay this process. 

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Speaker, it is not delaying the process. Actually as I stand here, I have just emerged from hospital when my colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, called me. I was on treatment. (Laughter) I had requested that we sit down and harmonise the relevant provisions. We have a number of amendments. If we are to go to the Committee Stage, we need to first harmonise all the amendments that we have proposed; if we could be given that opportunity, Madam Speaker.

MR RUHINDI: We feel sympathetic to hon. Lukwago for being a bit indisposed but as you are aware, when you adjourned this morning I gave you a copy of what my office – because principally, legislative drafting is the work of the office of the First Parliamentary Counsel. When amendments were passed to the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, the Office of First Parliamentary Counsel together with the relevant staff here harmonised the amendments in terms of incorporating them within this Bill consequentially. 

Therefore, if it may please the Shadow Attorney-General, I have a copy that I have been keeping for him and the work is very easy because the amendments are known. So, here are the proposed amendments that were passed by the committee and I do not think we should delay this process any more.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let me put the question. 

3.13
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you. I want to make one special appeal. Colleagues, you will remember when we were considering the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, the Speaker, decided that both sides of the House constitute a small committee to go and do trade off and consider the nitty-gritty of the major amendments. And that way we saved a lot of time when we came to the House. (Interjection) You do not have to say “No” because the small committee was being chaired by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister -(Interjection)- but it was there -(Interjection)- yes, it was for two days and within two days we achieved and covered a lot of mileage.

The point I am making is, I think on the side of Government, the lead person in this debate and this amendment, exercise is the Attorney-General. Equally so on my side is my Shadow Attorney-General who has been assisted by other four members of the committee. Unfortunately as I look around, I do not see any of them. That is the more reason why I had to go out and call the Shadow Attorney-General. Now he is here but he is indisposed. I would like a lead person on my side -(Interjection)- sickness is not anybody’s problem; even right now you can fall sick. Please, when it comes to issues of sickness, let us not apportion blame.

The point I am making is, if we could go into general debate on this particular issue and for us to proceed to the Committee Stage, I beg your indulgence that we only move there when I have got one of my lead persons to lead us in this process. That is all I am praying for, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But really hon. Members, I think this is taking the Parliament for granted. We have been at pains to inform you that we must finish these laws before we prorogue the Parliament. 

This morning I reminded you that I would prorogue this House on the 14th. Members of this House have been lambasting the Electoral Commission for mishandling elections not remembering that part of the problem is us delaying the laws. Really, if Members are absent without my permission, why should I give you time? Where are they? Are they away with my leave? I now put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

Clause 1

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chairperson, before clause 1, we are proposing an amendment to section 9 of the principal Act by substituting for sub-section 2 the following: “Every place fixed under sub-section 1(a) for the nomination of candidates shall be a public place such as a court, house, city or town hall, community centre or other public place. And where there is no public place in a particular area, a nomination shall take place in a private building hired by the Commission.” 

The justification: to require nominations to be done in public places except where there is no public place in an area in which case the Electoral Commission may hire a private place. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Lukwago, we are talking about parliamentary elections. Do you envisage any situation where a parliamentary nomination can take place in a place, which is not known, like the Ssaza headquarters or Gombolola headquarters? 

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chairperson, I am sorry but these are the harmonised positions, which the Attorney-General - actually this is what the technical team has worked on following the document we adopted as IPOD. We have not had time to go through these IPOD recommendations in the other committee of this House. This is one of the amendments we are moving following the IPOD understanding; and this is actually as it is re-drafted by the technical team of the Attorney-General. So, there is justification for that and the justification is that the place should be open; it should be clear; it should be known. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I have done my best to guide the Shadow Attorney-General. I have given him a copy of the document. If you may recall, his proposal was considered under clause 8 of the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill but it was abandoned in that special committee of Parliament. If he actually wants to verity that it is up to him. Maybe he can stand over this provision and he comes with the authentic passage of his proposal from the Hansard. But to the best of our recollection in this House, and the technical team who actually prepared this document that proposal was abandoned because the existing provision is adequate.  

MR MAWIYA: Madam Chairperson, we are wasting a lot of time turning over clauses. This is actually a proposal that is outrageous. This country has not started today and the Electoral Commission is not run by mad people. Let us vote on all clauses so that we can move and leave time for the EC and Government to do its work. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Shadow Attorney-General, I really want to appeal to you not to simply wake up and increase the expenditure of the Electoral Commission. Have they budgeted for renting offices? Do you know this place you are talking about? By the stroke of a pen you now want to say that they should rent new offices?

MR LUKWAGO: It would be very unfortunate if good proposals were rejected on the account of democracy being expensive. In this particular case, this is not the Opposition alone. It was agreed upon in IPOD and so by the time we did so, Government had in mind that it had financial implications. They conceded to this at that stage –(Interjections)- yes, it is in the IPOD document. Look at the IPOD document – why are we rendering the IPOD arrangement irrelevant? This is where we have a problem. Government conceded well knowing that there are financial implications. We shall handle that as a consequential matter when we are handling maybe a supplementary budget or anything – but the financing of this new requirement can be done subsequent to the passing of the legislation.

MS NAMAYANJA: I find the amendment of hon. Lukwago redundant in the law because we looked at it here in the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Act and the arguments are the same. The district is the central place where all of us go for nominations. I do not imagine that there is a district in this country that does not have either a community centre, school or somewhere that the Electoral Commission can –(Interjections)– even a church! There are community places even if it is at sub-county level. I think that is a provision that will be redundant and I beg that we really do not spend much time on it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Bill be amended as proposed by hon. Lukwago.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much. Immediately before clause 1 of the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, the committee proposes an amendment to section 11 by deleting sub-section (2) of section 11 and replacing it with the following: “Where under the multi-party political system, a candidate is sponsored by a political organisation or a party, the nomination paper shall be endorsed and sealed by the political party or organisation sponsoring the candidate.” 

The justification is for political organisations to endorse and seal nomination papers of candidates sponsored by them.

MR LUKWAGO: We have no objection to the amendment because it was agreed upon –(Interjections)- it was agreed upon in the IPOD and we thank the committee for having adopted it.    

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR LUKWAGO: Before clause 1, we have an amendment to section 17. We are proposing that sub-section (8) of section 17 be repealed - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: How does it read?

MR LUKWAGO: “It creates an offence for one to have more than two vehicles in your convoy when you are going for nomination.” It makes it an offence and the proposal is that it should not be a criminal offence. It can be a regulatory matter that you are just - for convenience of the nomination process the commission can issue those guidelines but not to make it a criminal offence that when you have more than two cars as you are going for nominations, you are committing an offence. You know it is a serious matter – one can even join your convoy unknowingly –(Interjections)- it is possible! As you are moving to the nomination place, an enthusiastic supporter can join your convoy and then you are held liable for that?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Lukwago, isn’t it possible that I can come with my convoy of 20 cars and prevent you from arriving before 5 o’clock so that you are not nominated? With my long convoy, you will not arrive at the nomination centre.

MR LUKWAGO: I understand the mischief in this particular case but again for one to be criminally liable there should be the evil mind –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I can want to prevent my rival from getting nominated by coming with 100 cars and nobody can get in until 5 o’clock – (Interjections)- yes!

MR LUKWAGO: The issue here is the person who has no evil mind and he is going for nominations and he has more than two vehicles in his convoy but with no intention whatsoever of sabotaging somebody else’s nomination. We are saying that the Electoral Commission can regulate the matter administratively but not to make it a criminal offence if you have more than two. That is the justification.

MR RUHUNDI: I do not know which tactics the Shadow Attorney-General is using today because these are matters we discussed in the special committee set up. This matter was discussed – you see, even if you have not discussed Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, most of the amendments that we passed in the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Act are consequentially impacting on this Bill. If, for instance, this was found untenable in the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, how do you make it tenable under the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill? And in any case, we are the same people who are busy banning fundraisings. We want to minimise candidate’s expenses, we want to have orderly process of the electoral process and we are the same people having double standards – this way and this way. This matter was completely debated and we agreed that it should be abandoned.

MR LUKWAGO: I want to be on record on this issue. We have not had time to sit down as a special committee of this House to harmonise these positions –(Interjections)- this is the truth I am giving you –(Interjections)- this is the information I am giving you. The committee chaired by the Prime Minister handled the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill and that is where we ended. What I am presenting right now are the amendments that were agreed upon in IPOD where even NRM is represented and we said that they should be subjected to a further review by a special committee of this House. This is where I wanted to be on record. If we could be given more time to look at this, I would say, “Fine, we should reflect on it.” But I do not even have the mandate to drop an amendment, which was agreed upon in IPOD and it has not been subjected to further review under the special committee of this House. I cannot single-handedly and unilaterally drop it. I find sense in this amendment. That is why I am moving it right now and I am appealing to hon. Members, please, critically reflect on this. I request you to critically reflect on this.

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, this is the biggest committee that will definitely impact on the registration we are doing. These other committees that were formed for convenience cannot be subject to this committee –(Interjections)- so I would take that one as a caucus and now this is the final committee. If the issue can come to the Table and then we subject it to a vote, we shall save a lot of time. (Applause)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Chair, I would like to give more information regarding hon. Lukwago’s amendment. During the 2006 parliamentary nominations, the Electoral Commission allowed candidates only two vehicles and there was a lot of order. Given that, if we really legislated on this I think we could have a lot of sanity as far as nominations of Parliamentary candidates are concerned. (Interjections)

The other issue is that I would like to implore honourable members and even hon. Lukwago that the issue of IPOD is not recognised here unless you are telling me that the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee of Parliament is under IPOD. And then when we legislate, it does not mean that all the witnesses – whatever suggestions you give, we will 100 percent take them. There are others that we drop. So, I would like to implore hon. Lukwago that the issue of IPOD is not part of the institution of this Parliament. I respect the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs more than IPOD and whatever the committee recommends; I think that is what we should vote on. I thank you very much, Madam Chair.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to it.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair, the committee proposes an amendment to section 18 of the Parliamentary Elections Act sub-section (3) to be amended by deleting the words “seven days,” and replacing them with the words, “ten days.” The justification is to increase the number of days in which the returning officer is to display the list of the presiding officers and polling assistants appointed. This is a matter we had presented before and accepted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Any objection to that? I put the question to it. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair, the committee further proposes an amendment to section 19 of the Parliamentary Elections Act sub-section (2) to be amended by inserting at the end of the sub-section the following: “Where the candidate is sponsored by a political party or organisation, the notification shall be signed and sealed by the secretary-general of the political party or organisation or any other person authorised by the political party.” 

The justification is to involve a political party or organisation in the withdrawal of candidates sponsored by it. 

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chair, where as we have no objection to the proposed amendment and indeed it was extracted from –(Interjections)- yes, I would say IPOD –(Laughter)- there is still a contentious issue of disqualification of candidates. This particular clause in the Bill – look at the substantive Bill, 19(a) because we are looking at 19(a) where there are only two candidates and one withdraws or is disqualified, the returning officer shall immediately declare the remaining candidate elected unopposed.

Madam Chair, we had a heated debate here –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, I think you are moving fast. We are still on the other one where the party is withdrawing its candidate. That is where we are.

MR LUKWAGO: No, it is one clause. It is one clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You have no objection to the proposal?

MR LUKWAGO: You see, the proposal is an addition to the clause already – 19. It is an addition. We said that whereas we do not oppose the proposed amendment –(Interjection)- no, it is the same clause. You understand it. It is 19(a) and 19(a) is two-fold. There are two situations: withdrawal and disqualification. So, what we are passing is in respect to both. We wanted to get a position from the Attorney-General first whether he is withdrawing the element of disqualification, then we move on. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, this matter was debated at length. It was even deferred for debate and in the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, we deleted the expression “or is disqualified,” so it remains “candidate withdrawing.” We gave a background of the enabling legislation that under the Constitution, Articles 61 and 64, sections 11 and 15 of the other Act – I think there must be an equivalent in here. There is already an elaborate process of invalidating a nomination, particularly considering the fact that when a nomination is invalidated, the aggrieved party has an opportunity to go to court and if you declare another one unopposed, it may prejudice that person’s chances of appeal once, for instance, if that person wins the matter or gets over the matter successfully. So, we thought, and we did indeed, withdraw the expression or disqualified and we propose we do the same here. 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Madam Chair. We appreciate the position of the Attorney-General. So now it is clear the element or the expression is withdrawn. We have no objection to the amendment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is another clause 1. Chairperson!

MR LUKWAGO: I thought the committee would propose an amendment before clause 2, but I beg to proceed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Where is it? You propose it.

MR LUKWAGO: I beg to proceed and move an amendment to section 27 by proposing insertion of a new section 27(a) to read as follows: “27(a) Right to monitor election materials: Political parties, political organizations and independent candidates shall have a right to monitor the management, storage and transportation of election materials and shall be provided with serial numbers of ballot papers and serial numbers for seals of ballot boxes for each polling station.” 

The justification is to empower political parties and political organisations and independent candidates participating in an election to monitor the management. I wish to put it on record, when we are discussing the Presidential Election (Amendment) Bill, we had to consider this amendment in the special committee and there were some slight amendments to this which I thought would be adopted if we were given an opportunity to sit. But now that we have not sat, I had to move it as it is and the Attorney-General would agree with me that we slightly amend that clause, but we have not had an opportunity to do so here.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, this matter did not get slight amendment, even in the Presidential Elections (Amendments) Bill. First of all, we are all aware that we cannot encumber the independence of the Electoral Commission. When you talk about monitoring, you are really encumbering the independence of the Electoral Commission. In any case, we have already made sufficient provisions in the previous Bills. We have passed that political parties, political organisation and independent candidates shall be accredited as observes in the electoral process. But in addition to that, we made an elaborate amendment, which consequently we propose be adopted here. Insertion of a new section 27(a); we came up with a few amendments. The principal Act is amended by inserting immediately – (Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chairperson, there is already a motion on the Floor; I am moving an amendment. And then the Attorney-General is also coming up with another amendment. Procedurally, before disposing of the amendment I suggested, would he be right to proceed with a new amendment?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Restate your proposal.

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chairperson, without wasting much of this House’s time, now that the Attorney-General is agreeable to the reviewed proposal, I would like to restructure it as follows: section 27(a), packing and dispatch of election materials. “Political parties, political organisations and independent candidates taking part in an election may, through their dully appointed representative be present during the packing and dispatch of election materials.” 

Clause 2 –(Interruption) 

MRS MUKWAYA: We want to look at the documents, Madam Chairperson.

MR LUKWAGO: They are being circulated, Madam Chairperson. I have read clause 1 of this amendment. I beg to move on to clause 2: “The commission shall provide political parties, political organisation and independent candidates taking part in an election with: 
    (a) The serial numbers of ballot papers supplied to each polling station.
    (b) The serial numbers of seals affixed to and enclosed in the ballot boxes supplied to all polling stations  as soon as practicable after the packing and dispatch of the election material as and in any case not latter than 24 hours before polling day – (Interruption)

MS ERIYO: Madam Chairperson, this is a very important amendment that we are looking at yet some of us do not have copies. Can we first have every one of us getting copies before we can continue?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Who does not have? Attorney-General, since you have a copy, can you respond, please –(Interjections)– okay, please complete your proposal.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  Sub-clause (3), “Any replacement made to the seals referred to in sub-section (2)(b) shall be documented by the presiding officer and witnessed by the agents of the political parties, political organisations and independent candidates present at the poling stations”. I beg to move.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I think he substantially agrees with the amendment we proposed in the Presidential Elections (Amendments) Bill. He is only introducing the element of management, monitoring and storage, which we are not comfortable with. In view of that, let me read the amendment and you hear the difference – even the Members who were in that committee would bear with me that this is the position we adopted:

“The principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after section 28 the following: 
27(a) Packing and dispatch of election materials -
    i) Political parties, political organisations and independent candidates taking part in an election may through their dully appointed representatives be present during the packing and ditch of election materials.
    ii) The Commission shall provide political parties, political organisation and independent candidates taking part in an election  with: 
    a) The serial numbers of ballot papers supplied to each polling stations.
    b) The seal numbers of seals affixed to and enclosed in the ballot boxes supplied to all polling stations as soon as practicable after the packing and dispatch of the election materials and in any case not later than 24 before polling day. 
    c) Any replacement made to the seals referred to in sub-section (2)(b) shall documented by the presiding officer and witnessed by the agents of the political parties, political organisations and independent candidates present at the polling stations. 

Madam Chairperson, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chair, I do not know but in the interest of time - because the original Bill as presented by the Attorney-General. If you look at it, clause 2 is in respect to section 58 and we have a number of amendments in between because we are now considering 27. I do not know whether the Attorney-General is going to move those amendments or I proceed to move them in the interest of time.

If that is the case, I beg to proceed and move the amendment before we go to clause 2. We had another amendment, which has not been considered in the special committee, which provides as follows on page 6, amendments to section 29 - before I come to 29, 28 amending sub-section (1) by inserting the words “Within seven days after close of nominations”. 

MS OBURU: Thank you, Madam Chair. The Speaker appointed a committee to go and harmonise these but now we are being given a big document. When shall we have these harmonised? Maybe we should give them a night so that it is harmonised instead of ping ponging here. There is a game of ping pong, Attorney-General, Shadow Attorney-General. When shall we have this?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, on this side of the House the Attorney-General is the lead person and on this side, the Shadow Attorney-General is the lead person. Let us move.

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chair, for the benefit of Members who do not have the full text of the parent Act, section 28 provides as follows: 

“Publication of lists of polling stations and candidates: 
The Commission shall, by notice in the gazette, publish a list of the polling stations in each constituency; and 
(b) A list of the names of the candidates nominated for each constituency in alphabetical order with surnames.”

We are proposing to put a timeframe because this is wide open and the amendment as I read it out on page 6 to say: “Within seven days after close of nominations” to be inserted after the word “shall”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you say it in full so that Members who do not have the Act can follow? Speak it in full, including the proposed amendments.

MR LUKWAGO: “The Commission shall within seven days after close of nominations …” that is the addition “… by notice in the gazette, publish a list of the polling stations in each constituency and the list of the names of the candidates nominated for each constituency in alphabetical order with surnames first -(Interjections)- … with surnames first”, that one is already there. We are just putting a timeframe within which the list should be published in the gazette.

MR RUHINDI: Again, Madam Chairperson, we discussed this matter in detail. I know of course we are debating the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill now; I do not need to restate the fact that really, what we passed in the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill impacts on this Bill. We cannot run away from that. For instance, if he did not actually provide for it in the other one and you provide for it in this one, I do not know whether you actually see any discrepancy at all. All we are actually saying is, we do not live in Missouri, we live in Uganda, we all know the constraints that we have as a nation; we know under what circumstances the Electoral Commission operates although of course many come till dawn to do whatever but they actually work under great constraints, particularly financial.

We must give some flexibility; the principle is already captured, there will be a publication in the gazette but why do you actually tie the Electoral Commission within seven days after nominations? Why?

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chair, when you look at the requirement to publish these lists in the gazette, it is mandatory and particularly when you look at candidates who have been nominated, they must be in the gazette. So, does it make sense to leave wide latitude for the Commission to publish the names even if it is two days to the polls or even one day to the elections? 

As legislators, we must provide for a timeframe so that people who want to cross check and see who has been nominated, who is contesting against who  should check in the gazette and I get to know the people who were duly nominated in time and get the necessary information about that particular candidate. If you leave it wide open to the commission and leave it at their discretion to decide as and when they should publish in the gazette, it does not really make sense. So, that is why we are saying we should provide for a timeframe of seven days.

Attorney-General, surely, I think the seven days —

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: How frequently does the gazette get published? Isn’t it 14 days? –(Interjections)- No, how often does the gazette get published?

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chair, there is a provision here; “reference to a gazette means even newspapers with wide circulation.”

MR KATUNTU: Originally, the law provided for the 14 days but now as and when there is need, a gazette comes out.

MS ERIYO: Madam Chair, I am seeking clarification from hon. Lukwago whether it is really practical for the Electoral Commission to have a list of all candidates that have been nominated within seven days. How practical is that? You can have maybe 10 or 20 candidates in just one constituency; how many constituencies are there and how practical is it to have those lists in the gazette within seven days only and as we know, Uganda is very wide.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chairperson, I find these amendments trying to give an institution a mandate with the right hand and taking it away with the left hand. Sincerely, if hon. Lukwago was to be the manager of the Electoral Commission, he would not have moved this amendment because it is not -(Interjections)- yes you must allow somebody some flexibility to manage the mandate that has been given to them.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I would not have a problem with hon. Lukwago’s proposal but I believe that we are going to have voting on the same day. The Presidential Elections Bill was passed and it did not have a timeframe. How consistent is it going to be when we are going to vote on the same day?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Deputy Attorney-General, should I give you time to consult?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I do not need any more time to consult because we consulted a lot on this matter. Interestingly, that provision was not among the IPOD ones -(Interjections)- please, listen. What was in the IPOD proposals is 28(a). Section 28 was an inclusion later on by him and we considered it in great detail. 

My proposal, and what we came out with, is that we should leave the position as it is in 28 -(Interjections)- in any case what is the purpose of publishing polling stations? The purpose, of course, is that persons should know where they are supposed to vote from and it should actually be done in reasonable time before polling day. It is the reasonableness, the flexibility that is left with the Electoral Commission publishing the names of candidates -(Interjections)- yes, people should know who their candidates are and I believe that the Electoral Commission is in a position to do this. 

We have accepted many proposals as far as time limits are concerned but we must bear in mind that overstretching the Electoral Commission may make it impracticable for that commission to perform its duties.

MR AMURIAT: I think the record needs to be corrected, Madam Chairperson. The IPOD report prescribes seven days and not 28 days and I would like to read: “Section 28 of the principal Act is amended in sub-section (1) by inserting the words, “… within seven days after close of nominations,” after the word “shall”. And there is a whole lot of justification given for this. 

The justification is to prescribe the time within which the Commission is required to publish the list of polling stations and candidates in the gazette and this is to ensure that it is not open-ended. As the law is at the moment, the Electoral Commission has the option of even publishing this in the gazette after the elections. Of what use would this be?

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I have a proposal as a way forward. I think it is bad legislation if you, by law, provide for a duty to be done by an organ and you do not provide guidance as to when that particular duty should be done. But not to tie the Electoral Commission, like the Attorney-General says, would he consider saying, “… in any case not later than that,” such that there is that flexibility within which the Electoral Commission can publicise this particular gazette? Then we can look at the period which we think is reasonable because when you look at the first amendment, it says, “… within seven days” but it can be redrafted to give them the flexibility they need, but in any case not later than the number of days you think are reasonable.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But may I know, what is the mischief that you are trying to address?

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, the mischief is that this gazette can come a day before the elections and they would be acting within the law if the law does not provide the time within which to do it. And that would not serve the purpose of informing the electorate of their constituencies and their polling stations –(Interjections)- but you see the only problem is that we are not listening to each other. 

The law is already in place and it is saying that the Electoral Commission shall gazette the polling stations and the candidates. It is already provided for. What we are now debating is when they should do it. The original amendment was within seven days and the argument of the Attorney-General is that that is quite prohibitive and I am suggesting that let us look at a period and say, “In any case not later than this.” Then the mischief will be sorted out.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, you have put a very valid question. This is a very innocent provision to inform the public where the polling stations are and who their candidates are. And the Electoral Commission is mandated to do that under the current provision. I would rather that we maintain the current position.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that section 28 be amended as proposed by hon. Lukwago.

(Question put and negatived.)

Section 29

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chairperson, as indicated on page 6, we had an amendment to section 29 to substitute the words “7 o’clock” with the words “8 o’clock” but I would wish to say that we are abandoning that to be in line with what was adopted in the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill but painfully because we wanted polling to begin at 8. 

I beg to move on to the amendment on section 32.

Section 32

MR LUKWAGO: By inserting, at the end of sub-section (3) of section 32 the following: “… and shall sit at a table provided under paragraph (a) of sub-section (5) of section 31 or be positioned in such a way that he or she is able to crosscheck the names of the voters on the voters’ roll against the voter’s card or any other identification given.” I beg to move. 

Madam Chairperson, it is already there in the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill.

MR RUHINDI: That is the position we agreed upon. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 32 be amended as proposed by hon. Lukwago.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, as amended, agreed to.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The committee had earlier proposed amendments to section 34, the effect of which would be that a person who does not have a voters’ card is not allowed to vote at a polling station. But subsequent to the discussions we have had, we agreed to adopt a compromise position and do propose the following amendment:

“That section 34 of the principal Act be amended by substituting for sub-section (3) the following: 
(a) Where a person does not have a voters’ card but is able to prove to the presiding officer or polling assistant that his or her name and photograph are on the voters’ register, the presiding officer or polling assistant shall issue him or her with  a polling paper; and

(b) By inserting immediately after sub-section (3) the following new sub-section: “Where a person has a voters’ card and his or her name appears on the register but the photograph does not appear on the register, the presiding officer or polling assistant shall issue him or her with a ballot paper.”

The justification is to enable persons who can properly identify themselves to vote where the person who has no voters’ card or where a person’s photograph does not appear on the register.
 
MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chairperson, for the record, the chairperson of the committee would not make a clarification whether the amendment as suggested in the report is dropped; because the report of the committee on page 7 is proposing a totally different amendment to section 34. So, I do not know which is which? To be specific on this, the committee is proposing that a person shall not be allowed to vote without a voters’ card. That is the recommendation –(Interjection)- that is the recommendation - you look at the report; the problem is that you do not have the report.

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair, for the clarification of the Shadow Attorney-General, I said that the original position of the committee was that a person without a voters’ card should not vote but after discussions we adopted the proposal which I read, that a person who can be properly identified should be allowed to vote.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In any case, hon. Members, the amendments were not read as part of the report. 

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 34 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, as amended, agreed to.

MRS MUKWAYA: I am sorry, Madam Chairperson, to take you back but there is a lie on page 6; the justification by hon. Lukwago when he said that the Electoral Commission has been paying our representatives and agents. I have never received money from the Electoral Commission. So, can I go and ask for a refund?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, is it really a matter of substance? Let us move to the amendments, please.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we need to assist the Member that actually that is the current position of the law. I wish she were listening –(Interjection)- that is the current position of the law and I think that the committee is seeking to repeal that particular position because whereas the law provided that your agent should be paid by the Electoral Commission, in practice the Electoral Commission is not paying them.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Lukwago, proceed, please.

Clause 37

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We had proposed to move an amendment on page 8. We had suggested moving an amendment to section 37 to delete the word “illiteracy,” but going by what we adopted in the Presidential Elections (Amendments) Bill, we abandoned that one. 

We are moving on to 38, Madam Chair; 38 was re-drafted as indicated on page 9 and it reads as follows: “Special procedure for voting for persons in institutions and operation areas:

(i) Subject to this Act or any other law, the Commission may make special provisions for the taking of votes of patients in hospitals or persons admitted in sanatoria or homes for the aged and similar institutions and also persons in operation areas such as soldiers and other security personnel. But the Commission shall publish in the gazette a list of the operation areas referred to under this section.

(2) Subject to sub-section (i) the Commission shall not create special or separate polling stations exclusively for the Army or any other security personnel.

(3) For purposes of this section - 
(a) Operation areas include an area where soldiers and other security personnel are deployed on special duty during an election period and may include restricted areas. 
(b) Restricted areas include areas with an epidemic, disaster or insecurity situation.” 

I beg to move, Madam Chair.

MR RUHINDI:  Madam Chairperson, I am first of all very happy because the Shadow Attorney-General is now rising up to the amendments as we have been agreeing upon them and this is the position we agreed upon and we still agree upon it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 38 be amended as proposed by hon. Lukwago.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 41

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chair, I beg to move on to the amendment to section 41 and as indicated, again the original text was changed and the new one is as indicated on page 10. The principal Act is amended in section 41: 

(a) By inserting before sub-section (i) the following: “The presiding officer shall ensure that polling takes place in a free and secure environment.”

(b) By renumbering the current sub-section as sub-section (ii) and substituting it with the following: “The presiding officer other than a presiding officer for a polling station located in an urban area may in the absence of a police officer appoint at least one person present and resident within the area of the polling station as an election constable to maintain order in the polling station throughout polling day where the presiding officer finds the services of an election constable to be essential.” 

    (c) By substituting for sub-section (5) the following: “A presiding officer who has appointed an election constable at a polling station shall announce publicly and record the appointment in the space provided for that purpose in the polling report book.”
    (d) By inserting immediately after sub-section (5) the following: “A presiding officer may, where he or she deems it necessary, request for Police assistance and he or she shall record in writing reasons which necessitated the request for the assistance.”
    (e) By inserting immediately after sub-section (6) the following: “For avoidance of doubt, military personnel, a member of the Internal Security Organisation or External Security Organisation shall not be appointed as an election constable.”

The justification is that it is a consequential amendment following the provision we adopted in the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill. I beg to move, Madam Chairperson. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, this is the position we agreed upon and we agree. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that section 41 be amended as proposed.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41, as amended, agreed to.

Section 42

MR LUKWAGO: With your permission, Madam Chairperson, we are abandoning section 42. 

Section 47

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chairperson, we are also abandoning section 47 and we should move on to section 50. On page 12, the principal Act is amended in section 50(1)(b) by inserting between the words “display” and “at” the words “at a conspicuous place.”

ii) By substituting for paragraph (c) the following: “One copy shall be enclosed in an envelope supplied by the Commission for the purpose, sealed by the presiding officer and delivered to the sub-county headquarters or division headquarters to the designated officer of the Commission together with the report book for transmission to the returning officer.”

b) By inserting immediately after sub-section (2) the following: “A presiding officer, who without reasonable cause fails to cause to be posted a copy of the duly filled and signed declaration of result forms in contravention of sub-section (1)(b) commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding twelve currency points or imprisonment not exceeding six months or both.” 

For the benefit of those who do not have the parent Act, sub-section (1)(b) talks about the words which we want to insert there – “at a conspicuous place”. It is a very important provision that requires the presiding officer to display a copy of the duly filled declaration of results form at a polling station. What was missing is the words “conspicuous place” because it was just open to display it at a polling station. So, we wanted to insert that expression and this was agreed upon. I beg to move.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, we agree. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that section 50 be amended as proposed by hon. Lukwago.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, still on section 50, the committee proposes an amendment to section 50(3) of the Parliamentary Elections Act by adding at the end of the subsection the following (g): “The report book and the justification is that the report may be used by the presiding officer to record incidents at the election at the polling station.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that section 50 be amended as proposed by the Shadow Attorney-General and by the Chairperson of the Committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 50 as amended, agreed to.

Section 51

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chairperson, again following that meeting, we re-drafted the proposed amendment to section 51 as indicated on page 14. The principal Act is amended in section 51(a) by substituting for sub-section (1) the following: “The presiding officer shall immediately, after close of polls, deliver the declared results and sealed ballot box to the sub-county headquarters or division headquarters to the designated officer of the commission together with the report book for transmission to the returning officer.”

b) By inserting immediately after sub-section (1) the following (a): “A polling agent who wishes to accompany the presiding officer to witness the delivery under sub-section (1) may do so at his or her own expense.” 

I beg to move.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, we agree. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you agree? Suppose the people beat up the returning officer on the way? Attorney-General, I am a bit disturbed by this business of polling agents accompanying the presiding officer. Suppose they are angry and they beat up that presiding officer on the way? First, I have declared the results and I have displayed them conspicuously; why do you accompany me? Suppose they are going to steal the polling materials?

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, also practically, this may not be possible owing to the small number of agents and also to the fact that the security provided not only should be able to hold at bay a big crowd but also restrain whoever - whether they are candidates’ agents  - may want to cause chaos or disorganise the process of elections.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chair, the House may deliberate on your guidance. Otherwise, this is the position as we discussed it. But with your guidance, we may have to reflect on it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Members, how many polling stations do we have in the country? So an Army of 50,000 will accompany - from different direction; really! And causing congestion at the tallying centre - I do not know.

MR KUBEKETERYA: This one, other than putting it in the law, has been voluntarily happening –(Laughter)- that somebody wants to know whether you are going to tamper with the ballot box and so even if you do not put it in the law, it has been happening and nobody has really complained –(Interjections)– so, somebody escorts and sees whether you are going to tamper with it or not. What I am trying to say is that even if you did not put it in the law, the agent will ensure that he escorts the ballot box up to the last destination.  

DR EPETAIT: I think it is proper to provide for the agents to escort the ballot boxes just for avoidance of doubt. In any case, if the agents were disappointed with the presiding officer, I think they would take action at the polling station itself. So I do not think that polling agents while escorting materials to a sub-county would attempt to do anything mischievous along the way. As my colleague put it, it has actually been happening and I think we have not had serious problems before. I do not, therefore, see any harm in providing for it in the law after all it is a consequential provision since we have already passed it in the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill.

MR KATUNTU: First of all, we have already passed it under the Presidential Elections Act and if we provide for a different situation now, it means that the ballot boxes containing a presidential vote may be escorted but these ones of parliamentary candidates may not be escorted ­–(Laughter)- those are the two standards we are going to provide for. Having said that, there has always been a complaint that results are actually switched on their way to the sub-county headquarters. And this apparently could affect both sides -(Laughter)- some of you may not realise but I can tell you that you could be victims tomorrow of this switching –(Interjections)- it is in the interest of anybody who has won an election at a polling station to make sure that his victory is being witnessed from the polling station to the sub-county and ultimately to the returning officer’s tallying centre. 

I may hasten to add that there is actually no law that bars me from getting people to escort my results. Whether you put it here, which would be okay because I will now be acting legally even if you do not put, I will have people to escort my results –(Laughter)- yes, I will do that and every intelligent politician who has won, will do that –(Laughter)- there is no harm and we shall continue to do it. What we are now trying to cure is that people who have been escorting are actually now doing it according to the law. If they are doing it according to the law, they can even be regulated. At the end of the exercise, the Presiding Officer will ask, “Who is escorting me?” And he will record them and they will move in an organised way and lawful manner. These are our results we wish to protect -(Member timed out_)   

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 51 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 51, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 52

MR LUKWAGO: We are abandoning clause 52. We are also abandoning 57.

Clause 2

MR LUKWAGO: No. Before clause 2 comes in, there are matters – okay, we shall raise it later. We can move on to clause 2.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR TASHOBYA: The committee proposes an amendment immediately after clause 2 by having an amendment to section 60 of the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill by inserting immediately after sub-section (4) the following, sub-section (5): “The court, in considering an election petition under this section shall deliver judgment within 180 days from the filing of the petition.” 

The justification for this is to provide a time limit within which the High Court should dispose of election petitions -(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: I think the chairperson has moved a little bit fast because there is 59, which is clause 3. I think we should first deal with that one and then we come to his amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us deal with that one. I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR TASHOBYA: I think this is where my amendment comes in. It is an amendment to section 60 where we are proposing that we insert immediately after sub-section (4) the following, sub-section (5) to read as follows: “The court in considering an election petition under this section shall deliver judgment within 180 days from the filing of the petition.” 

The justification for this is to provide a time limit within which the High Court should dispose of election petitions.

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chair, I am a bit disturbed by this amendment -(Interjections)- I am a bit disturbed. My reading of section 63, sub-section (9) of the parent Act is as follows: “The High Court shall determine an election petition before it within six months after the petition was lodged in that court.” So, this provision already talks about six months. Now you are trying to – this is Section 63(9) –(Interjection)- yes, this is the Parliamentary Elections Act. Section 63(9) already talks about six months. Now we are creating another provision in section 60 to read, “180 days.” (Interjections) It is six months, Madam Chair. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you saying it is redundant?

MR LUKWAGO: Yes, I appreciate there is a problem with the timeframe; even six months is too much. I beg to move that under sub-section (9) of section 63, instead of six, we say four months -(Interjections)- I beg to move. There is already a problem on the ground -(Interjections)- Madam Chair, I have a justification for this. 

The presidential elections, for your information Members, the law says they should be disposed of within one month –(Interjections)-  for presidential elections it is one month –(Interjections)- even this case –(Interjections)- listen to me. A Judge handles one case -a High Court Judge handles one election petition. We have over 48 judges –(Interjections)- so why should a Judge be given six months for the electorate to know whether the election was valid or not? Whether they have a representative in Parliament or not? Why should they have to wait for six months? So, I beg to move -(Interjections)- Thank you hon. Adolf Mwesige – I beg to move under section 63(9) that we substitute, “within six months,” with “four months”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Members, I do not know whether you are really being considerate to the Judiciary. You are saying that once we have elections; they abandon defilement; they abandon murder; they abandon treason, robbery and focus only on election petitions? That is what you are suggesting.  Really, does it take four months?

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, even then, I think there is another problem. The provision hon. Lukwago has been reading of “determining,” the word used by the statute is “determining” the election petition within six months, has already been defined by the courts of law. Actually, the interpretation is that it is not mandatory. That is the interpretation. That is why, much as that provision is in the law, election petitions are still running for years -(Interjection)- That has been the interpretation of that particular section. So, the Attorney-General should really be looking for what mischief is being cured; otherwise if it is about time, these two provisions are redundant. They are only advisory to the courts of law. That is what has been happening. 

You are now aware, Madam Chairperson, that there are some petitions, which have been in the High Court for two years - just in the High Court - I was in the High Court myself for one and a half years, much as that provision is there. So, as it is, it does not make a lot of sense to me. 

MR RUHINDI: Now that you have highlighted the constraints of the Judiciary, I wish to add my voice. The committee, enthusiastically of course, thought that they were providing for a reasonable time not knowing that that time is already in the law. I am inclined to leave it the way it is at six months. Why? Hon. Katuntu is spot-on because in legal interpretation, when you use expressions like, “shall” in such manner, then we say those are provisions, which are directory and not mandatory. 

Where the validity of the subject matter of what is being prescribed depends on what is prescribed for its validity, the provision is mandatory. Where the validity of what is prescribed does not depend on what is prescribed, the matter is directory; and in any case, if you say six months and the Judiciary fails to achieve that time, what happens; can you actually appeal, for instance, on that ground that the court failed to hear my case within six months? I think this is a guiding principle and it is guiding enough by leaving it at six months.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, if you make it mandatory, then it means if six months elapse, the court will not be in position to possess jurisdiction, and the case will suffer a natural death –(Interjections)- yes it will; because the courts have already even interpreted so –(Interjection)- So, if there are any circumstances not foreseen and six months elapse the court will not have jurisdiction. 

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chair, my colleague Katuntu has already guided us properly here on the principles as initiated by the Judiciary, that in certain cases, “shall” means may -(Interjections)- Yes, you may not agree with me, but that is the interpretation of the word “shall,” in certain cases; it is not mandatory; it is sometimes directory and that is the position. 

So, the point here is that we want to demonstrate to the Judiciary that there is mischief that we want to curb. The delay of delivery of justice in election matters is a question of public concern to all the litigants. The entire electorate is overwhelmed with this notion of delay of delivery of justice.

Madam Chair, if it is a directive, we need to demonstrate to the Judiciary that actually earlier on we had given you six months but you have not used that judiciously; so, now we are making it clear to you that in exercising your discretion to prolong time, please, bear in mind that these are matters, which are urgent in nature –(Interjection)- and, therefore, that is why we are reducing it to four months in order to –(Interruption) 

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Chair, I need clarification from a very efficient lawyer on the matters that you are discussing. Why should you blame the Judge when it is these very lawyers who ask for endless adjournments every time they appear before court? (Interjections) So, I would love an amendment. If you are stifling the court, you should also stifle the lawyers who move adjournments unnecessarily. (Applause)

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chair, I beg that we take these matters seriously because every person here in Uganda who has witnessed the delay of delivery of justice should be concerned. If you looked at – actually I have been reminded that section 63(2) - we made a directive to the courts that, “The High Court shall proceed to hear and determine the matter expeditiously and may, for that purpose, suspend any other matter pending before it.” This is the reason we restricted the time to six months and it has not worked. What do we do? 

Let me tell you by experience, I have seen the Supreme Court handling presidential election petitions. They are mindful of time knowing that they have only one month. But this business of giving them six months gives latitude to the Judiciary to relax only to wake up and say, “Hey, by the way, the six months are about to elapse”. If they are given four months and it is one Judge handling one petition –(Interruption)

MR ONYANGO KAKOBA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to be assisted. From the presentation of the lawyers, particularly from hon. Katuntu, we have heard that a provision was made for six months and it has not worked. What guarantee does hon. Lukwago have that if it is four months, it will work?

MR LUKWAGO: The guarantee I can give, Madam Chairperson, is that the Judiciary will get the message that the Legislature is really concerned with the delays of justice; we gave you six months, but the record shows you do not comply with the requirements, and now in our own wisdom and assessment, the courts can dispose of an election petition within four months. I am telling you it is possible even in two or three months – a petition can be heard each day and they are given –(Interruption)

MS NAMUYANGU: Thank you. Madam Chairperson, you raised an issue which hon. Lukwago has not responded to. You asked whether the judges are going to abandon all the other cases and concentrate only on electoral petitions. 

But also, I would like to speak basing on a previous experience. I had an election petition in Mbale, but we used to have judges coming all the way from Kampala and at times you would get there, but the judge would not be there. So, if these judges have not been able to execute their mandates in six months, how sure are we that they will be able to execute them in four months?

MS MASIKO: Madam Chairperson, I need clarification. We have been given a document which I presume has been discussed by hon. Lukwago and the Minister and the chair of the committee. It clearly stipulates the articles that have been agreed upon; the clauses that have been agreed upon and those that have been rejected. 

On page 15, it shows that 180 days were agreed upon by both parties. So, why should we sit here, to be derailed by hon. Lukwago, who purportedly has agreed to the amendments and is now changing his mind and bringing some other issues? How are we working? I thought as a responsible Parliament, we would use this document and move as they agreed!

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I think our difficulty is that the matter appears to have been provided for already; the six months are already part of the law. So, I have not yet understood why we need these other six months in the same law. It is in section 63; do we really need this?

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chairperson, I had moved an amendment under section 63(9) to reduce it to four instead of six so that they can dispose of these petitions early enough and expeditiously. This is a command here under the law that the Judiciary shall dispose of these matters expeditiously and suspend any other business; it is a command, and we have to operationalise that command by fixing a very strict timeline for the Judiciary. Why should we promote laziness that a Judge cannot dispose of a case within four months?

MR DOMBO: Madam Chairperson, I want to seek clarification from hon. Lukwago given the advice by hon. Katuntu. There is already a provision in the law of six months which has not worked according to the interpretation of the judges. But the specific clarification which I seek is that at times the judges have retired and it has taken a long time to appoint new ones. In that case, we may put a provision when there is no quorum for a required appeal court or High Court to sit in order to determine, because the judges do not appoint themselves. In such circumstances, what do we do?

MS MUNYIRA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have listened to hon. Lukwago attentively, and I know he has been to court many times, but it looks like he is just being punitive to the judges. But let him put himself in the place of the judges; there are so many things that could hinder a Judge from being present. So, let us not make a law while looking at only one side of the situation; tomorrow you may also fail to appear in court.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Lukwago, have you considered that there could be 300 petitions to be dealt with in four months, is it feasible?

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I am aware of the concerns of Members on both sides, but put yourself in the shoes of the people who have had stressful time running to court, then sitting in this House and running to the constituency for more than six months. We have Members in this House who were so stressed because the six months’ deadline was not respected. 

Hon. Lukwago is talking from a point of experience. A colleague of mine who was representing hon. Sauda Mugerwa had to go through a lot of stress and pain – there are many in this House. I thought this helps all of us, if we happen to fall in such circumstances. So, given what hon. Katuntu has said, both provisions which have been put there have not helped. The lawyers should help us to know whether there is a maximum timeframe in which to dispose of cases –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, much as we may not be comfortable with the submissions of hon. Lukwago, there are grounds under the Parliamentary Elections Act where petitions abate. And one of it is death of a petitioner. So, we can come out very clearly and say, “If after four months, the case is not disposed of, then the petition should abate, because we are not just going to –(Interjection)- just think of a situation where they have petitioned against me. I have been waiting for two years for the ruling; you cannot even sleep or live a normal life –(Laughter)- you are not sure whether you are going back for an election -

MR RUHINDI: You see, Madam Chairperson, you cannot put an irregularity of any authority on the aggrieved party; that is a principle. If there is a problem in the Judiciary or in Parliament, you cannot put that irregularity on an aggrieved party; you would be doing injustice. But without prejudice to that, the Judiciary has done all in its powers; it is only constrained. (Interjection) The backlog we are talking about is a different matter altogether that we can discuss at a later stage, but the Judiciary is putting in place many interventions to take care of case backlog. In any case, section 63, sub-section (2) takes care of our worries because it provides that the High Court shall proceed to hear and determine the matter expeditiously, and may for that purpose suspend any other matter pending before it, and they have done a lot in this particular regard.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you for that information. In the alternative, I would plead with my colleague, hon. Lukwago and Members that in case we are comfortable with the current provision, then we should make the Court of Appeal be the last court. We should at least come out clearly other than leaving it to the Supreme Court where people buy time —

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chair, what hon. Odonga Otto is talking about is the next amendment, if you looked at page 15. We are still handling -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Members, the six months are already part of the law; so this one is redundant.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. The committee proposes an amendment to section 66 of the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill. We propose that sub-sections (2), (3), (4) of section 66 should be deleted and replaced with the following:

“Sub-section (2), “The Court of Appeal shall proceed to hear and determine an appeal under this section within six months from the date of filling of the appeal and may for that purpose suspend any other matter pending before it.” 

Sub-section (3), “Notwithstanding section 6 of the Judicature Act, the decisions of the Court of Appeal pertaining to parliamentary elections petition shall be final.” The justification is to provide for expeditious delivery of justice.

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chair, I again have a problem. The principle is okay, but now the problem here – sub-section (3), “Notwithstanding section 6 of the Judicature Act, the decisions of the Court of Appeal pertaining to parliamentary elections petition shall be final”. You cannot do that unless you repeal sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) of 66.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But that is what the Chair has proposed.

MR LUKWAGO: No, it was following sub-section (2) here which we have rejected. The period of six months is provided for under sub-section (2) of section 66, the one on appeal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that section 66 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Section 66, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair, the committee proposes an amendment to clause 4 by inserting after sub-clause (8) the following sub-clause (9) which reads as follows: “Fundraising for purposes of this section shall not include the soliciting of funds for candidates to organise for elections.” The justification is to provide for the definition of what amounts to fundraising. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 4 be amended as proposed by the Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2009 and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

5.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2009” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2009”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Members.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT UNDER ARTICLE 179, CLAUSES 1 AND 2 OF THE CONSTITUTION PROVIDING FOR THE ALTERATION OF BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS AND CREATION OF NEW DISTRICTS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before I invite the Minister of Local Government, I want to remind you that tomorrow there is a football match between the Parliamentary Football Team and Ex Internationals at 2 p.m. at Nambole Stadium. Our bus will leave Parliament at 12.30 for Nambole Stadium. Please, carry along any Parliament sports equipment in your possession.

5.13
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, tomorrow we are launching issues regarding maternal health in Nambole. So, this match is part of the campaigns for the issues regarding maternal mortality and health.

But also on a sad note, we received communication that one of the players of the Ex Internationals, Denis Obua, collapsed during training today and he passed away. So, with the Speaker’s permission, having been a renowned sportsman in this country and the former President of FUFA can we observe a moment of silence? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was he preparing for our match tomorrow?

MR OKUPA: Yes, tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us observe a moment of silence, please.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you recall, a motion was moved in this House by the Minister of Local Government and what was remaining was the decision of this House. So, we are going to start.

Kalungu District

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we shall vote row by row.  

(The Members voted by show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, Kalungu District: 176 in favour, one against. Kalungu District approved. 

Bukomansimbi District

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are on the district of Bukomansimbi.

(The Members voted by show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, those in favour of Bukomansimbi District are 189, none against. Bukomansimbi approved. 

Butambala District

(The Members voted by show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, those in favour of Butambala District are 189, none against. Butambala approved. 

Lwengo District

(The Members voted by show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, 187 have voted in favour of Lwengo District, none against and no abstentions. Lwengo District is approved. 

Mitoma District 

(The Members voted by show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, 190 have voted in favour of Mitoma District, none against and no abstentions. Mitoma District is approved. 

Lubirizi District

(The Members voted by show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Lubirizi District: 188 votes for, and none against. 

Sheema District
 
(The Members voted by show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, Sheema District has got 191 votes for, and none against.

Buhweju District

(The Members voted by show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, for Buhweju District, there are 195 in favour –(Applause)- none against, and no abstentions. (Applause)

Ngora District 

(The Members voted by show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, Ngora District has 190 in favour; no abstentions, and none against. (Applause)

Napak District

(The Members voted by show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in favour of Napak District we have 194 votes; no abstentions, and none against. So, Napak is approved. 

Kibuku District

(The Members voted by show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, for Kibuku District, those in favour are 189; no abstentions and none against. Kibuku District is approved. (Applause)

Nwoya District

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Nwoya District is curved out of Amuru.

(The Members voted by show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, Nwoya District has 193 in favour; no abstentions, and none against. It is approved.

Kole District

(The Members voted by show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, those in favour of Kole District are 192; none against, and no abstentions.

Agago District

(The Members voted by show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Agago District, out of Pader, headquarters to be determined later in consultation with the minister. 

(The Members voted by show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members in favour of Agago we have 192 votes; none against, and no abstentions. Agago is approved. 

Kween District out of Kapchorwa

(The Members voted by show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, those in favour of Kween District are 192; none against and no abstentions. Kween District approved. (Applause)

Maracha-Terego District

6.37
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Madam Speaker, I would first of all like to thank you for giving me this opportunity to remain on record. This is the moment of truth and I very much want to thank the committee that scrutinised this motion and for their well informed decision, which is in accordance with the supreme law of this country, the Constitution of 2005 (as amended) and the Local Government Act. And also for acknowledging that there are three arms of governance: we have the Executive, the Legislature and the Judiciary -(Interjections)  

Madam Speaker, you will remember that this matter was very exhaustively debated under your chairmanship. I have got with me copies of the Hansard of 08 December, 15 December and 16 December where you clearly made a ruling on page 10,454. In your own wisdom, you did rightly advise the minister that since he had made an appeal in the Court of Appeal, he should use the constitutional means to expeditiously dispose of that case. 

As if that were not enough, the minister quickly submitted a Memorandum of Appeal, and last Thursday I tendered a document from the Court of Appeal, dated 13 April in which it set 24th of this month, for conferencing. I laid it on the Table and in case of doubt, I still have another copy. With your permission, Madam Speaker, I can lay it on the Table. Therefore, I really beg that since we are the framers of the Constitution and Article 4 calls upon any one of us to come to the defence of the Constitution - and what I am about to say is an abrogation of the Constitution -(Interjection)- yes, what I am about to say is an abrogation of the Constitution. It is not the first time that such kinds of things have happened. There are institutions for redress. 

I, therefore, appeal to each one of us as having sworn to serve in this office or in this Parliament using the Constitution to appeal to your conscience because I would not like a situation where we are individually held responsible as people who made this Constitution look a mere paper. [MS KABAKUMBA: “Do not threaten us.”]  I am not threatening you; you will have your time to talk.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, we have been proceeding very well and we are all happy. We are now remaining with one test. I was just thinking that if we could get a win-win situation, why can’t Parliament create Terego and Maracha districts separately and we end the whole story? (Interjections)  Forget about procedure or order, we need a win-win situation. Why can’t we assert ourselves as Parliament and create two districts out of these two counties and hon. Wadri goes home happy and hon. Onzima also goes home happy and we end this story? I am just appealing for a win-win situation. That is the little chip in I wanted to give to hon. Wadri’s time. Thank you for the opportunity. 

6.41
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, today we have witnessed the formation of new districts and all of them are one-county districts. We are about to re-integrate Terego into Arua. Terego is a one count of this country. I do not see the logic why Terego cannot be allowed to go on its own. My biggest problem is the reason why Government would choose to proceed this way. And until the Minister gives reasons why Terego cannot go alone I think I do not support this motion. 

6.42
MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Madam Speaker, we have been patient for a long time and we have listened to different contributors since last week on the same issue. We have now reached the stage of voting, and on all the districts Members were willing to add more new information but you could not, all simply because we have exhausted the debate. 

And listening to what my colleague from Terego is talking about now, I am almost calling it a song now because I have not heard any new word. Is it procedurally right to re-open the debate instead of continuing with the exercise of voting?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know that this matter has really been canvassed for so many years. The arguments are the same year in year out, and I think we need to put an end to this matter. So, let us vote. Those in favour of creating Maracha District put your hands up. 

(The Members voted by show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, 167 have voted in favour of Maracha District, none against and there are 17 abstentions. Maracha District is approved. Now we have to vote on the incorporation of Terego into Arua District. 

 (The Members voted by show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, those in favour of alteration are 167; there are four against; and eight abstentions.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I thank you. I seek your guidance. Article 72(4) of the Constitution, if I may read it, says: “Any person is free to stand for an election as a candidate, independent of a political organisation or political party.” Hon. Onzima contested to come to this Parliament under the FDC –(Interjections)- two weeks ago, hon. Onzima was suspended from the Forum for Democratic Change party. Today he has come into Parliament waving the Movement sign –(Interjections)– like this and then to make matters worse, he is pointing the FDC sign downwards –(Interjections)– so the guidance I am seeking is, has the Member crossed and if he has crossed, what the hell is he still doing on our side? I seek your guidance because this is very serious to us in FDC. We are not going to accept somebody eating from our granary when his soul is somewhere else. So, I seek your guidance – which party is hon. Onzima and which side does he belong to? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know that the Speaker does not attend your party meetings. The Speaker is not aware of the expulsion – until the Member notifies me that he or she has changed so that I can make arrangements for him or her to sit on this side – that is when you have crossed. Since you have not done so, he is still your Member. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the new districts take effect from 1 July 2010. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That the headquarters of each new district which is not a town council shall become a town council in accordance with provisions of Regulation 32 of the Third Schedule of the Local Government Act. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODONGA OTTO: We want a time frame.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Time frame? The minister is going to consult with you. Minister, when can you give the new Agago District their headquarters since they are going to take effect in July?

MR MWESIGE: This Parliament has authorised me by resolution to go to Agago and consult the stakeholders. I will do it as soon as possible. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to thank you for your attendance and participation. I want to remind the chairpersons of the sectoral committees that your reports are really due and I would like to remind you to complete them and hand them in by Friday so that the committee on Budget can compile the report for the President. The House is adjourned to 2 O’clock tomorrow afternoon. I thank you.

(The House rose at 7.02 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 5 May 2010 at 2.00 p.m.)
