Tuesday, 3 May 2016

Parliament met at 3.44 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: The Deputy Prime Minister, the Leader of the Opposition and Members of Parliament, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I do apologise for this late start; our Committee on Budget was still concluding its report which, as you know, we agreed should be handled today, hence the delay. 

I would like to inform you that as we close the Ninth Parliament, a number of our colleagues are not with us; some of them have been hospitalised and others are out of the country. I would like you to pray for them because they have been indisposed. They include Dr Chrispus Kiyonga, Bukonzo West; hon. John Nasasira, Kazo County; hon. Adolf Mwesige, Bunyangabo County; hon. Alex Onzima, the Minister of State for Local Government; hon. Peter Omolo, Soroti County; hon. Issa Kikungwe, Kyadondo County South; and hon. Kaddu Mukasa Ssozi, Mityana County South. Let us pray for them as we complete our term. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE SPEAKER: Can someone stand in for the Parliamentary Commission? 

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay the following reports on the Table:

1. 	Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Ministry of Health - Centre for Disease Control and Prevention HIV/AIDS Project. 

2. 	Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the year ended 30 June 2015 - Joint Water and Environment Sector Support Programme (JWESSP), Ministry of Water and Environment.

3. 	Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Economic Policy Management Programme, Makerere University, for the financial year ended 30 June 2014.

4. 	Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Amber House Ltd for the six-month period ended 30 June 2014, and cash accountability for the year ended 30 June 2015.

5. 	Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Kilembe Mines Ltd for the financial year ended 30 June 2015.

6. 	Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Ltd (UETCL) for the year ended 31 December 2014.

7. 	Report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Economic Policy Management Programme, Makerere University for the year ended 30 June 2015.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Bahati. All these are sent to the Public Accounts Committee for expeditious perusal and report back.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO DEGAZETTE AND GAZETTE FOREST RESERVES

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter came up last week and a request was made for adequate time to consult. In the meantime, the minister has not been able to complete the consultation, so I am deferring this matter to Tuesday, 10th next week to give everybody time to harmonise their presentation.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE HARMONIZED FIGURES FOR SUPPLY TO VOTES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, where is our chairperson? Honourable members, our chairperson is still tidyng up his papers. We could go to item No.8; I understand there were two clauses remaining. Is the minister here so we can start on the Microfinance Institutions Bill? 

Honourable members, as we wait for our colleagues, in the public gallery we have students and teachers of St Margaret College, Kawempe. Can you, please, stand up? They are all here. (Applause) We also have Bandwe Secondary School. I do not know where they are seated. It seems they are not yet here. The students and teachers of St Margaret College, Kawempe are represented by hon. Sebuliba Mutumba and hon. Naggayi. Those of Bandwe are represented by hon. Lukyamuzi and hon. Naggayi. You are welcome.

Where is the Minister of State for Microfinance?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the minister will be coming in a few minutes.

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to item No.9.

MOTION FOR PREENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEARS 2008/2009 AND 2009/2010 ON LOCAL GOVERNMENTS UNDER SOROTI AUDIT REGION

3.57
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Maxwell Akora): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts on the Auditor-General’s report for financial years 2008/2009 and 2009/2010 on local governments under Soroti audit region. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts on the Auditor-General’s report for Financial Year 2010/2011 under the Arua audit region. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I wish to present the report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts on the Auditor-General’s report for financial years 2008/2009 and 2009/2010 on local governments under Soroti audit region. I will briefly go through the report and the executive summary. The report has already been uploaded online for Members to peruse through and consider. Therefore, I will concentrate on the executive summary.

In accordance with the provisions of Article 90, Article 163(3) and Article 164 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Section 13 of the National Audit Act and Rule 170(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, I wish to present to the House the report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts on the Auditor-General’s report for financial years 2008/2009 and 2009/2010 for the following local governments under Soroti audit region:

1. 	Abim District Local Government;
2. 	Amudat District Local Government;
3. 	Kaabong District Local Government;
4. 	Kaberamaido District Local Government;
5. 	Moroto District Local Government;
6. 	Moroto Municipal Council;
7. 	Nakapiripirit District Local Government.

The Committee on Local Government Accounts is one of the accountability committees under the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda that is mandated to consider and report on the Auditor-General’s reports on the accounts and financial statements of district local governments, municipal councils, town councils and subcounty councils. The Committee on Local Government Accounts was created in 1998 to handle issues related to local governments. 

Guided by the provisions of Article 163(3) and Article 164 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Section 13 of the National Audit Act, 2008, the Auditor-General is mandated to audit and report to Parliament on the public accounts of Uganda and of all public offices including the courts, central and local government administrations, universities and public institutions of like nature, and any public corporation or other bodies or organisations established by an Act of Parliament; and annually, produce a report of the accounts audited for the financial year immediately preceding. Pursuant to the aforementioned provisions of the Constitution, the National Audit Act, 2008 and Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, the committee considered the Auditor-General’s report for financial years 2008/2009 and 2009/2010 for local governments under Soroti audit region with a view to reporting on the same to the House for consideration and adoption. 

The methodology we followed in considering the Auditor-General’s report was as follows.We held meetings with accounting officers of local governments and scrutinised their responses; we made references to Article 164 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Local Governments Act 1997, the Public Finance and Accountability Act 2003, the Local Governments (Financial and Accounting) Regulations 2007, the Local Governments Internal Audit Manual 2007, and the Local Governments Financial and Accounting Manual, 2007.

Madam Speaker, the detailed report for each of the seven local governments which I enumerated has been given. I would like to go through the executive summary that captures the salient issues that cut across the local governments. The executive summary starts from page 6.

The report highlights findings, observations and recommendations by the Committee on Local Government Accounts during the consideration of the Auditor-General’s report for financial years 2008/2009 and 2009/2010 on local governments including Abim, Amudat, Kaabong, Kaberamaido, Moroto, Moroto Municipal Council and Nakapiripirit under Soroti audit region. The salient features of this report include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. 	Funds Not Accounted For

The committee established that during the Financial Year 2008/2009, a total of Shs 457 million was paid as advances to various officers of Abim, Kaberamaido, Moroto, Moroto Municipal Council and Nakapiripirit to carry out council activities but was not accounted for. This contravenes regulation 43(2) of the Local Governments (Financial and Accounting) Regulations, 2007 that requires all administrative advances to be accounted for within a period of one month.

The committee further established that during the Financial Year 2009/2010, a total of Shs 67.7 million was paid as advances to officers of Amudat, Kaabong, Kaberamaido, Moroto, Moroto Municipal Council and Nakapiripirit to carry out council activities, but were not accounted for as required by regulation 43(2) of the Local Governments (Financial and Accounting) Regulations, 2007.

The committee observed that the accounting officers of these local governments indicated were negligent to cause the responsible officers to retire the advances paid to them in accordance with regulation 43(2) of the Local Governments (Financial and Accounting) Regulations, 2007. The committee further observed that the accounting officers of Kaberamaido, Moroto, Moroto Municipal Council and Nakapiripirit authorised payments of advances to officers who had not returned previous advances. 

The committee recommends that the accounting officers should be held responsible for the recovery of these funds from the concerned council staff.

2. 	Non-Remittance of Taxes (Withholding Tax, Pay-As-You-Earn (PAYE) and Income Tax)

During the two financial years under review, a total of Shs 95.4 million in respect of withholding tax, PAYE and income tax was not remitted by the accounting officers of Abim, Kaabong and Kaberamaido to Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) as required by the Income Tax Act.

The committee observed that the accounting officers were negligent to obtain acknowledgement receipts from URA and did not avail them to the auditors.

The committee recommends that the accounting officers should endeavour to obtain acknowledgment receipts from URA in time in preparation for audit. The committee further recommends that URA should generate instant receipts upon payment of taxes by local governments.

3. 	Shortfall in Local Revenue

The committee established that a total of Shs 359 million was recorded as shortfalls in local revenues of Moroto District Local Government, Moroto Municipal Council and Amudat. The accounting officers of these local governments attributed the local revenue shortfalls to insecurity in Karamoja Sub-region, poor harvests, negative attitude of taxpayers and weak law enforcement mechanisms.

The committee observes that whereas the accounting officers were aware of the revenue shortfalls, they did not bring them to the attention of councils for consideration.

The committee recommends that the accounting officers should endeavour to involve council in the budget process with the view of revising budget estimates.

4. 	Overdue Personal Advances

The committee noted that during the Financial Year 2008/2009, the accounting officer of Abim District Local Government authorised personal advances amounting to Shs 14 million. The committee further noted that the query recurred in the Financial Year 2009/2010, but the accounting officer did not endeavour to recover the advances.

The committee observed that the accounting officer was negligent by not recovering the advances from the concerned staff. The committee further observed that the accounting officer disregarded the recommendation of the local government public accounts committee to recover the advances.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be tasked to recover the advances in full. 

5. 	Procurement Irregularities

The committee established that there were a number of procurement irregularities in Abim and Moroto District local governments. Abim District Local Government lacked a Procurement and Disposal Unit (PDU) as required by sections 26(c) and 30 of the PPDA Act, 2003 and the procurement activities lacked appropriate technical guidance. The committee was informed that the PDU lacks staff to manage the entity’s procurement. The committee observes that without the right staffing in the PDU, management of procurements was bound to be compromised.

The committee recommends that Abim District Local Government should establish a fully functional procurement and disposal unit to manage the entity’s procurements.

Moroto District Local Government had a number of procurement irregularities, including non-completion of contracts within the agreed period, and no penalties were imposed on the contractor; lack of evidence of payment of 10 per cent security bond by the contractor for contracts worth Shs 5 million; and purchases made without local purchase orders being issued.

The committee further observed that whereas the accounting officer of Moroto District Local Government maintained that measures were undertaken to address the irregularities, the response given was inadequate as he did not address the issues raised by the Auditor-General. 

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should adhere to the procurement guidelines at all times. 

The committee established that the accounting officer of Moroto District Local Government authorised for payment a sum of Shs 76.3 million for procurement of drugs from Joint Medical Stores without certification of non-availability issued by National Medical Stores, contrary to Government policy. The accounting officer informed the committee that the certificates of non-availability from National Medical Stores were not availed to the audit team for verification but they were presented later to the committee. 

The committee observes that the accounting officer withheld information from the auditor. He availed no explanation as to why the certificates were not availed at the time of audit.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should always adhere to the regulations and obtain a certificate of non-availability in the event there is need to purchase drugs elsewhere.

6. 	Assets Management

The committee noted with concern that management of council assets was not in conformity with regulations. The accounting officers of Moroto Municipal Council, Amudat and Abim District local governments did not maintain assets registers as required by the regulations. The committee further noted that there were no certificates of title for Abim Local Council to claim legal ownership of the land on which to construct the district headquarters. 

The committee observed that the accounting officers were negligent in managing their respective councils’ assets as required by the regulations.

The committee recommends that the accounting officers should adhere to the regulations in regard to management of council assets.

Madam Speaker, having deduced the findings and observations made from queries and responses by the accounting officers of the local governments above on the Auditor-General’s report for the financial years 2008/2009 and 2009/2010, the Committee on Local Government Accounts is of the view that management of fiscal transfers and other resources in the local governments should be in accordance with established laws, policies and guidelines and proper accountability retired by the respective public officers. Failure to satisfy Parliament, which is the oversight arm of Government, should evoke appropriate punitive measures against the offending officers in accordance with the law.

Madam Speaker, that is the report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts on the Auditor-General’s report for the financial years 2008/2009 and 2009/2010 for Soroti audit region. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2010/2011 ON THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS UNDER ARUA AUDIT REGION

4.09
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Maxwell Akora): Madam Speaker, the next report is the report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts on the Auditor-General’s report for the Financial Year 2010/2011 for local governments under Arua audit region.

In accordance with the provisions of articles 90 and 163(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, section 13 of the National Audit Act, 2008 and rule 170(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I wish to present to the House the report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts on the report of the Auditor-General for the Financial Year 2010/2011 on the accounts and financial statements for the following local governments under Arua audit region:

1. 	Adjumani District Local Government
2. 	Arua District Local Government
3. 	Arua Municipal Council 
4. 	Koboko District Local Government
5. 	Maracha District Local Government
6. 	Moyo District Local Government
7. 	Nebbi District Local Government
8. 	Yumbe District Local Government
9. 	Zombo District Local Government

Madam Speaker, we followed the same methodology, as I have already indicated, in considering the Auditor-General’s report. We held meetings with the accounting officers of local governments and we scrutinised responses by the accounting officers to the Auditor-General’s report for the financial year under consideration. We also made references to the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Article 164; the Local Governments Act, 1997; the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003; the Local Governments (Financial and Accounting) Regulations, 2007; the Local Governments Internal Audit Manual, 2007; and the Local Governments Financial and Accounting Manual, 2007.

I wish to take Members through the executive summary contained on pages 8 to 12. The details of each local government are in the report. The report highlights findings, observations and recommendations by the Committee on Local Government Accounts during the consideration of the Auditor-General’s report for the Financial Year 2010/2011 on local governments under Arua audit region. The salient features of this report include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. 	Funds Not Accounted For 

The committee established that a total of Shs 4.8 billion – Yumbe, Shs 797 million; Maracha, Shs 443.9 million; Koboko, Shs 860.59 million; Zombo, Shs 2.26 billion; Arua, Shs 140.3 million; Moyo, Shs 47.5 million; Arua Municipal Council, Shs 83.5 million; Adjumani, Shs 208.75 million; and Nebbi, Shs 45.45 million - advanced by the respective accounting officers to officers of the local governments to carry out council’s activities remained unaccounted for. This is contrary to regulations 42 and 43(2) of the Local Government (Financial and Accounting) Regulations, 2007.

The committee observed that the accounting officers were negligent to cause the responsible officers to retire the advances as required by the regulations.

The committee recommends that the accounting officers should be cautioned to always adhere to the regulations and further recommends that the accounting officers should recover the said advances from the responsible offices.

2. 	Budget Performance

The committee noted that during the Financial Year 2010/2011, the central government released less than the approved budget estimates to the local governments in Arua audit region. With less than approved fiscal transfers, the local governments were unable to implement all planned activities.

The committee observed that the central government is the sole determinant of the amounts released to the local governments. Local governments have no control over releases received from the central government.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the central government should endeavour to release the approved budgets to the local governments to enable them implement planned activities.

3. 	Lack of Land Titles

The committee was informed that Yumbe, Maracha, Koboko, Zombo, Moyo, Adjumani, Nebbi and Arua Municipal Council had no certificates of title for the land on which their respective headquarters and administrative units were to be located. The committee noted that without certificates of title, the district land risked being encroached on or the local governments could face law suits for illegal occupancy.

The committee observed that the accounting officers of the respective local governments were negligent in failing to apply for certificates of title to secure their occupancy.

The committee recommends that the accounting officers for the respective local governments should expedite the process of securing their land titles so as to guarantee ownership and occupancy.

4. 	Staffing Gaps

The committee was informed that all local governments in Arua audit region operated with less than the approved staffing establishment. This posed major challenges to service delivery. 

The committee observed that the limited wage bill as well as the ban on staff recruitment by the Ministry of Public Service was responsible for low staffing levels in the local governments. It was further observed that this challenge could only be addressed with support from the central government through express permission to recruit, and allocation of funds to finance the wage bill. 

The committee recommends that in order to enhance service delivery, the central government should lift the ban on recruitment of staff as well as allocate sufficient funds to local governments to enable them enhance their staffing component. 

5. 	Management of Information Technology (IT) Equipment

The committee noted that the accounting officers had neither formulated IT policies nor designated officers to implement the IT policies, as required by regulation 110 of the Local Government (Financial and Accounting) Regulations, 2007.

The committee observed that without these policies in place, information systems and information itself was at risk of abuse and councils stood to lose out on the investments made. 

The committee recommends that the accounting officers should expedite the process of formulating IT policies to ensure security of the IT infrastructure and to safeguard the integrity of the data and information held. 

6. 	Non-Remittance of Statutory Deductions

The committee established that Shs 9,602,297 was not remitted as Value Added Tax (VAT) by the accounting officer of Arua District Local Government, and Shs 1,247,700 was not remitted as withholding tax by the accounting officer of Moyo District Local Government. The committee further established that the accounting officer of Adjumani District Local Government had Shs 124,309,552 outstanding as withholding tax contrary to income tax, and did not secure acknowledgment receipts in respect of payment of Shs 30,414,870 to URA. The committee noted that URA had been delaying to issue payment receipts to local governments and yet payments were made in time. 

The committee observed that the accounting officers were in breach of regulations that would subject their entities to fines and penalties by URA. 

The committee recommends that the accounting officers should endeavour to remit statutory deductions in time to URA to avoid fines and penalties.  

7. 	Unauthorised Excess Expenditure

The committee established that a number of votes in Arua District Local Government were overspent by Shs 538,925,045 without the council authority, contrary to regulations 24 and 25 of the Local Government (Financial and Accounting) Regulations, 2007. 

The committee observed that the accounting officer did not seek consent before spending council funds. The committee further observed that the practice was an abuse of authority, procedures and misappropriation of funds by the accounting officer. 

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should take responsibility for the anomaly and that CID should investigate the matter of unauthorised excess expenditure.

8. 	Diversion of Funds

The committee noted that the practice of illegal transfer of funds was common in many local governments. The committee further noted that in most cases, funds were transferred to finance urgent administrative undertakings, including allowances, which affected planned activities. The committee established that the accounting officer of Yumbe District Local Government diverted Shs 162,283,586 from the works accounts to finance daily operations of the administration and the education department without approval.

The committee observed that whereas funds were finally returned to the works department, the practice of diversion without approval was an outright abuse of public funds. 

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should always adhere to the regulations.

Conclusion

Having deduced the findings and observations made from queries and responses by accounting officers of the local governments mentioned above on the Auditor-General’s report for the Financial Year 2010/2011, the Committee on Local Government Accounts is of the view that fiscal transfers to local governments should be managed in accordance with established laws, polices and guidelines, and proper accountability should be retired by the responsible persons. Failure to satisfy Parliament on their management means that appropriate measures should be taken against the offending responsible officers. I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson, for delivering both the reports for 2008/2009 and 2010/2011. Are there any comments, honourable members? 

4.15
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is there a deliberate policy by Government not to get land titles for their property so that they steal it for themselves? We need an answer from the Leader of Government Business on this because the Ministry of Lands, which issues titles, is under Government. Why doesn’t Government get land titles for its property? 

4.15
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, Sir -(Interjections) – Culturally, she is fit to be called a “he” because of the level she is at. Therefore, I have not made a mistake. (Laughter)

The lack of land titles seems to be due to the laxity of the various governments since colonial and post-colonial time. Up to now, several governments have not bothered to get titles. We should all make an effort to make sure that Government offices and properties have land titles so that people do not claim them, as is the case now. 

This is a mission that past governments did not take seriously. However, from now onwards, we should make efforts to ensure that this mistake is corrected and all properties have titles. This is in order to reduce squatters or people who are grabbing Government land.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Are there any further comments? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I will give an example from Mbale. There was an institution house for the town clerk occupying two acres. The town clerk waited for the title to expire and then he applied for it in his names so that he could take that property. This was institutional property, but no action was taken -(Interruption) 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I would like to give the House information. I want to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for giving way. In our meetings of the Committee of Health, there was a report about somebody who wanted to grab Mbale Regional Referral Hospital’s land. The people who are supposed to protect Government land are the same ones stealing it. 

In Mbarara, the LC V chairperson together with his team sat down in a meeting and they wanted to take all the houses constructed by the late Maj. Victor Bwana for all civil servants in Mbarara District and yet they are not interested in buying houses there. The problem is that when somebody is posted to Mbarara and these houses have been taken by the local councillors, where will these people sleep? 

Therefore, Government, as I wind up in this Parliament -(Interjections)- I will be gone, but I am telling you that somebody wants to steal the houses which Maj. Bwana built for Mbarara. I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for the information. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the reason as to why I am raising this is because there is a minister here who took land in Kitgum which belonged to the hospital. He has even built a hotel. You can, therefore, not talk of colonial times. Why did the British Government, which colonised us, have titles for their –(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, there are a number of ministers here and when hon. Nandala-Mafabi says that there is a minister who took land from Kitgum, it leaves the whole nation confused. Could he substantiate about that issue and also give evidence, so that we get to know who this minster is and then the Prime Minister will be able to take action? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the minister is from that side of Kitgum. (Laughter) He has built a hotel there; it was even in one of our reports here. 

The reason I am raising this issue is because it looks like Government officials, including ministers, deliberately refuse to get titles for land and property which belongs to Government so that they can encroach on it. We have even recommended that Government should get titles for all its property and land. Why don’t we take action now on this one? We need to recommend that those who have not got titles are not fit to be accounting officers; they should be removed.

4.27
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the same issue of land. You directed, and I remember very well, that the Committee on Physical Infrastructure travels to Mbale. I think on two or three occasions, they went to Mbale but they have never presented a report on this Floor.

The issue of land in Mbale is a very serious one. People have built in the middle of the roads, on sewage pipes, behind alleys and this Parliament has done nothing. They have cheated my people. I do hope that you recall that in Kampala, there was an institutional house that belonged to the mayor of this city. One outgoing mayor wanted to grab this house but the Government said that it was not possible. However, you can see the situation in Mbale; because there was no title, it had expired – (Interruption) 

MS NAKAYENZE: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The issue of land especially in Mbale Municipality is very pathetic. It is true that the Committee on Physical Infrastructure went to Mbale and we even accompanied them. There is a school that has been built across a road and they refused us to access it. From that time on, the minister told us that he will communicate but as much as they have tried to do something, nothing substantial has been done about it.

There were also cases where a borehole, which is a public facility, was cordoned off and people were denied from fetching water. It is so pathetic in Mbale, just like my colleague said; it is quite true. 

Added to that, all the children’s parks that are in Mbale have all been grabbed and owned by various people. Our children have nowhere to play and have gone to play on the roads and are knocked down by cars. It is so pathetic and something has to be done. Thank you.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, colleague, for that information. Madam Speaker, we have our fingers crossed that you will come back to that Chair. We are just counting days so that you take over the leadership of this Parliament. However, when the new Parliament starts, we need to revive this issue.

The people of Mbale feel cheated by this House. The House has not come to their aid. They have waited for a report which is not forthcoming and yet the issues are becoming more serious that even an institutional house has just been given to the outgoing town clerk; it just went like that. This is, therefore, a very serious matter and I beg that when you resume your Chair in the Tenth Parliament as our Speaker, you take up this issue once again. Thank you very much.

4.30
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I was privileged to chair this very committee in the previous Parliament. When I took over the leadership of this committee, we had a lot of backlog. Many reports of the Auditor-General, for almost four to five years, had not been considered by the committee. 

This particular report being presented is for the year 2010/2011. Five years later, we are now looking at the committee report and scrutinising the Auditor-General’s report. The situation is certainly very different today. What we are doing now is just a post-mortem because we must sort out the reports that were forwarded to this House by the Auditor-General. 

My request, therefore, is that the next Parliament should start afresh with the latest report. It is only then that these reports will be more relevant. To sit here and discuss something which happened six to seven years ago - the officers may no longer be in the public service, others are dead - we really seem to be having a conversation. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, especially those who will be around tomorrow, I think this particular committee and maybe other accountability committees are also having a problem of backlog. They should start with the latest reports and find a way, maybe in one session, to consider the backlog. That is when this debate will be relevant and beneficial. 

First of all, for the Auditor-General’s office it is very frustrating that they forward a report, civil servants have been paid a lot of money to produce this report, and then it sits with us for six years without consideration. They definitely lose morale and also money lost cannot be recovered. It is very difficult to recover money. You see recommendations that money should be recovered or such and such an officer should be held accountable but he is no longer at the station or even in that particular office or even in service.

As I end my submission, Madam Speaker, I would like to say that of course, hon. Wamanga-Wamai was leading a prayer about your office; I could say that in the House, everybody was saying a chorus “Amen” - quietly though. (Applause)

I think we need to handle this issue of reports very seriously - consider them when they come and not wait for five years before we start debating them. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.33
MS OLIVIA KWAGALA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since I will not be in the Tenth Parliament, my prayer will be made now, and we are not talking loudly, so my prayer has ended there for that office. I am using this opportunity to also substantiate on that aspect. We are speaking in parables and the Bible allows people to do so. 

Going to the issue on the Floor, I will specifically highlight an issue related to hospital facilities, especially doctors’ and nurses’ quarters, and I would like to give some examples. As you leave the bridge and enter Jinja, opposite Igar Petrol Station, there used to be doctors’ quarters. Currently, they are putting up hotels there. (Interjection)- I do not move that side; I am only looking at the eastern region.

Also, in front of Bugiri Hospital, there is a functional petrol station which was constructed on hospital land. In Iganga, we have two mosques behind the hospital, a church at the front and shops at the side.

Madam Speaker, I remember just three months ago we were encouraging the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to reserve the few remaining Government properties by securing titles for them. However, whenever you go for a field trip, you find people constructing powerful hotels near a hospital, moreover on hospital land. We, therefore, call upon the Cabinet to task the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to safeguard the remaining land. Otherwise, these days, hospitals are mixed up with other facilities, which are not suitable.

Madam Speaker, lastly, that prayer should also cover school land. It seems it is intentional that when school land titles expire, they are not renewed. As a result, some people have come up to claim that the land was sold to another person. This is very unfortunate. 

With those submissions, I pray that when the Tenth Parliament is in place, you steer it to resolve this issue of land once and for all so that in the Government registry, we have assets like hospitals and schools. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.37
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice specifically to the issue of land. We have seen school land and many other public assets go. 

When I was going through the land law, I realised that Government land is entrusted under the custodianship of the Uganda Land Commission. Many of these public utilities may have titles but those titles are under the custodianship of Uganda Land Commission. Therefore, I am at a loss because the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development supervises the Uganda Land Commission and it is the Uganda Land Commission, the custodian, which has reallocated land belonging to schools. At the end of the day, Uganda Land Commission goes and reallocates land where a school is sitting. We have seen very many of these cases. 

I hope that the land title for Parliament is with Parliament and not with the Uganda Land Commission, because we shall wake up tomorrow when we are in conflict and they will tell you that they have allocated it to an investor.  At the end of the day, Parliament would have to compensate the investor.

Madam Speaker, we would like to call upon the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, which supervises Uganda Land Commission, and Cabinet, to come up with strict guidelines for adherence by the Uganda Land Commission so that they do not reallocate land on which public utilities are located. I thank you.

4.39
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a breakdown of respect for Government property. The new culture is more individualistic and anything to do with Government property is not respected. As a young man, I grew up knowing that anything for Government is sacrosanct; you could not touch Government property. 

Gen. Moses Ali has been around for long, I do not know why he has not fought this problem. If you are saying it is an omission, then I am really worried. Is it a technical omission that land-hungry individuals within Government are taking advantage of? Of course, that is what we are seeing in every part of Uganda. 

Schools have suffered, Madam Speaker. I remember that you set up a special investigation committee here on the grabbing of school land. However, we have also seen the grabbing of swamps and NEMA is helpless. We have also seen the grabbing of municipality land, hospital land, among others. How long are we going to go on with this? (Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. Honourable colleagues, in Kampala there is a group of young men who sit in a hotel near Parliament. That group looks for all Government land whose leases have expired or are about to expire. I am very glad that the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, hon. Migereko, is here. These people have got some good friends in the Uganda Land Commission. They look for Government land whose leases are expiring and they know all of it. I can tell you that they can even give you a list, and they just go and the transfers are made. 

Madam Speaker, I have only two weeks to go and I can show you where those boys are. They have stolen all Government land. They are rich and drive very good cars as Government land is going. I thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way.

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, we are addressing a much bigger problem and I do not know whether we can have a resolution to ensure –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You gave away your time to hon. Bitekyerezo.

MR RUHUNDA: Yes, since he is going -

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute to conclude. 

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, I sit on the Budget Committee and during our meetings I saw the Chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development struggling to ensure that money was allocated to the gender ministry for getting land titles. I think that there is a problem because we are not budgeting. I do not know why we cannot budget to enable Government ministries, departments and local governments title their land. This is something, which we can push -(Member timed out.)

4.43
MS HELLEN GRACE ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the issue of staff gaps. Whereas the report is quoting the previous years, this is a continuous problem in the districts. There are many gaps in many local governments that affect the work of the districts. Public Service has not lifted its ban on recruitment for a long time yet people are still needed. Many officers are in acting positions. Maybe there is a need to get information from the Ministry of Public Service as to when they are lifting the ban to ensure that there is recruitment.

Madam Speaker, the report mentioned negligence of officers. Whereas we appreciate decentralisation, in the local governments most of the officers are close relatives, so who reports to the other? It becomes a very big challenge to manage the monitoring and reporting mechanisms. That is why it is difficult to recover allowances that some people could have taken in a wrong way.

Madam Speaker, I would like to know when we are lifting the ban on recruitment so that we have proper recruitment, and maybe a wage bill should be put in place to cater for this. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Fortunately, the minister is here; I hope he will allay our fears.

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (NORTHERN UGANDA) (Ms Rebecca Otengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee. 

To me, the committee report is polite and mild if you compare it to what is happening in the local governments regarding land. Madam Speaker, I also agree with hon. Abdu Katuntu that the status quo has changed but for the worse. The local governments are acting with a lot of impunity. There is what we now call district land boards, which do not act in isolation; they work with the Uganda Land Commission and they know all the pieces of land, which belonged to the Government before decentralisation, and that is the land they are shifting to. 

Madam Speaker, there are people who connect them to the people who are outside the districts. They also have their own people within the district land board. What will happen in future is that you will have very few people - because land does not expand; it is the population which will expand. You will have very few people whose generation owns the districts because some will be in the villages and they will not access this land, which appreciates. I would like to implore the Tenth Parliament that what happens in the local governments under the decentralised system of governance will affect all of us in future if we do not, as Parliament, guarantee the sustainability of people who are not in leadership at this time. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to make a humble proposal because the issue of land is between life and death. Even if you are going to talk about the Committee on Infrastructure, can you think of having a committee, which will specifically deal with land under the Local Government Public Accounts Committee (LPAC) or something else? I know that you will have many people who can give better ideas but I would like to say that the faster we act, the better because what we are seeing has been happening for six to seven years. What do you think has happened after these six to seven years?

Madam Speaker, I think that we must guarantee the future of the children who must also partake of land, which is under the local governments, and it is this Parliament that can help our people to do that. Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I wish all of you well. May the Lord bless you.

MR KANGWAGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform you that I am a member of the Local Government Accounts Committee and I would like to give you some information-

THE SPEAKER: This is your committee report, so you cannot debate it. You can give information to a Member on the Floor but you cannot contribute in your own right.

As the minister comes up, I would like to allay the fears of Parliament. The title deed for Parliament is on freehold, register 452, folio 2, plot 13-15 Apollo Kaggwa Road in the County of Kyadondo, Kampala. It is registered by Uganda Land Commission (Parliament of Uganda) on 25 July 2007. I hope that no one will change the freehold to something else. Thank you. 

Minister, I hope you can tell us why you have not got title deeds for Government land because we have been making several appeals on this.

4.50
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank Members for the issues they have raised. 

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for assuring Parliament that there is a title for the parliamentary land. I think that is very important information to all the Members who are seated here and those who will come after us.

Madam Speaker, land, particularly in the districts, has been a contentious matter for quite some time. The land in the districts is controlled by the district land boards whose powers are derived from the Constitution. The members of the district land boards are proposed by the district councils and the district executives who forward the names to us for consideration for appointment.

We have had a problem with the conduct of a number of district land boards and we have been forced to suspend transactions of some of them because of the problems we have been having with them. Unfortunately, even when old ones are dropped and new ones appointed, they seem to have the same mother and father; they all appear to come from the same family. This has been a problem because you decide to get rid of one district land board because of malpractice but the new team that comes in its place turns out to do the same things that gave you problems with the previous land board. 

In Mbale, I had an even more interesting and bizarre case. You get rid of this chairman, get a better person but the board makes sure that they hold meetings when that chairman is not there. At one time, the chairman was locked in the toilet - hon. Nandala-Mafabi seems to be familiar with all these cases. (Laughter) 

We have been trying to grapple with all these problems but I think that we need to review our focus on the kind of economic setup that we want to have in the country. Almost everybody has been told that their livelihood, by and large, depends on land. Therefore, land has become such a precious commodity and an economic good, which it never used to be. 

The new thinking that must emerge must try to stem some of the pressure that we currently have on land by creating other opportunities for survival. I have had some problems; people are displaced from an area and we must resettle them and subdivide the little land there is into small parcels so that whoever has been displaced can be relocated onto a smaller piece of land. When they get families, they also have to subdivide that piece of land or encroach on the land of their neighbours. I think this is not sustainable and we need to review the way in which we want to provide for our people in terms of survival. (Interruption)

MR KASAMBA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I would like to inform you that I live with a border community near Tanzania. In spite of the spirit of integration, there is no Ugandan who is allowed to acquire even an inch of land in Tanzania or Kenya. However, so many Tanzanians have crossed over and acquired land and property in Uganda and nobody is bothered. 

One of the biggest and contentious issues, under the East African integration process of deepening and widening cooperation, is that our colleagues fear the recklessness of Uganda’s landholding system and the way we allow every Tom, Dick and Harry - people have come from as far as Somalia as refugees and they own land. Let us not just talk but act and bring a policy here to make sure that we protect land for posterity. I thank you.

MR MIGEREKO: I know you are giving useful information but this must be dealt with at the district level. When you look at the land policy and the Constitution, they are very clear on who should own land and where. Therefore, you are raising a good point but the operationalisation and implementation of these good things that we must see on the ground lies with us who are providing leadership in the districts and in the various parts of the country.

Madam Speaker, regarding the issue of land belonging to public institutions - hospitals, schools, ministries, etcetera - as Cabinet we issued a directive to all district councils, district land boards and ministerial zonal offices in the country that there should be no allocation of Government institutional land for private use. This is in black and white and I can give you a copy of the circular that we issued.

I remember that we had a problem with Main Street Primary School in Jinja. The LC III council sat and resolved that Main Street Primary School was too big and they needed to allocate part of it to a private investor. Jinja Municipal Council sat and endorsed that decision. As Government, we said, “no; this cannot be permitted” and that is what has saved Main Street Primary School as we speak. This directive - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, honourable Minister of Lands. The clarification I would like to seek is in regard to Jinja and that school whose land they could not reallocate. Why is it that in Mbale, part of school land, the children’s park, lorry parks and hospitals are being given away? Why did you do it for only Jinja and forget Mbale where you grew up? (Laughter)

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, it is not that I forgot about Mbale. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi knows very well that many of the things he is talking about took place even before I assumed office in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. Yes, it is true that you raised all these issues when you knew I was in office but they had already taken place. We came up with a set of interventions and in certain situations we have been able to rectify the situation. In others, however, we are yet to rectify the situation but it is not that there was any nepotism or special consideration.

Madam Speaker, because of budgetary pressures in regard to our ministry, we have written to the various ministries, departments and agencies requesting them to survey and title the land that is under their control. Much as we would want to do it as Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, we do not have the necessary budgetary muscle to be able to execute this. 

I have been interacting with the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget requesting for funds to help us solve the problem of Migingo Island but I have been told that there is no money. I have requested for budgetary provisions for other things as well and the chairman said, “Daudi, I have a problem and I do not know how I can help you.” Maybe when he comes here to present, he will be able to throw more light on what I am talking about.

My appeal to the ministers who are here and to the various committees of Parliament is that we need to make special provisions under our budget to enable us carry out the surveying and titling of land belonging to the various public institutions that fall under Government ministries, departments and agencies. (Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for this opportunity. The point of clarification I am seeking regards the land law in relation to investment. The position of the law is that when vacant public land is applied for by an investor, the investor can take over and develop that land. If the position of that law is not changed, how workable is it going to be for us to pass a pronouncement that would supersede the position of the law?

Secondly, at the lapse of the lease of Government land, to whom does it revert? That position must be defined. If there is a lease on Government land which has elapsed and someone just comes up and takes advantage, my question would be: did the person own the land initially before it became Government land? 

Finally, the minister may have to come out very clearly. I studied in Erusi Primary School, which does not have a title but the people respect its boundaries. Government used to hold customary land and its boundaries were known. Why must it be at the centre of this country that you find informed people working with people in the lands ministry and Uganda Land Commission and they work their way out? That is the matrix that defeats my understanding. 

In Nebbi, people know Government land and its boundaries and they are ready to defend it but here it is a different story. We need to work out something. Go to northern Uganda, apart from isolated cases, we tend to respect boundaries - even when the titles are not there - for Government land. Something must be wrong.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please respond and wind up.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that practically all over the country, public and Government land was respected and nobody would tamper with it, but this has changed. 

I have been receiving petitions from Kabale where LC III chairmen are trying to sell off sub-county land. Every other day we are at war with these people telling them, “This land belonged to the county even before you were born. Please respect these properties as Government land and public property as it is your duty to protect this land.” The next day you receive information that they are issuing all sorts of statements totally at variance with what you discussed with them.

I would like to repeat that we need to survey and title this land because the people we are working with go out of their way to claim even what is not theirs. 

The other issue is about reversionary rights. If it is a lease, the land reverts to the controlling authority but often times, the person whom they have found on that piece of land or who had the lease will be given the right of renewal of the lease that he or she had. Therefore, where does the land revert to? If it belongs to the district land board and they are the ones who issued the lease of 49 years and the 49 years are over, you have to go back to the district land board. If it is Uganda Land Commission, you will have to go back to them. That is what is stated in the law.

Customary land, as per our Constitution and in the Land Act, is highly respected and it has to be treated as such. However, we are encouraging communities to let their people acquire land titles. We came here and acquired a line of credit under Competitiveness Enterprise Development Project (CEDP), and we are trying to title as many pieces of land as possible.

Our target is to ensure that we have one million titles issued to various land owners in different parts of the country. This will be extended to individuals just as it will be extended to communities and clans. Therefore, I would like to request Members to embrace this programme so that our people can acquire land titles because they are an instrument of economic empowerment.

Lastly, much as the land commission is supposed to be independent, often times we give policy guidance to Uganda Land Commission but the real solution to some of the problems that we experience with Uganda Land Commission will be solved when the Uganda Land Commission Bill is debated here because it is virtually ready. 

It will come on the Floor of Parliament and in that way, we shall be in a position to harmonise and regulate the various operations of Uganda Land Commission. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I now put the question that this House do adopt the report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts on the Soroti audit region for Financial Year 2008/2009 and 2009/2010.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I also put the question that this House do adopt the report of Local Government Accounts Committee for Arua audit region for Financial Year 2010/2011.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that the committee chair is ready. Can we go back to item No.5?

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE ON THE HARMONISED FIGURES FOR SUPPLY TO VOTES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

5.09
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Budget Committee on the harmonised figures for supply to various Votes for Financial Year 2016/2017.

I am moving in accordance with Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and Rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

The Budget Committee, under these provisions, is mandated, among other things, to:

(a) Consider preliminary estimates and the macroeconomic plan and programmes and submit recommendations to Parliament.

(b) 	Consider the National Budget and make recommendations on them for general debate in the House. 

In accordance with these provisions, particularly sections 13(4) and 14(1), the Budget Committee considered the sectoral committee reports on the ministerial policy statements for the Financial Year 2016/2017 as were referred to it by the House for further scrutiny.

Madam Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Budget Committee on the harmonisation of the sectoral committee reports and Appropriation Bill, 2016.

The methodology that we used to prepare this report is contained in section 3 and the details can be read later. This report is presented in two major sections: There is a section that presents the general observations and recommendations, which I will present and it is quite brief. 

Section (b) presents the sectoral observations and recommendations. We captured those that we thought were most important from the various sectoral committee reports and they are the basis of which we made some recommendations for allocation of resources.

Coming back to section (a), the general observations and recommendations in the ministerial policy statements for financial year 2016/2017 

Inconsistencies in Sectoral Allocations 

The committee established substantial deviations in the sectoral allocations in the Appropriations Bill with what Parliament approved in the National Budget Framework Paper (NBFP) of financial year 2016/2017 to 2020/2021. 

Some of the budget lines, as approved by Parliament, were completely ignored as many new ones were introduced in the Budget. The table below shows the allocations to sectors as compared to figures that were approved in the National Budget Framework Paper.

In this table, the figures increased, for agriculture, if we compare the National Budget Framework Paper with the draft estimates, there was an increase of 11.64 per cent. In the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, there was a reduction from the budget framework paper by 36.67 per cent and I think we all heard the minister complaining.

The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development reflected a slight increase of 3 per cent, Works and Transport, 0.9 per cent and ICT an increase of 2.61 per cent. I may not read all of them but Tourism and Industry was among the biggest beneficiaries with a 68.3 per cent increase. They are all reflected in table 4.  


The committee recommends that allocations, as contained in the approved National Budget Framework Paper, must always take the first call on resources and where Government finds it necessary to make variations, necessary consultations must be undertaken with Parliament in a bid to ensure the attainment of the NDP and Uganda’s Vision 2040 because this is a legal requirement. 

Wage Shortfalls

The committee noted that a huge number of Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) had wage shortfalls indicated in their ministerial policy statements and budgets. The Public Finance Management Act, 2015 provides that every MDA should indicate their recruitment plan in their budgets, implying that they should have adequate resources to cater for all their staff. However, the committee noted with concern that many MDAs reported wage shortfalls for existing staff.

With the current reforms in the Public Service, including decentralising the payroll and integrating the payroll with the National Identification System, it was expected that Government would be in position to budget with certainty for all their staff. 

The committee recommends that approved wage allocations should take the first call on the sector budget and should not be reflected as a shortfall to benefit from supplementary expenditure requests.

Budget Absorption/Budget Shortfalls/Releases

The committee noted that during Financial Year 2015/2016, many MDAs had experienced shortfalls in the Budget releases, hence affecting implementation of work plans and procurement plans. The failure and delay to release funds constrained performance of many approved projects and programmes submitted to Parliament under section 13(15) of the PFM Act, 2015. 

The committee was concerned about the poor performance of the development budgets, particularly in the first half of Financial Year 2015/2016.

Loss of Poundage

The committee was informed that many votes, more especially those with huge development expenditure that require international procurements, were suffering from loss of poundage due to the depreciation of the shilling against major international currencies. 

This has largely affected missions abroad that faced shortfalls throughout the financial year. During the budgeting process, the missions used the budget rate of $1 to Shs 2,792 but by the time quarter one funds were released, the rate was higher –(Interruption)

MS JOY ONGOM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whatever the chairperson is reading is very important and we are here for supply. However, I do not see the report uploaded on my iPad. I do not know whether I just do not know how to open it but I do not see it. Can I get clarification whether it is uploaded or not? Thank you.

MR LUGOLOOBI: What I am sure of is that we supplied the document for uploading and we were assured that it had been uploaded. If it has only failed to open then it is a technical problem, not arising from the committee. The document is there. (Interjections) I am using the hard copy. I beg to be guided on how to proceed.

THE SPEAKER: No, the document is there. (Interjections) Is it not opening?

MR LUGOLOOBI: I think you can use your sense of hearing since I am highlighting all the important points. Madam Speaker, with your permission, I beg to proceed.

On the loss of poundage, the committee notes that this has become a persistent problem and has affected budget implementation, especially for large projects. 

The committee recommends that Government should improve on its macroeconomic management and ensure mitigation measures against drastic loss of poundage.

Renting of Government Offices/Construction of Central Government Offices

The committee observed that budgeting for office accommodation has remained a big challenge for many MDAs without permanent homes. At one point, during the consideration of the Budget for Financial Year 2013/2014, the committee was informed that the Office of the President was charged with theresponsibility of coordinating all initiatives for constructing Government offices, including mobilisation of resources. 

The total budget for rent of office accommodation for MDAs is estimated at Shs 88.5 billion in Financial Year 2016/2017, which erodes resources that could otherwise be allocated to other critical areas.

The committee recommends that Government seriously considers this matter with a view to coming up with a phased plan for construction of Government offices to rationalise resource use.

Compliance with the PFMA, NDP and Gender and Equity Certification

We had a comprehensive report on this and I beg not to go into the details on that subject because it was captured in detail yesterday.

Membership/Subscriptions to International Organisations

The committee was informed that Uganda was a member to 59 international organisations as at 30 March 2016. The committee noted that Government has accumulated arrears of Shs 46.312 billion on contributions to these international organisations. The committee further noted that the outstanding contributions reported include amounts owed by other MDAs that are affiliated to some of these organisations. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that each MDA budgets for and remits its contributions to international organisations that it is affiliated to.

Budgets for Public Corporations and State Enterprises 

The committee welcomed the reform in the PFMA, 2015 that brought on board Government public corporations and state enterprises, authorities and all semi-autonomous institutions currently receiving Government subventions and those collecting funds to have their budgets appropriated so as to provide totality in the Government budget.

In compliance with Section 13(11)(f) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and Section 13(3), the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development laid on the Table the budgets for public corporations and state enterprises. 

Whereas the minister complied with Section 13(3), the minister only laid budgets for six out of 64 public corporations and state enterprises. We have listed all the 64 public corporations and state enterprises in Annex (III). Therefore, the minister did not fully comply with the requirement under the PFMA, 2015.

The committee recommends that all public corporations and state enterprises should have their budgets presented and appropriated as stipulated by law.

Land Compensation Funds

The committee notes that although funds allocated to this activity are meagre; Shs 14.7 billion compared to the outstanding verified compensation of Shs 92.4 billion, there is lack of equity in the verified distribution list where most beneficiaries are from one or two regions of the country.

The committee, therefore, recommends that a fair and transparent method of distribution of these funds be developed as a measure of ensuring equity.

Of course, there was a problem of trying to bridge the gap between what is available and what is required and in the effort to try and bridge that gap, we could not actually find the money.

Utility Arrears

About utility arrears, the committee was concerned about the perennial accumulation of utility arrears under various MDAs despite the commitment control system in place.

Whereas the budget circular enjoins all accounting officers to ensure that utility bills have the first call on their budget allocations, this is always ignored.

The committee learnt that the reconciliation with Umeme indicated that various MDAs owe Umeme, Shs 64.17billion as at 31 December 2015 (Annex 3). Shortfalls in Umeme directly impact negatively the budgets of other entities such as UECTL, Rural Electrification Agency (REA) and Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited (UEGCL). In a letter dated 28 April 2016, the Secretary to Treasury directed all accounting officers in the affected MDAs to ensure that all electricity arrears are cleared within Financial Year 2016/2017.

The committee recommends that all utility arrears as presented in Annex 3, be offset from the non-wage to the utility budget line of the respective votes as listed in that annex. 

Section B is what I talked about earlier as being the sectoral recommendations on the ministerial policy statements on the Financial Year 2016/ 2017. We tried to capture what we thought were the most critical issues in those sectors, and I believe it will be very interesting reading because that constitutes a large proportion of this report.

Madam Speaker, allow me to move to page 86 on the corrigenda. The minister laid on the Table corrigenda (1) amounting to Shs5, 073,076,177,000. A general breakdown is as follows. Details by vote are contained in the schedule as laid at the Table. 

In summary, corrigenda (1) has the following figures:

Recurrent – Shs44, 899,187,000
Development -– Shs109, 092,825,000
Total for appropriation – Shs153, 992,012,000
Statutory- Shs4, 919,084,165,000

Proposed Re-allocations 

I have heard some Members complaining about the corrigenda but you need to note that when the budget estimates were presented, they did not provide a certain number. There was an omission to provide for the debt stock, which I think amounts to about Shs 4.7 trillion, due for redemption. This was a correction in the submission of the budget and you recall – (Interjections) No, they are still cleaning it up to establish the actual figure.

Proposed re-allocations by Parliament of what we considered are available resources within the work that we have just undertaken through various sectoral committees.

Madam Speaker, arising from the sectoral committee reports and associated funding gaps amounting to over Shs1 trillion, the committee has proposed the following re-allocations. However, before we re-allocate, we need to create the resource and the sources of funds that we are proposing for re-allocation are the following;

Vote 003 - Office of Prime Minister 

We are reducing on Project 0922, Humanitarian Assistance. This was a one off item for land acquisition by Government that has been in the budget for three years and we think that this money should be pulled back since the land was already acquired. That amounts to Shs8 billion.

Vote 008- Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

This is from FINMAP: Oracle support Costs. In that budget, there is a provision of Shs15 billion meant to rollout IFMIS; we are reducing that budget from 15 to 10 and taking away Shs5 billion.

Vote 014 - Ministry of Health

We are reducing item 224001 medical and agricultural supplies by Shs8 billion. This is a recommendation from the Committee on Health and we are also reducing on items in 221009 on welfare, travel abroad, maintenance, venue hire, workshops and seminars and suppressing them by Shs2.559 billion.  I did not mention the figure for the previous item but it was Shs8 billion.

Vote 017 - Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development 

We are reducing from project 1222; electrification of industrial parks projects and suppressing that budget line by Shs11.007 billion. In the same vote, we are reducing from item 221002; workshops and seminars, 221005 hire of venues, 221007 books and periodicals and so forth. The total is Shs3.472 billion.

Ministry of Minerals and Energy

Project 1426, we are reducing engineering and design studies and plans for capital works; Shs10 billion.

Vote 019 - Ministry of Water and Environment

We are reducing item 221009 the welfare and entertainment budget line by Shs200 million. Most of these came from the committee reports and the details were read on the Floor of Parliament and adopted. 

Vote 130 - Treasury operations. This was about deferring payments to Nigeria, Tanzania and Iraq under the HIPC initiative amounting to Shs12.77 billion.

Capitalisation of Bank of Uganda- Shs150 billion

Vote 141 - Uganda Revenue Authority, reducing on item 227002; travel abroad. This had a budget of Shs9 billion and that was reduced by Shs0.7 billion.

Vote 163 to 176 - Referral Hospitals. They are about 13. Reduce on a one off expenditure by 80 per cent meant for procurement of oxygen plants for 13 referral hospitals implemented in 2015/2016.  We were informed that they are procuring that equipment during this financial year.That was about the sources. 

The re-allocations are as follows: Additional resource allocation for Financial Year 2016/2017

Vote 007 – Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs

Compensation for land compulsorily acquired in Kasese – Shs 3 billion

Vote 008 – Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (National Population Council)Operationalisation of the National Population Council – Shs 1.1 billion

Vote 012 – Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development
Development of a National Physical Plan and Urban Development – Shs 3 billion

Vote 014 – Ministry of Health (10 newly refurbished hospitals)

Provision for wages for specialists and operational expenses for these hospitals – Shs 2.085 billion

Vote 015 – Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives

Part-payment for compensation of Masaba Co-operative Union – Shs 5 billion

Vote 017 – Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development (Atomic Energy Council)

Provision for development of a centralised radioactive waste management storage facility at Mpoma – Shs 2 billion; enhancing radiation inspection, safety and protection of radioactive facilities countrywide – Shs 2.355 billion

Vote 019 – Ministry of Water and Environment

Facilitating ISO accreditation process of the ministry’s laboratory – Shs 200 million; 
Water for production (urban water supply and rural water supply) – Shs 11.15 billion

Vote 022 – Ministry Tourisms, Wildlife and Antiquities

This is provision for quality assurance in tourism – Shs 0.7 billion Tourism planning and research – Shs 0.29 billion. This gives a total of Shs 0.99 billion.

Vote 104 – Parliamentary Commission

The shortfall in Parliamentary Commission development budget; Shs 10.107 billion. The corrigenda has already substantial provisions.

Vote 106 – Uganda Human Rights Commission

Wage shortfall to cater for a fully constituted commission – Shs 0.4 billion Hire of a transaction adviser on Public Private Partnership to construct commission headquarters – Shs 200 million. This gives a total of Shs 600 million.

Vote 108 – National Planning Authority

Intra country Peer Review Mechanism (IPRM) country self-assessment and annual progress report, NDP compliance certificate and decentralisation, and UPE evaluation and repair of Planning House and wage shortfall – Shs 5 billion.

Vote 109 – Law Development Centre (LDC)

High Court order to pay squatters to secure LDC land – Shs 0.79 billion

Vote 116 – National Medical Stores

Procurement of Hepatitis B vaccines and test kits – Shs 8 billion
Procurement of drugs for the 10 newly refurbished hospitals, through National Medical Stores – Shs 1.35 billion.

Vote 121 – Dairy Development Authority

Revamping of the Entebbe Dairy Training School – Shs 1.134 billion

Vote 124 – Equal Opportunities Commission

Provision for operations on gender and equity certification – Shs 2 billion

Vote 125 – National Genetic Research Centre &DataBank (NAGRC & DB)

Provision for establishment of artificial insemination centres throughout the country and procurement of trucks for semen and nitrogen distribution – Shs 8 billion

Vote 130 – Treasury Operations

We have reserved Shs 100 billion under the Contingency Fund, pending parliamentary resolution on the re-capitalisation of Bank of Uganda.

Vote 131 – Office of the Auditor-General

Provision for wage shortfalls and operational funds for Directorate of Forensic Investigations – Shs 4.18 billion

144 – Uganda Police Force
Classified – Shs 6 billion

Vote 153 – Public Procurement and Disposal Authority (PPDA)

Recruitment, retainer allowances for the board and counter-part funds for on-going project – Shs 2.8 billion

Vote 161 – Mulago Hospital Complex

Procurement of imaging equipment (MRI, 128 CT Scanner, fluoroscopy, etcetera) – Shs 16 billion

Vote 170 – Mbale Regional Referral Hospital

Construction of a new theatre, cancer ward and replacement of an X-ray machine – Shs 4 billion 

Vote 212 – Uganda Embassy to China, Beijing

Provision for additional operational expenses on commercial diplomacy – Shs 1 billion

Vote 302 – Uganda National Meteorological Authority

Additional provision for procurement of a weather radar – Shs 10 billion

Vote 122 – Kampala Capital City Authority

Increase on item 312103 (additional support for upgrading city roads) – Shs 2 billion.

Votes 500-616 – Local Governments

Support to district youth development councils. This money is to be shared equally by all the districts – Shs 500 million.

Vote 011 – Ministry of Local Government

Construction of sub-county headquarters in various districts – Shs 1 billion. The total we are providing in this arrangement is Shs 216.106 billion.

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, the committee considered the Appropriation Bill, 2016 and noted numerous variations dictated by the corrigenda and changes by Parliament, as I have just read. All the changes have been analysed to provide final figures for appropriation, as in table No.5 below. 

The committee recommends that the House adopts the report and approves the following allocations, which are in tables 4 and 5 for supply and appropriation for the Financial Year 2016/2017.

The figures I am recommending for appropriation are as follows:-

Total recurrent budget – 6,999,172,830,000
Total development budget – Shs 10,916,809,017,000
The total amount for appropriation, therefore, is Shs 17,915,981,847,000.

The statutory expenditure provision amounts to Shs 8,444,469,528,000.

The grand total constituting this budget is Shs 26,360,451,375,000.

Madam Speaker, Table No.5, as I mentioned, presents the detailed estimates for the Appropriation Bill, 2016 and it is available to everybody.

Madam Speaker, we are recommending that the Appropriation Bill, 2016 be amended as follows:

    1. All re-allocations by votes in the schedule of the Appropriation Bill, 2016 be amended to match the figures in Table No. 5 below.

    2. To amend the long title to read “An Act to apply a sum of Shs 17,915,981,847,000.”The rest that I have not read is in the Bill.

    3. A similar consequential amendment should follow under clause 2 of the same Bill. We shall make this clearer when we get to the Bill.

Madam Speaker, we have presented certain annexes to this report. Annex 1 is about the list of unfunded and underfunded priorities, which were presented by various committees. 

The detailed list is presented as Annex 1 and the total of the unfunded priorities amounts to Shs 1,115,100,000,000.

We have also provided a list of public corporations and state enterprises as of April 2016. These ought to have presented their estimates for appropriation. Unfortunately, the minister did not provide for all of them. He only provided for six and, therefore, the committee was constrained to recommend appropriation of their resources. Annex 2, has the list of the public corporations.

Annex 3, is the electricity arrears with Umeme Limited as of 31 December 2015. These arrears are so important because they impact on various Government institutions that are meant to implement this budget.

When Government fails to pay Umeme, Umeme cannot pay UETCL. Therefore, UETCL cannot remit the money to REA and REA gets constrained. The same thing happens to the UEGCL and so forth. Therefore, it has a ripple effect. 

We are asking the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to make sure that these outstanding arrears are clearly mapped in the budgets of these various votes within that utility item so that they are enjoined to pay. Madam Speaker, I beg to move. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. Are there any comments? 

5.49
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga West County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Budget.

However, I need the following clarifications; when the committee was presenting here, the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development had Shs 7.5 billion shortfall on Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE), for it to be rolled to other districts. I would like to know how they handled it and also to know if they have found money for that.

Secondly, when the Chairperson was presenting, he said that they removed money for oxygen in the referral hospital because it was supposed to be procured this financial year. I need clarification whether these gadgets were procured. It is most likely that the procurement process could begin this financial year when they have not paid. Therefore, if you removed the money, what will they use?

Last, but not least, the Committee on Budget has removed money for land fund; what will the Ministry of Lands and Mineral Development use? [MR LUGOLOOBI: They added.] Thank you. That is it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is, you recall when you ruled that we shall not touch this budget until the Ministry of Foreign Affairs brings the report concerning the embassies and their operations. Is it procedurally right for us to discuss the budget, which includes the Ministry of Foreign Affairs without their report?

THE SPEAKER: Didn’t they pass it the other time? There is the Minister of State for Regional Affairs. We are cross checking what the issue was.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you recall we had an issue in Parliament of losing properties of our embassies, their operations and how they are in a sorry state. At that time, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, hon. Okello Oryem, asked for 30 days to present the report; he disappeared with the report last year. 

It is more than a year and the report is not yet there.

Madam Speaker, that day when we were discussing the Ministry of Foreign Affairs’ budget, there was nobody from the ministry and I hope you recall that hon. Alex Byarugaba raised how we have lost opportunities to India and Beijing. We all agreed that at budget time, if those people do not bring the report, then we cannot deal with the budget.

There are two ways to do this: either we remove the budget of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and we proceed, or we hold on since the minister is here. If he does not have the report, we do not want to see him. 

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of State for Regional Affairs is there.

MR MATEKE: Madam Speaker, I promise that we are going to produce the report. (Interjections) Latest tomorrow afternoon.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, it is true that you directed the Minister of Foreign Affairs to make that accountability? However, I would like to appeal to Members that given the time that we have and also the blessings of this House that we have received, knowing that there is good steady progress with that Chair, we can continue to pass the budget. Thereafter, this accountability can be made after the budget. (Applause)

After all, the budget is going to be implemented beginning with July. In the limited time we have for this House, I would appeal that we move ahead and appropriate, on condition that this accountability will be brought in the due course as you may direct.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we are aware of pressing times. However, we have asked for this report on several occasions. If hon. Byarugaba was here, I can tell you he would have talked a lot. We now want to pass a budget for people who do not know how to use it. We would rather pass the budget of other ministries, but remove the budget of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 

I recall in the Seventh Parliament, we had to cut off the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development  itself; we had to remove money for travel abroad and other items, until they produced what we wanted. Thereafter, we passed the remaining budget. I know the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development knows about it. When they supplied what we wanted, then we passed that budget. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we have not refused to pass the budget of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. My proposal is that we withdraw and withhold it. If we do so, I can tell you the report will be here soonest. We cannot take two years waiting for one report- (Interruption)

MR LWANGA: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving way. While we are all concerned about the Foreign Affairs’ properties or Uganda properties abroad, we are also aware that in the last two budgets, as well as this one, there is Shs 15 billion that goes towards repairs of these properties.  

Therefore, the information I want to give is that since there is that money and we have been budgeting it, it is a matter of either the Auditor-General ensuring that this money is doing what it is supposed to do or telling us otherwise. It is not enough for us to refuse to continue debating, when we are aware that there are funds provided by this Parliament for the repairs to be carried out.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am happy that you gave the information in the opposite direction, because we are not saying that we want accountability on the money we gave to properties. The issue, which was brought to Parliament is that, our image outside there is very bad; we are losing properties and there are poor working relationships. Our staff working in the missions are suffering and our properties look like mortuaries. 

What we, therefore, wanted was to give us a detailed report of the status of each of our missions out there, but not the Auditor-General’s report of the Shs 15 billion you are talking about. Therefore, -(Interruption)

MS KAMATEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Nandala-Mafabi for giving way. The information I would like to give to the Member is that we are losing these properties abroad because of the sorry state they are in. 

Hon. Lwanga has just reminded us that there is money in the budget for rehabilitating these properties. What do we want to see? We want to know that the money we are allocating is going to the rehabilitation of these properties so that we do not lose them. Therefore, what we need is a status report and this status report could always come after the budget. Thank you, honourable. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am so grateful. Let me make my case. When I am speaking, I always know what I am talking about. I do not just get up and guess. Even the Shs 15 billion could be very little money. Therefore, if it meant committing the entire budget to making our properties better, then that is our interest. 

That is why we asked for the status report on all embassies outside. This is in order for us to give money to those which need to be repaired and pay those that need to buy land.  What I am speaking about is not the Shs 15 billion, because it could be very little money for these embassies and may not be able to do what we want. 

6.03
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to sympathise with us; a directive from this House was given several months ago. My understanding of getting that report was that, it could inform the Members in order to help the appropriation and provide for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 

The Minister of Foreign Affairs, that left shortly after giving the commitment, was saying that not later than tomorrow afternoon and actually it meant even today. Without disagreeing with my brother, neighbour, and the Secretary General of the leading opposing party, we all agree that the purpose of the report was to inform Members to provide for in the budget. We are now appropriating; even if that report is brought today- 

Madam Speaker, you know what the mood is. That debate will be no different from the mood exercise but would inform Members of the subsequent budget. The dilemma is that I sympathise with myself, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, and the whole House because the foreign affairs ministry has just missed an opportunity to get more support. 

The information given by the former veteran budget chairman, hon. Tim Lwanga, could only be helpful in comforting us that without the report, there was some data provided. What I am saying, Madam Speaker, is that we should not ignore the report, but we should be able to be seen that we are steadily progressing, as one contender stated on the Floor. I believe that in that spirit, we shall make sure that we consolidate the achievements and ensure that we go on.

However, we need to make sure that the report is brought to help us move to the next budget. But even if that report is brought today, it will not be able to help the House to go and make funds and resources available. I thought that would be a moot. 

6.05
MR PAUL  MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I sympathise with Government. Actually, they seem to underscore the importance of what hon. Nandala has said. We are actually saying that the image of Government out there, when you look at our properties abroad, speaks volumes about the people in Government.

However, some of us are not willing to continue being embarrassed because some people do not understand the component of the development budget of these ministries. All we are saying is that, we are not opposed per say to the passing of the budget.

What we are saying is, if the resolution of Parliament was taken serious by those who were supposed to take it - at this moment there is a lot of nugatory budgeting within the budget. We would have requested for money from other sectors to support the ministry.

For us to continue by-passing the budget and moving on with an assumption that, after all there will be another opportunity, undermines the ministry; this also goes to the powers of Parliament. It is only at this opportunity that we look at – I can look at, hon. Kabwegyere, my good friend, very desperate.

For him, it is like he is under instructions to pass this budget and that is it. However, to us, it is more than just passing the budget. It is about the powers of Parliament, that it can direct and it is ignored, but also true that we are going to waste another financial year.

If we had a commitment from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that in case the report is brought and there is need, a supplementary would be raised to take care of the needs that would arise out of the report. It is only in that perspective that I would actually support what is being said.

However, without that commitment from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I would like to associate myself with the submission of hon. Nandala, that Government should take parliamentary resolution very carefully. Otherwise, we shall be wasting time sitting here and taking decisions which are ignored by Government. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.07
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Having listened to the eloquent presentation by hon. Mwiru and the one before him and indeed submission of the Minister of State for Finance Planning and Economic Development, I would like to propose the following.

Having read Merchant of Venice, where Shylock demanded a pound of flesh and it became so difficult to have it cut without losing a drop of blood or keeping it only to that mound, I would like to persuade hon. Nandala-Mafabi that, given what has been presented on the Floor of this House and on record, and even what the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs has said, promising tomorrow afternoon, I would propose that we continue with the discussion of the report, with all the good will so that we donot push hon. Nandala to be on record, that he is a “Shylock”.

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give this House information that – may be to appease hon. Nandala, that there is something going on. For example, we have just been to Dar-es-Salam and –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Is it in order to appease me? First of all, I donot own any embassy, Uganda does not belong to me; it belongs to all of us Ugandans. To appease me when we are talking about losing property, land –I believe now that the people of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs are interested because they must be the beneficiaries. That is why they would be happier to lose it, so that they pass behind and buy it and own it.

Is my sister hon. Mutonyi, who was one time in India, fighting in the embassy with all the staff, in order, to say that she wants to appease me when I am saying that properties of Uganda are being wasted? Is she in order? 

THE SPEAKER: The honourable member wanted to give you some hope that something is happening.

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. I wanted to give information. We have just left Dar-er-Salam and there is renovation of the consulate and it is going on well. 

I would also like to inform the House once again that we were in Washington with, hon. Wamai, and we saw the buildings looking very nice. They have even installed security gadgets. There is something going on, there is steady progress.

If Parliament can help, at least what the Chairperson commented about; loss on poundage is a very serious issue and that is very urgent. This is because Members of the mission there have not been receiving their salaries and allowances on time. This was as a result of loss of poundage. Therefore, if this House can help, let them appropriate enough money, so that there is no loss on poundage.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is of course disappointing that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has failed to adhere to the directive of this House, but also when you look at the amount of time remaining for us to do meaningful work, it is not much. I, therefore, would like to direct that, that report be brought before we prorogue this House and the Tenth Parliament should be able to take it up early enough. I am not sure, from the way you said it, whether that report will come. (Laughter)

Hon. Prof. Kabwegyere, you are representing the Government. We would like to have that report before the end of this week.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, I have heard your voice and we shall comply.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Budget Committee and his team for giving money to the Ministry of Health and for accepting our re-allocation.

Mostly, I would like to talk about health because it is what I know most. The biggest amounts of money in the Ministry of Health remains at the centre, yet the people who are suffering are in the village.

Secondly, I would like to thank the Chairperson for availing Shs 16 billion for buying sophisticated machines for Mulago. However, for heaven’s sake – good enough, Prof. Kabwegyere, you are here and you are the one representing Government, hon. Opendi is also here.

The charges for these machines that we are spending on a lot of money, are very difficult; the poor peasants cannot manage the cost. The cost-sharing on these machines; CT scan, Magnetic rezoning imaging scan, among others, are very expensive. You bring them on Government money and put them in Mulago. When these peasants go there, you find that the technocrats somewhere have already inflated the costs.

When you bring a patient from your place and you go to Mulago, it becomes a problem. The problem we have is, the superintendents of these ministries; of the hospitals together with the ministry, please, time for partying is over. 

People gave us votes and what they want now is service delivery, period. I wanted to talk about money for oxygen. I want to thank the Budget Committee - the money for oxygen plants for all the 14 regional hospitals of this country has been given by this Parliament and also has been allocated by the Budget Committee. The problem is that they will start fighting during the procurement process and will take years and years, still trying to maneuver to see how much remains in their hands and people get nothing.

Hon. Sarah Opendi, hon. Dr Elioda Tumwesigye and hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi, please for heaven’s sake, do not sit in that building when people do not have oxygen in hospitals, because Parliament is doing its work. Leave that building, move in the hospitals and see whether there is oxygen. It is a pain for a person to die gasping for air when Parliament of Uganda and Government of Uganda has given money for oxygen for patients.

Madam Speaker, lastly but not least, Hepatitis B money has been given. It will be a problem – and when people were procuring Hepatitis B vaccines, they brought vaccines and forgot to bring the test kits. You cannot give someone an injection of Hepatitis B vaccine when you have not tested to know whether the person is positive or negative because you may end up rendering that person positive when they were originally negative. That also goes to the monitoring function of the ministry on this other -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, People should be vaccinated against Hepatitis B - (Applause) because the money has been given. People should not come here and tell you lies that they are going to bring reports. No, we are tired of reports. What we want is Ugandans to be vaccinated because the money is going to be given. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and once again I wish you good luck (Applause)

6.16
MR TIMOTHY LWANGA (NRM, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to make a few comments about the budgeting process in a few words. I am doing this because probably this is the last time I am getting a chance to speak about budgeting in the House.

What I would like to comment on is the seriousness of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It is very disappointing - for those who understand what budgeting is - to have a budget of Shs 21 trillion at one stage, turning into a budget of Shs 26 trillion. That is over 25 percent. Is it a mistake? Or is it because people do not take budgeting seriously? 

This is what happened this time. The National Budget Frame Work Paper came here and you know how much there was in that. A few weeks later, we are talking about Shs 4.9 trillion more. That shows that we are not serious. Through you, Madam Speaker, let the minister know that this shows the world and those who understand what is going on that budgeting in this country, despite the work we have put in during this Parliament – this Ninth Parliament, has revolutionalised the way we do budgeting. However, it looks like the Executive has not appreciated it. Budgeting must be serious. It does not make sense - the National Budget Frame Work Paper was about Shs 21 trillion but we are now talking about Shs 26 trillion. What went wrong? The minister must actually be put on the carpet to explain what went wrong. Was it a mistake? Was it an afterthought? There should be no afterthoughts in budgeting and not to that extent. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.18
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I subscribe to what hon. Bahati has called the spirit of “steady progress” of Parliament registered since yesterday. (Applause) I have just a few questions.

One, I totally agree with hon. Tim Lwanga. The Chairperson of the Budget Committee told us that what was approved by Parliament in the National Budget Frame Work Paper is not the same as what has been submitted to us in the draft estimates. I thought this was against the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. It should be captured on the Hansard should the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development do the same thing in the subsequent years; Parliament shall take it as a serious offense. We look like we are not serious in what we are doing. You submit a paper, we go through it, we approve certain figures but you bring a totally different budget. Honourable minister, you owe Parliament an explanation.

Secondly, on the issue of wage shortfalls, in each sector budget, we completely cater for the salaries of staff and in some budget frame work papers; they actually even put the list of the staff. 

I would like to request that before Parliament is prorogued, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development together with Public Service –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, protect me - present to Parliament the full list of wage shortfalls for the various sectors. This is because it is going to impact on the supplementary budget. The type of budgeting we are making, we think that we have provided for everything yet here we are already being told, at the time we are approving the budget, there is already a shortfall in wages for the various sectors. We would like to have this statement so that we know that this is what we have left undone.

Thirdly, under the budget for public cooperation’s and State enterprises - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute to conclude.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you. The chairperson of the committee said 59 of these corporations have not been budgeted for. I would again like to find out, how are they going to operate? Chair of the committee, what is your way forward on this?

Finally, in terms of the total budget; the Shs 26.3 trillion, I am interested in knowing what the percentage of our domestic budget on this is? Thank you very much.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just have one clarification on two issues. One is that there was a clear statement that the Women Enterprise Fund has Shs 54 billion –(Interjections)– yes, because that is what was promised in the budget that we are considering. You also said that you are taking away money for health and agricultural services. Why would you take away money for health and agriculture services when these are key sectors? That is the clarification I am seeking - the report is not on the iPads.

THE SPEAKER: It is there.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, can I have clarification on why the committee is proposing to take away money for health and agricultural services?

6.22
MS MARGRET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Budget Committee. They have picked all our issues in the different committees. We have exercised our powers, as members of Parliament, that if money is appropriated to a wrong sector or a less important sector, we can transfer it to a sector we think is very important. 

Madam Speaker, my concern is about the Women Enterprise Fund. In our policy statement, we are given Shs 50 billion but at the same time, Shs 10 billion of this money has been transferred to the Prime Minister’s Office for Ruwenzori issues or something near to that. Why are you removing our money? 

There are many women in Uganda and we need our money. We recommend that the money should be brought back to the committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development so that we can either add it to the women’s fund or at least use it within the ministry but I have not seen anything. Does it mean our money is still in the Prime Minister’s Office, yet we need it? I would like to get clarification on this. Thank you very much.

6.24
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the effort and all the input made to harmonise the figures. I would like to thank this Parliament for all the effort made in as far as scrutinising the budgetary process for the new Public Finance Management Act is concerned.

I have learnt so many things during this budgeting process, and I would like to appeal to Members to continue scrutinising every Ministerial Policy Statement. It is a very important learning tool for us as Parliamentarians, if we are to conduct our oversight function.

I would like to appreciate the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and Government in general, for the little increment into the agricultural sector especially for coffee.

During our term of office, we have increased coffee from Shs 800 million to Shs 87 billion. So, I would like to thank Parliament for the involvement. If we can involve ourselves in every sector the way we are trying to do, I know we can make a difference.

I would like to make sure that beyond the budget appropriation today or tomorrow, we should do budget tracking. Let us not only scrutinise the policy statements when work is done. We should continuously engage the ministry officials at every quarter. Let us look at what has been performed, how much did we target and how we are performing. If it means launching those projects, that should be the way rather than waiting to do a budgetary review at the end of the financial year.

I appeal to the new Parliament to ensure they have not done business as usual. They should put on their “gumboots”. They should have a department of value-for-money to ensure the resources appropriated for every activity are put to proper use.

Otherwise, I would like to thank you and also to thank the Budget Committee - this is a learning process. I was there since October with hon. Lugoloobi, when many of our colleagues were busy struggling to make sure that during the budget advisory process, we put everything on the Table. There is need for us to pay attention at the budgetary process, but even beyond, to track and make sure that every penny helps to deliver what the people of Uganda expect from us. I rest my case.

6.27
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for partly addressing the issue of equity and fairness as regards to land compensation. 

However, I am very much perturbed by the fact that, sometimes there is no fairness and equity to some people and some regions in this country.

Madam Speaker, the issues of SAGE and women’s funds are examples of fairness in all aspects and to all regions of this country. Last week we, as a Committee on Public Service and Local Government, recommended that the issue of the creation of town councils and municipalities should be halted. The reason was that there was no fairness and equity in the distribution of town councils and municipalities and this goes along with the issue of resource distribution.

I would like to get a clarification from the chairperson of the committee, because I have sat down here, and have not heard anything to that respect, as regards to what the committee, has done to address that recommendation. That is important because one region of the country, to be specific the North, was completely left out, yet when we were creating town councils - that goes along with resources distribution. I would like that to come out very clearly; why was the North left at zero.

Secondly, the chairperson mentioned something about SAGE. We all need this programme in our respective districts. For example, my district was 95 per cent in the IDP camps and we have had so many problems arising out of that. I am very surprised that the committee has not come out to address this issue of balancing in regard to SAGE and the women’s fund for all the people in Uganda. Thank you.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Member for the point she has raised, which really requires clarification. It is a fact that the land fund is undersubscribed. It is because the resources provided to the land fund are simply not adequate. We had applied for about Shs 92 billion but the allocation is Shs 14.7 billion. 

The lack of fairness and justice that is being talked about has got to be put in context. The list of those that were receiving priority consideration came mainly from Bunyoro and Buganda. And this is for historical reasons. These are the areas that had experienced injustice over time as a result of colonial agreements, where you find like in Bunyoro we have the problem of absentee landlords.

The colonial Government allocated land to some chiefs in Buganda and Bunyoro. They have never stepped there but they have the land titles, yet the indigenous people of Bunyoro are living on land but being told that “that is not your land. The owner of the land is in Kampala, London.”

In the Land Fund, there is a commitment to address this problem of historical land injustice, and people that feature on the list as being likely recipients of the first batch are those from Bunyoro, Kibale, Bugangaizi and some areas of Buganda, where we have been experiencing perennial land evictions.

I thought I needed to provide that clarification but also call for allocation of more resources to the Land Fund so that we can be in a position to find a sustainable solution to the land problems that have afflicted certain parts of the country.

Otherwise, our sense of equity, particularly in regard to consideration of every part of the country is alive and actual. I thank you.

6.32
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The budgeting process has been shrouded in a lot of difficulties and challenges as members have already said, but I would like to draw you to the principle of equitable distribution of development, and the gains made in the past 20 years of this Government.

If we look at the progress made in Uganda, the gains have neither been evenly shared nor distributed. The North has still remained poor. There are pockets of under development in the North. For example, the Nile valley villages take 20 kilometres from either side of the river Nile, from Panyamur through Pakwach up to the border of Uganda with South Sudan. People there have been left in the dark. Infrastructure and communication are not developed, yet the Nile valley feeds the people in the highlands. The fertile lands and even the oil in the North are located in the Nile valley. 

Madam Speaker, if this budget does not include the construction of Kia-kia Bridge - the opening of a road from Pakwach through Jonam, Rhino Camp to Obongi to Moyo and to Kajo Keji, then you have done nothing in terms of improving distribution of development.

We should also have a complete Government in Uganda, beginning from LC I, II - the way it is laid in the Constitution. We are here very happy that elections were done for President, LC V, members of Parliament, but LC I is an essential part of Government. This budget should include, before we pass it, a provision for the conducting of LC I elections.

Madam Speaker, again, before we pass this budget, we must remember that part of the oversight and monitoring work we do as members of Parliament is supported by the councillors at LC III. Before we pass this budget, we must ensure that Local Council IIIs are provided with means of transport.

Members of Parliament cry here when we are not given cars or when given bad cars. However, LC III and LC V councils do not have even bicycles! How do you expect them to monitor and evaluate development projects and service delivery as frontline people?

Madam Speaker, for me to do my work very well, when I go to Obongi, I should find, in the office of the LC III chairman, reports collected by the councillors from the parishes about functional and non-functional boreholes, so that I can also do my part. But honestly, - may be the councillors in Kamuli are doing better. I do not know. If they are doing as badly as the ones in Obongi, we must make sure money is shifted from the presidency or Parliament to Local Council IIIs to buy them motor cycles or bicycles. LCV councillors must also be equipped so that we have a complete Government, with complete monitoring and evaluation networks. That way, we will have effective oversight in the country. Thank you.

6.36
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The budget last year was about Shs 15 trillion. When it went to Shs 21 trillion this season, I thought ministries and departments were going to be looked after better. I raise this point feeling so sad because I spent 25 years serving as a foreign service officer and I know what those people in that ministry go through.

I thought hon. Kabwegyere here would speak for the ministry because he happened to be a minister at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. However, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is a window to the outside world. Many of you Members have visited our missions abroad. With Shs 21 trillion in this budget and with the Ministry of Finance officials always travelling to these missions, I thought they should have given these people some money to acquire property.

When you look at the budget of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, so many items are unfunded cases year after year. Every year, they come here and talk about unfunded priorities but there is nothing done to the ministry; we are embarrassed abroad. When hon. Nandala was raising this issue, it was in good faith to make sure this Parliament puts aside money for our Ministry of Foreign Affairs officers who represent us abroad, and who are working so hard for us to get this aid coming in, because I used to do it.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of the Ministry for Health - we know that all our people go to hospitals. I would like to support hon. Dr Bitekyerezo’s point. Surely, how do you purchase a machine and keep it there, and you cannot install it yet our people are going through hell in these hospitals? Then we are here allocating a lot of money to some other sectors not caring about these Ugandan who gave us votes; the people who need services in those hospitals. Look at the money that is put up in hospitals.

Look at the agricultural sector. Uganda is an agricultural country. We are talking of this and that but that is where we get most of our funds. You people in the Ministry of Finance and Budget Committee Members should have said, no. Agriculture is our source of living in this country. Therefore, you should have put money in the Ministry of Agriculture.

When you talk of putting it in during next budget and you think that the Tenth Parliament will look after the ministry later on in the next budget, you are doing a disservice to these ministries. 

I feel that before this budget is passed, we should consider most of our critical departments and ministries. You see, people at the Ministry of Public Service are crying for the pension. They are not even given that little money after serving this country for years. Imagine, if they never served this country, who would be there? They worked so hard but they cry for the little pension that the ministry should pay them. The civil servants of course need salary increments. You can hear and see what is happening at Makerere University. Employees have put down the tools. So, when you are working out the budget, please do consider and look at some of these critical areas. I rest my case, Madam Speaker.

6.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and the committee for the report. I would like also to make clarification on what hon. Dr Bitekyerezo talked about. However, before I do that allow me inform the House that the National Drug Authority- we are aware that there are challenges and gaps and they cannot play their role effectively, because we have food supplements on the market being sold without inspection. We hope soon we shall be on the Floor of this House with a Bill to amend the name of the National Drug Authority Act to the National Food and Drug Authority Act. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Dr Bitekyerezo has mentioned something regarding provision of quality healthcare. Provision of quality healthcare is not only about equipment. We are grateful that some money has been availed to purchase equipment for Mulago National Referral Hospital. However, with quality healthcare, you need equipment, health workers and the medication.

Therefore -(Interjections)- no we cannot say they are there because we all know that they are not well motivated to do their work. Therefore, we must also appreciate that tertiary care in this country is not wholly free. That is why, when equipment are sent to these hospitals, there is a fee charged because tertiary care is not wholly free; it is primary healthcare that is free. That is what I would like Members to understand. When you hear of the regional referral hospitals charging, there is an official fee. Of course, I am not talking about an unofficial fee because we are aware that some health workers unofficially receive money from patients but there is an official fee for everything. For example, if you move to the hospitals, you will find the X-ray may charge a minimal fee of Shs 5,000 to help them with maintenance. What we have done is to ask medical superintendents to place up the official fee so that people know what they are supposed to pay. Therefore, tertiary care is not wholly free in this country; it is primary health care that is free. That is the clarification I wanted to make.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, others will contribute during the committee stage. I put the question that the Appropriation Bill be read for the second time?

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

TOTAL RECURRENT EXPENDITURE FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 6,999,172,830,000 be provided for as total recurrent expenditure for financial year 2016/2017-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, before we approve that amount, when you go to KCCA now days, they charge us Shs 100,000 for Yellow Fever vaccine.

I would like to ask the minister whether that is their income or the vaccines are supposed to be paid for. What is this? I need to confirm that so that we can add money for vaccines and our people who are travelling are not charged Shs 100,000.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I do not know whether that has to do with the recurrent expenditure. But of course the minister can –

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The issue of Kampala City Council charging Shs 100,000 –actually some colleagues have even told me that they were paying Shs 150,000 yetthe official fee is Shs 100,000 - was brought to my attention. Initially, Kampala City Council has been on its own trying to import the Yellow Fever vaccine because it is expensive and Government has not been importing and putting it at our health facilities. However, for the current situation, we have followed up the matter and got to know the vaccines that they are currently giving to the people were given to them by National Medical Stores free-of-charge. 

Therefore, we are following it up with the Kampala City Council Authority asking why they are charging Shs 100,000 yet we gave them the vaccines free-of-charge from the National Medical Stores.

It is something that we are following up and maybe at an appropriate time, we can give a response to this House. We will update you but that is an issue we are tackling.

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to get a clarification from the minister regarding the Mama Kits. I am very sure this is primary healthcare, but some health centres II and III are selling Mama Kits at Shs 30,000 each. Has the ministry followed up that aspect?

MR OKUPA: Now that the minister has told us that the vaccines, which KCCA administers to Ugandans was given free-of-charge, have you stopped them from charging the Shs100, 000 as you investigate? That must come out clearly from you so that Ugandans know that they are not supposed to pay any money because KCCA got those vaccines freely from their taxpayers’ money.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, I did indicate that we will inform you accordingly - even tomorrow I can bring the information. This matter was brought to my attention yesterday that National Medical Stores gave 3,000 doses under the Kiruddu Health Centre IV budget. They got this from the National Medical Stores free-of-charge, but now they are charging. I have tried to raise the executive director but I could not reach her. This morning we have been busy, all the ministry staff were out. The President was commissioning the Entebbe Grade B Hospital, so most of the staff were not available. So, allow me to follow up and I will give you feedback before we close; maybe even tomorrow I can come here to give further clarification on that matter.

Madam Chairperson, concerning the issue of the Mama Kits, we have been having a challenge with the Mama Kits. Time and again we have been informing Members of Parliament that these Mama Kits are provided free-of-charge to the mothers. Help us to tell the women out there that when they go to the health facilities, they should not pay for these Mama Kits. 

However, we have a challenge that we cannot be everywhere. I cannot go to every health centre II and I do not know how many they are in this country; they are so many. 

Madam Chairperson, it is a bit difficult, but we want to rely on Members of Parliament and when we go to the districts we speak about these issues, but help us to educate the population. Mama Kits are provided free of charge. They can only charge for Mama Kits if they are not from the National Medical Stores otherwise, if they are from the National Medical Stores, they are supposed to be supplied for free.

Secondly, Madam Chairperson, colleagues have been asking me to give them Mama Kits on allegations that they were not at their respective health facilities. The information I would like to give to Members of Parliament is that districts have their budgets. It is up to the district to ask for what they want. If you do not pay attention to these, the District Health Officers (DHOs) do not care much about bringing or having the Mama Kits supplied to their health facilities. So, they ask for what they feel is necessary and we have discovered some districts leave out the Mama Kits. So Members of Parliament should interest themselves in this matter and ensure the DHOs request for Mama Kits when they are requesting for supplies from the National Medical Stores.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, honourable members. I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 6,999,172,830,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2016/2017.

(Question put and agreed to.)

TOTAL DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose the question -

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, on NAADS Secretariat - unless you are going to go line by line - but if you want to pick the total then this is the time for me to propose my recommendation. 

The money for NAADS Secretariat largely includes money for inputs. During the campaigns we emphasised the issue of giving our people hoes. So, I would like to recommend that out of this, Shs 50 billion be ring-fenced to procure hoes for our people. I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, that is very good. I remember during the campaigns, one of the candidates said he would give Shs 2 million to every malwa group. (Laughter) I would like to know where this money is in the budget because the Malwa groups are asking for their Shs 2 million.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The promise was to do with village groups though including Malwa groups. All the pledges that our candidate made will be in the manifesto and in Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. We are planning to provide for this particularly item in the Financial Year 2017/2018.

MR MUSASIZI: Further clarification, honourable minister, on the hoes –(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, hoes are going to be part of the inputs under NAADS, which is already provided for under the budget.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Chairperson, on page 22 of this huge report, under item 152, I see NAADS Secretariat being given Shs 312 billion. You have just talked about hoes for NAADS and I am talking about Shs 312 billion for NAADS, Secretariat. This is a huge sum of money, yet we have got some important departments where there is no money at all given. For example, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs I talked about and Ministry of Health - Shs 312 billion!

MR LUGOLOOBI: Can I remind you of something? Just moments ago, honourable member, you just complained that the agricultural sector is marginalised. Now, you are complaining that NAADS is receiving a lot of money. They even need more money. (Laughter)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Chairperson, what I was talking about is not these unprofessional soldiers trying to distribute items when they left out professionals. So, Shs 312 billion being put in the hands of the non-professionals – we have got professionals who should look after our farmers properly, but not the money to be given to soldiers –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us have a point of order.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: I am forced to raise a point of order because the UPDF is a professional army and has been ranked number 16 in the world. So, how do you stand, hon. Wamai, to say these are unprofessional soldiers yet they are doing an honourable job? So, is the honourable member in order to refer to the UPDF as an “unprofessional” army?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the officers are professional soldiers. I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 10,916,809,017,000 be provided for as total development expenditure for Financial Year 2016/2017.

(Question put and agreed to.)

TOTAL STATUTORY EXPENDITURE FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 8,444,469,528,000 be provided for, as total statutory expenditure, for Financial Year 2016/2017.

(Question put and agreed to.)

RECURRENT EXPENDITURE, CENTRAL GOVERNMENT VOTES

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 4,754,149,838,000 be provided for, as recurrent expenditure for central government votes, for Financial Year 2016/2017.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE, CENTRAL GOVERNMENT VOTES

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 10,476,997,476,000 be provided for, as total development expenditure for the central government votes, for the Financial Year 2016/2017.

(Question put and agreed to.)

RECURRENT EXPENDITURE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,041,832,150,000 – yes, hon. Alum?

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Earlier on, I raised an issue on the local governments, where, as a committee, we had recommended the halt of the creation of town councils but the money is still in here. I want clarification from the chairperson on how far he went with that issue of halting the creation of town councils in the whole country. I have not heard of any kind of explanation, yet this has a very big impact as far as equity and fairness is concerned.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Before we came to committee stage, hon. Tim Lwanga raised an issue, which I thought we needed an explanation on before we go on to pass these figures. The issue was about variances in the budget - the figures that were in Budget Framework Paper and the ones we are now passing. There was no explanation given for a variance of about Shs 5 trillion. I think we need to take ourselves seriously. Madam Chairperson, can we kindly get that explanation because we do not know where it arose from.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. As you are aware, in August we created new districts, among which was Rubanda District – which is mine. Automatically, the headquarters of a district become a town council. I would like to inform my sister, hon. Santa Alum, that one of the reasons we are seeing new town councils come up is because we have created districts. Much as you may want to halt - but in cases where we have created districts, it is difficult to halt creation of new town councils.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us have a point of order.

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This very issue I am raising came from the Committee on Local Government and Public Service. This is the committee, which is responsible for scrutinising issues regarding local governments on behalf of this Parliament.

There are also districts, which were created in the north yet the whole of northern Uganda does not have any town council. Does it mean that the districts, which were created in northern Uganda, do not deserve to get town councils? 

So, is it in order, for my honourable friend to say that he is informing me yet this issue came from the committee? Moreover we were all informed about this issue before we came up with this recommendation to Parliament. Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, honourable members, I thought that once a district is created, the headquarters automatically become a town council. 

MS OSEGGE: Madam Chairperson, it is true that once a district is created, the headquarters become a town council. Wouldn’t we want to scrutinise to find out if all these town councils are from district headquarters? Probably hon. Santa Alum has a point. There may be some town councils that have become district headquarters but there are those that are actually not headquarters for new districts.

MR PETER OGWANG: Madam Chairperson, I am on the Hansard on the same subject. Our own committee made a recommendation against this – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Committee on Presidential Affairs?

MR OGWANG: No, the Committee on Local Government and Public Service. It said that money should not be appropriated for these town councils because what hon. Santa Alum is raising is an issue of equity. I personally questioned the criteria used to select those town councils. 

We also have areas in our constituencies that are eligible to become town councils. How come that they were not considered? This is an issue that we debated here. So, for us to begin using technicalities of districts – it is automatic –it is the same committee that recommended for the creation of new districts. 

Therefore, my request to colleagues is, now that we are in such a situation, let us make progress but when we know that facts are facts other than hiding. You rather speak the truth – even in the Kingdom of God, you will be saved. So for this aspect, Madam Chairperson, let the truth be told; the criteria used in identifying needs talked about - because in eastern Uganda- do you want to tell me that they picked only three: Magamaga, Busia and Nabumali? I remember those three very well. How do you want to convince me here that out of over 400 sub counties in eastern Uganda, there are only three town councils? That is my observation. Thank you.

MR KWIZERA: Madam Chairperson, the creation of urban authorities enhances fiscal planning. However, it is not by law that where we have town councils, they must be at districts. There are some town councils that are not at the headquarters.

Secondly, you can still have, under local government, a district without a town council, because you are talking about a district and the political head is the LC5, who is elected. However considering our wage bill, we should look at the issue of not creating new expenditure centres that call for more personnel to be paid yet we already have a wage shortfall. For example, in meteorology, we have a shortfall of Shs 8 billion. The officers are there but there is that shortfall. 

Therefore, when you create another town council, you are creating another structure of Government to take money. We should, therefore, not say that as long you get a district, you must have a town council. I do not think it is right. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why is it that there is no one addressing the issue of equity in the formation of these town councils?

MR SSEMUGABA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I appreciate the challenges raised by other Members about equity. However, on this specific one, the town councils are already created. I beg that colleagues scrutinise that one for the future because these ones are already created.

They are asking about the criteria; I hope they will summon the honourable minister in the committee to take them through the criteria and for the future. However, for the present, those town councils are already created and budgeted for in the Ministry of Local Government. How do we arrest the progress? When we establish such urban centres, we still attract more development. 

Madam Chairperson, I beg that we continue to supply but then take note that in future, the Committee on Local Government should scrutinise the criteria they followed so that they follow equity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Did the minister appear before that committee? What did he say?

MS SANTA: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. The minister appeared and we raised these questions and we even came up with a resolution as a committee, expressing the lack of fairness, and that there are areas in the north without town councils. He even told us that very soon they are going to put a moratorium on creation of these town councils –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to give hon. Santa information. I have been to Fort Portal and all of you who have been there will agree with me that, every village there is a town council –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Chairperson, let us not mislead this House. I was not prepared to answer this but I was Minister for Local Government and what I know is that, for every area that is passed by this House to be a district, the headquarters become a town council. 

There are some trading centres that graduate into town councils and that is also presented and passed, and there are town boards as well. I cannot follow to say that in the whole of northern Uganda, there are no town councils. That cannot be true –(Interjection)– Wait, before you come in with information, let us not make mistakes. 

There is a process through, which the local governments consider applications for these trading centres to become town boards and from town boards to town councils. However, for every district, there is an automatic town council.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The information I was giving is that when people here hear of something, because they have not done research, they just talk. I can bring here data and you will confirm my statement - (Interjection) - hon. Kamuntu, you are a professor; you should have listening capacity.

Madam Chairperson, it is unfair that one place can have more town councils compared to other areas which also qualify. I am raising this because the Members are right –(Interjections)– I was giving information and because you do not want to know - you studied women, so –(Laughter) 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Chairperson, there is a level of decency expected in this House. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi makes generalisation about things and yet he is capable of knowing. He has talked about my studies on women, particularly the Akamba women and I even gave him copies of my books - (Laughter). Is he in order to continually misinform himself and perpetually misinform others that he knows that Kabwegyere studied women? And in any case, what is wrong with studying women? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think what we are looking at is that there are already existing town councils for which provisions are being made. What we can demand of the Minister of Local Government is to come here and give us the criteria and a proposal of how he intends to handle the areas that do not have town councils. This is because they are already there; what are we going to do? Are we going to close them? We cannot close them.

MS ANNA MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am a member of the Committee on Budget. First of all, there are some town councils that we could not leave out - where we had provided for the new districts. It is a policy that wherever there is a district headquarters, that must become a town council and a council budget is embedded within the budget of the district.

There are some other town councils, which had already been started off by the Ministry of Local Government a year ago. For example, when the Ministry of Local Government is authorising the creation of a town council, they will indicate it to the district to go through the process, and they create an interim and give a date when that town council will start. Workers are posted and only wait for finances. For such town councils that have been in process, you cannot derail the process by not appropriating. I totally agree with you that we should proceed to appropriate. 

However, for the issue of equity and other issues that Members are raising, the minister will be here in due course and explain. That is the basis on which the Committee on Budget continued with the appropriation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to appeal that we keep our eyes open and demand that the minister produces this criteria and reports before we prorogue, so that all the Members get the information and use it in the Tenth Parliament.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I propose further that we could still task this committee, because they have not told us what the minister answered when they asked him. Can we task this committee to follow up this matter and report before we close? This is because the report only recommends that the money should not be passed. They are not telling us why the minister, if true, left out the northern part of this country. If that is the case, then it is very unfair for the whole region to be left out. 

However, I agree with you that we should proceed and pass this but task the committee to bring a report on this matter before we close. It can be treated as a special case and have town councils in those regions in the next financial year.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: First of all, we must audit the past. Let the minister bring all town councils in this country. From there, the criteria will be known and he will then have to explain why some have more town councils, while others have less. From his explanation we will then make a decision on whether one qualifies or not.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we had asked the Government to appoint someone to take charge of the issues for the Ministry of Local Government, and hon. Mbaguta was appointed. We, therefore, expect hon. Mbaguta to come and give us that report before we close.

MS OSEGGE: Since we are talking about a report from the minister, we could also probably expand it. We also realise that some districts are far much smaller than others and so, there are very many town councils in particular places, while in other regions, the districts are big and fewer. That also counts. Can the minister come and give us – (Interruption)

MR OGWANG: Thank you, honourable colleague. For your information, eastern Uganda has the biggest number of districts in Uganda. There are 34 districts in eastern Uganda as of today. Therefore, if you begin to account why others are smaller and others bigger, etcetera - Let us not go there. Let us remain within the parameters of where we are.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,041,832,150,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for votes for Local Governments for Financial Year 2016/2017. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Local Government

Development expenditure

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 402,418,440,000 be provided for as development expenditure for votes for Local Governments for Financial Year 2016/2017.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Regional Referral Hospitals

Recurrent expenditure

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 67,001,828,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for votes for regional referral hospitals in Financial Year 2016/2017.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Regional Referral Hospitals

Development expenditure

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 21,359,742,000 be provided for as development expenditure for votes for regional referral hospitals -

MS OSEGGE: Under the development budget for the regional referral hospitals, I would like to know if we included the blood banks because I did not hear it. It was in the policy that we are going to have a blood bank in every regional referral hospital. Is it there in the budget?

MS LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, I think the minister should be able to tell that level of detail.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you mean construction of a blood bank or having blood there?

MS OSEGGE: Madam Chairperson, sometimes it requires construction although it also goes with other equipment. This is because you can have a cold room, which is just a building, and it is facilitated to do that.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: I am constrained to ask if I can find health centres IV, because my understanding is that every health facility, which has an operating theatre must have a blood bank – (Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Madam Chairperson, it is very unfortunate that a senior Member of this House, who has been here for more years than I have been, and has gone around this country a number of times, is not aware that health centres IV - even having been granted that they should function at that level, actually do not function at that level. 

Many of them do not have operational theatres. Many of them do not have doctors. The facilities they need are not there. The regional referral hospitals do not have blood banks. How would you then expect a health centre IV to have a blood bank? It is not there. Is the honourable member in order to trivialise an issue of life? We are talking about the budget and the lives of Ugandans.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I think she was giving information from what she knows. However, if it is different, let us establish the truth, because I also do not know. Who can give us that information?

MS ANNA MARIA NANKABIRWA: Madam Chairperson, I have information. I am a legislator with knowledge but I am not very old. Maybe I am a legislator who is on the ground and know my responsibilities. I need to provide information that every health centre IV provides theatre facilities. You cannot have a theatre and have a doctor carry out an operation without blood in the bank – (Interruption)

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I sit on the Committee on Health and I wish hon. Bitekyerezo was here. We got to visit health centres and even the regional hospitals. Other health centres IV do not even have electricity. We have several health centres IV that are supposed to decongest the regional referral hospitals by carrying out minor operations, but they are not functional. 

I would like to inform you that, other health centres IV do not have doctors. They do not have blood banks because there is no electricity in some of health centres IV. You are knowledgeable of other things but in the sense of health centres IV, you are not informed completely. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, tomorrow, the Minister of Health will be here. She is supposed to provide information on some issues. We shall find out - hon. Kakooza, is a former Minister of Health; would you like to give some information?

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I am providing information that health centres IV are in a policy of Government. They do not have blood banks but they have fridges, which keep blood.

Actually, the policy is under the control of the district management. The theatre is there; the blood is collected from the blood bank at Nakasero and transferred to health centres IV, where it can be used in a theatre. Of course, some health centres IV have theatres and some do not have. Therefore, it is not a must for a health centre IV to have a blood bank. 

It is a policy that they must have a theatre and fridges. However, what is on the ground is that some of the fridges do not work. I believe it is not wise for blood banks to be in health centres IV because at the moment - [MR NANDALA-MAFABI: “They are not there anyway.”] Anyway, they are not there. The policy provides for a fridge to store blood from the blood bank in Nakasero.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we know whether each of the referral hospitals has a blood bank?

MR KAKOOZA: They have. In the structural adjustment of health centres, the referral hospitals have.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 21,359,742,000 be provided for development expenditure for regional referral hospitals for Financial Year 2016/2017.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS OSEGGE: Madam Chairperson, it is very unfortunate that we are speaking in this House as if we do not care for the rest of Ugandans. You cannot generalise that all regional referral hospitals have blood banks. For example, Soroti Regional Referral Hospital does not have a blood bank. The Rotary Club has been trying to get one for Soroti Hospital; we have done fundraising for the same purpose and the ministry is not contributing anything. That is why we are concerned - and it is serving a very big catchment area.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, can I propose that, at some point, we have recommendations that all regional referral hospitals should have blood banks, so that Government can start providing for them. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, hon. Kakooza was the Minister for Health -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Osegge, we are going to make sure that progressively, all the referrals have blood banks -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the reason we are raising this - when hon. Kakooza got up to speak and said all referral hospitals - [Mr Kakooza: “No.”]- He has changed his statement that he never said that. Anyway, maybe English was the problem.

However, Madam Chairperson -

MR KAKOOZA: Is hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order to misquote me and state on the Floor of the House that I talked of referral hospitals, yet I talked of health centres IV?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, he is out of order.

Recurrent Expenditure for Missions Abroad

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, for recurrent expenditure for Missions Abroad, I now put the question that total sum of Shs 136,189,015,000 be provided for –

MS JOY ATIM: Madam Chairperson, we are talking of Missions Abroad and it is unfortunate the minister just mentioned it and disappeared. The staff who work at Missions Abroad are suffering.

When it comes to recurrent, you will realise that some of the staff who are there cannot even afford to pay fees for their children. For that reason, most of them do not even stay there. They move back to the country. That is why some of them vie for political positions, like Member of Parliament. I wish the minister was here. It was an opportunity for the House to help add money for them. The staff abroad are suffering.
Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 136,189,015,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for Missions Abroad for Financial Year 2016/2017.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development Expenditure - Missions Abroad

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 16,033,358,000 be provided for as development expenditure for Missions Abroad for Financial Year 2016/2017.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

7.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the report of the Committee on Budget and passed it with amendments.

THE SPEAKER: No, there was no amendment.

MR BAHATI: Even zero amendment can also mean amendment. (Laughter) I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the report of the Budget Committee and passed it with no amendment.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

7.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2016

7.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I move that the Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2016.” be read for the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded by a number of colleagues. Can we have the report? 

7.35
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, we considered the Appropriation Bill alongside the budget estimates and we made certain recommendations as I presented the report on page 90. On that page, we indicated that the committee recommends that the Appropriation Bill, 2016 be amended as follows:

All the allocations by vote in the schedule of the Appropriation Bill, 2016 be amended to match the figures in table 5 below. Those are the figures that we have just supplied. We have provided for them from the first vote up to the last vote. They are all in this report and they will accordingly subject them into the Appropriation Bill, 2016.

We are proposing to amend the long title. The long title provides the figures for appropriation and we are amending it to read, “An act to apply a sum of Shs 17,915,981,847,000 out of the Consolidated Fund to the service of the year ending 30 June 2017 and to appropriate the supplies granted.” 

The thorough amendment is that a similar consequential amendment should fall under clause 2 of the Bill to be more specific. It reads, “The Treasury may issue out of the Consolidated Fund and apply towards supply granted to the Government for the service of the year ending 30 June 2017 the sum of Shs 17,915,981,847,000.” 

Those are the amendments that we are proposing and once they are adopted, I think we shall get done with this Bill. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: But haven’t we adopted them together with the report? I put the question that the Appropriation Bill, 2016 be read for the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2016

Clause 1 agreed to.

Clause 2

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, I propose an amendment that the entire provision of clause 2 should read, “The Treasury may issue out of the Consolidated Fund and apply towards the supply granted to the Government for the service of the year ending 30 June 2017 the sum of Shs 17,915,981,847,000.” I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

The Schedule 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that all the allocations by vote in this schedule be amended to match the figures in table 5 in the budget committee report on the harmonised figures for supply to various votes for the Financial Year 2016/2017. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the schedule in section 4 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Title

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, I propose to amend the long title to read, “An act to apply a sum of Shs 17,915,981,847,000 out of the Consolidated Fund to the service of the year ending 30 June 2017 and to appropriate the supplies granted.” I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it the title or the memorandum? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: It is the long title. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The title itself remains the same but the memorandum is what you are amending. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, there is an amendment to the title. There is a mistake. This was not yet an Act so I beg to amend the title to read, “The Appropriation Bill, 2016.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Mine is a Bill. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: So the memorandum would read exactly the same as what I have just read for the long title. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that the memorandum be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Memorandum, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the title stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.44
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House resumes and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, and the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2016 “and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2016

7.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2016” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2016” be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to).

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE APPROPRIATION ACT, 2016”

THE SPEAKER: Title is settled and Bill passes. (Applause)

Do you want to say something?

7.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): No, the “crowds” have already gathered. I just would like to thank Members for the support you have given us during this budget process, and also to take this opportunity to wish the very best to those who will not be with us in the Tenth Parliament. I would also like to call upon those who will be in the Tenth Parliament to continue with this spirit of cooperation, as we serve the people of Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let me also take this opportunity to thank the Committee on Budget and all the Members of the House for – sometimes people do not appreciate what we do, but I think that the re-allocations and proposals you made today, will make a difference in the lives of Ugandans. I hope somebody will acknowledge that contribution. Thank you very much for that work.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE SPEAKER: Let us do it tomorrow. I have not read my report. Honourable members, this House stands adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow. Thank you very much, for what you have done this afternoon.

(The House rose at 7.49 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 4 May 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 

