

Thursday, 4 May 2017

Parliament met at 2.10.p.m.in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to welcome you to this special sitting, which has been specially convened to pay tribute to the late Joel Hunter Wacha Olwol. I would like to thank you for the time you have made, given the kind of things going on in Parliament at the moment; the budget and all the meetings that the committees are involved in. I, therefore, thank you for making time to come on this occasion to honour our senior citizen.

Further, I would also like to thank His Excellency, the President and Cabinet for granting a state funeral, which is befitting to His Excellency Wacha Olwol. 

As you may already be aware, His Excellency Wacha Olwol served this nation selflessly and with distinction. He has joined his other fallen colleagues like the late hon. Mayanja Nkangi, the late Ignatius Musaazi and all the others that have gone before him and are no longer with us; many of them, including His Excellency Wacha Olwol, who exhibited high humility and the love for their nation, patriotism and selflessness.

For those who could have seen His Excellency Wacha Olwol physically, can testify that he was a tall, well-built gentleman, of dark complexion who exhibited dignity, humour and honour of a true gentleman, nurtured as a son of a chief and educated at King’s College Budo.

The late Wacha Olwol served Uganda in various capacities, among others, as a teacher, an administrator, rising to the ranks of a permanent secretary, a delegate to the Lancaster Constitutional Conference in 1961, a Deputy Chairperson of the Public Service Commission and ultimately as a member of the tripartite  Presidential Commission.

On behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, I wish to convey my heartfelt condolences to the family, the Lango community and indeed the whole nation, for the passing on of a true leader and elder in this country. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

(Entrance of the late Joel Hunter Wacha Olwol.)

   National Anthem

East African Community Anthem

Laying of wreaths.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE H.E. YOWERI HUNTER WACHA OLWOL, FORMER MEMBER OF THE PRESIDENTIAL  COMMISSION, DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION AND PERMANENT SECRETARY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me just make some recognition before the Rt Hon. Prime Minister presents his motion. Let us recognise the presence of former members of this House who have come to be part of this proceeding but from the VIP gallery: I have hon. John Livingstone Okello-Okello, hon. Mary Amajo, hon. Anthony Butere, hon. Sarah Lanyero and I have our own newly elected Member of the East African Legislative Assembly, Mr Paul Musamali. 

Further, I have a condolence message to the family from Professor Tarsis Bazana Kabwegyere, which will be delivered later. I have the family members on the technical bench behind me and other members of the family are in the other side of the gallery.

2.31
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to move a Motion for a Resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to His Excellency Yoweri Hunter Wacha Olwol. I am doing so under Rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure.

Mr Speaker, the motion reads: 

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received, with grief, the sad news of the demise of Mzee Yoweri Hunter Wacha Olwol, a former member of the Presidential Commission of Uganda, which occurred on Tuesday, 2 May 2017 in Kampala;

NOTING that Mzee Wacha Olwol started out his career as a teacher in different schools and thereafter, served in various Government offices including as Clerk to the Lango District council, district commissioner in several districts, local Government inspector, and also in the President’s Office; 

RECOGNIZING that he was a member of the three-man Presidential Commission that led the affairs of the State of Uganda between May and December 1980 after the fall of President Godfrey Binaisa, and that it was that Commission that handed over power to the late Dr Apollo Milton Obote after the 1980 general elections; 

ALSO RECOGNISING that he was one of the few people chosen to represent the country in the independence negotiations in London, which paved the way for Uganda’s independence in 1962;

APPRECIATING that Mzee Wacha Olwol was a dedicated citizen and leader who devoted his life to the service of his country; 

NOW THEREFORE this Parliament resolves as follows:
    1. That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the loss of Mzee Wacha Olwol.

    2. That it takes cognisance of the services rendered and contributions made by Mzee Wacha Olwol to Uganda. 

    3. That this Parliament collectively prays to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved and grant our departed elder statesman and friend, Yoweri Hunter Wacha Olwol, eternal peace.” 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to speak to your motion, Prime Minister? 

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mzee Yoweri Hunter Wacha Olwol was one of the distinguished sons of this country who played a significant role in our nation’s history. 

From being a teacher, in different schools to serving in several Government departments and later as one of the country’s representatives who went to London in 1961 to negotiate for independence from Britain, Mzee Wacha Olwol later became a member of the three-man Presidential Commission that led Uganda following the removal of the late President Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa from power in May 1980.

On receiving the sad news of his passing on, His Excellency President Yoweri Museveni directed that Mzee Wacha Olwol be accorded a state funeral, befitting his status and contribution as a member of the Presidential Commission that led Uganda from May to December 1980.

Accordingly, a committee consisting different Government agencies, the family and the Lango Parliamentary Group was set up to coordinate burial arrangements. On this note, I would like to thank the family and the Lango Parliamentary Group for the cooperation and solidarity they have exhibited in spearheading the burial arrangements of our elder, Mzee Wacha Olwol.

Mr Speaker, when news of the passing on of Mzee Wacha Olwol was received in the morning of Tuesday, 2 May 2017, some people on social media and other platforms wondered who this man was and in a way they had a point.

It is clear that we need to teach our history and current affairs better especially to the younger generation, to ensure that the people and significant milestones in our country’s journey are well documented, understood and appreciated by the current and future generations.

Mr Speaker, the period from May to December 1980 during which Mzee Wacah Olwol and his two colleagues, Justice Polycarp Nyamuchoncho and Justice Saulo Musoke served as Presidential Commissioners, was indeed a very challenging one.

In a space of less than two years after the fall of Idi Amin in April 1979, the country witnessed the change of leadership from Idi Amin to Professor Yusuf Lule to Godfrey Binaisia to the three Presidential Commissioners who handed over power to Dr Milton Obote. This period was characterised by political instability, insecurity and jostling for power by the different political forces. 

We give credit to Mzee Wacha Olwol and his colleagues for providing titular headship of the country’s leadership and keeping the Uganda together during this turbulent period. 

After handing over power to President Milton Obote in December 1980, Mzee Wacha Olwol continued to serve this country in many other important positions - as Chairman of the Uganda Advisory Board of Trade, member of the Central Tender Board and Deputy Chairman of the Public Service Commission. He also served as the chairman of the Lango Community Association, from 1986 to 2000. 

Mr Speaker, he was born to Rwot Eliezer Olwol and Loy Akullo on 19 November, 1923 in Loro Sub-County in the present Oyam District.

The late Wacha Olwol attended Loro Preparatory School, from 1931 to 1935. He later joined Boroboro Central School between 1936 and 1938. From Boroboro, he joined Kabalega Secondary School in Masindi, from 1939 to 1941. When Junior Secondary Three Leaving Examinations were introduced in 1941, Wacha Olwol was among the first to sit these exams, earning himself admission to King’s College Budo, from 1942 to 1944. 

From Budo, he joined Mukono Teachers’ Training College, graduating as a teacher. He later went to the United Kingdom in 1958 for a year and did a course in social and public administration, graduating with a diploma.

Mr Speaker, Mzee Wacha Olwol was an effective administrator. He was a peacemaker, a patriot and a gentleman who rose from relatively humble beginnings to national prominence and leadership. Mzee Yoweri Hunter Wacha Olwol succumbed to kidney failure and was aged 94.

Mr Speaker, we extend our condolences and sympathies to the family, the Lango Community and the country at large on the loss of this national icon and statesman. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Prime Minister. Can we hear from the seconder of the motion?

2.43
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Opposition in Parliament and outside Parliament and on behalf of the people of Kasese District – whom I represent – as well as the Rwenzururu Kingdom, I rise to second the motion as moved by the Prime Minister for a Resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to this gallant son of the Republic of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, it is with deep sorrow that we send our condolences to the family, the people of Lango sub-region and Uganda as well as all those who have worked with the late Yoweri Hunter Olwal in his capacity a member of the Presidential Commission of this country, as the Deputy Chairperson of the Public Service Commission and also as permanent secretary.

You have heard from the Prime Minister how this great son of Uganda moved from strength to strength. He did all these for the good of this great nation. We are here to celebrate a life well-lived and I would like to thank the Almighty God for giving us this great son in the name of Yoweri Hunter Wacha Olwol. I also thank God that he was able to give his services for the benefits of Ugandans.

Mr Speaker, the late H.E Wacha Olwol belonged to the generation of selfless leaders who always sought the great good. He has lived a life free of corruption, controversies, jealousies and antagonism, which is the order of the day in our country today and is jeopardizing the development of our nation.

Mr Speaker, Ugandans are just waking up to the reality that there was a three-man Presidential Commission that governed the affairs of the state of Uganda between 22 May and 15 December 1980. This is an issue that many people actually didn’t know of. So, I would like to thank Mzee Yoweri Hunter Olwal for having been an able leader who believed in true democracy. The legacy you are leaving behind – Mzee Yoweri Hunter Olwal – may never be challenged because at my age I have not seen a peaceful transfer of power. But Mzee Yoweri Hunter Olwal is an example of that true democracy that we are talking about where one can be in a seat but peacefully hand over power to another leader. 

I thought I would be seeing this before we tampered with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Mzee Wacha, you have been our role model; you have been a model to democracy; and you have been a pillar to the development of this nation and to the development of democracy. 

I talked to one old man who interacted with the late here and he said that in talking to him, Hunter said that one of the proudest moments in his life was the great part he played in attaining the independence for his country. We would like to thank him for that great job. 

The many meetings he held have made me a Member of Parliament. Possibly, I couldn’t have been a Member of Parliament – and many of us here – if Uganda wasn’t independent. But because he gave away his sleep and sacrificed his family for the sake of all of us - his work was for the common good of Ugandans.

I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker and the Government, for having thought it wise that we have a special sitting to pass a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to this gallant son of Uganda. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for having accorded us this opportunity to speak about a man who has done all he could to ensure that Ugandans live in peace and harmony. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I still speak with sadness that even when we have laws that speak about former leaders receiving some kind of appreciation for the work well done, Mzee Yoweri Hunter Olwal has died before he partook of this appreciation. It is sad and unfortunate that our country takes long to appreciate the work done by senior leaders. 

Mr Speaker, you will all recall that on many occasions Members of this House have been concerned about the welfare of all senior citizens of this country, including Mzee Yoweri Hunter Olwol here. 

Members of this House on many occasions had encouraged Government to ensure that members of the Presidential Commission are also appreciated for their contribution in regard to our laws. However, it is unfortunate that the Mzee has gone before this came to a reality. 

I would pray that as we pay this special tribute –(Interjection)– if they have been paid, I am very glad. However, I still remember hon. Hamson Obua moving this House to do that. The hon. Joy Ongom also moved this House to do that. If that was accepted and done, then I want to thank God for it. However, I would like to say that many of the senior citizens of this country still suffer without any assistance.

I would like to pray that the family remains united and continues carrying the candle of Mzee Wacha high. He has lived a dignified life. You should feel proud to be associated with him. Even us, who don’t belong to his family, feel proud to have associated with him because he made us proud as Ugandans.

Mzee Wacha, you played your part. This world is a stage. Each one of us comes and plays their part. You played a great part in bringing this country together. May your soul rest in peace. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is duly moved and seconded. My duty is to propose this motion for your debate. The motion is that this Parliament by resolution pays tribute to H.E. Yoweri Hunter Wacha Olwol and specifically –

    1. that it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the relatives, friends and the people of Uganda, upon the loss of H.E. Yoweri Wacha-Olwol;
    2. that it takes cognisance of the services rendered and contribution made by H.E. Wacha-Olwol to Uganda; and
    3. that this Parliament collectively prays to the Almighty God, to sustain the bereaved and grant our departed elder statesman and friend Yoweri Hunter Wacha, eternal peace. 

That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now. I will start with the member for Sheema.

2.52
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to pay my last respect and tribute to a man, a Ugandan and a fellow citizen who served this country with dedication, integrity and efficiency.

Mr Speaker, you have already mentioned it and I would like to contextualize it because I worked under Wacha Olwol. Therefore, I have a personal feeling for this great son; we sometimes look back in history and see Wacha, as a young man born in Oyam District; studying in these places you have mentioned, but more particularly, he came to King’s College Budo in 1942. For those who studied with him – This early exposure coming from Oyam - Oyam is in the north and studying at King’s College Budo made an impression on Wacha to understand Uganda at a time when the country was in tribal groups. It also shaped his thinking to look at Uganda as one country, one nation and as one people - (Applause) - For some of us who had an opportunity to work with him; this is a man whose commitment you would never doubt to this country. 

Indeed, hon. Kiiza mentioned that no doubt and no wonder in his old age, his contribution to the struggle for independence was absolutely total.  He was also a member of Uganda’s delegation to Lancaster Conference, negotiating for Uganda’s independence. 

Mr Speaker, we are Members of Parliament and Uganda is a sovereign state because many Ugandans including the son that is in that coffin struggled for this independence. We owe it to him because we speak here partly due to the contribution he made together with others – getting independence was not easy. For some of you who followed these developments, some of them were exiled and others were imprisoned. We must pay respect to those who contributed to it and he is one of them.

Mr Speaker, Wacha Olwol’s contribution came to peak in 1980. Why I am speaking with a sense of appreciation is that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, has given it in passing but for those of us who lived through it, it was a very difficult time. In 1979, the war ended and the President was sworn-in in this Parliament. Within 68 days, Prof. Yusuf Lule who was also the President was voted out. You should have been here to move from Entebbe to Kampala - this city was under fire. It was very tough and within another 11 months, President Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa who was also the Queen's Counsel (QC) had also been voted out. Imagine, in only 68 days and the President is voted out of office; 11 months later, another President was out too. 

Now, for some of us who were members of the Interim Parliament, the National Consultative Council, the Military Commission said “We have disbanded you, go home”. There was a Military Commission with absolutely no legitimacy. It was a challenge. The country was at a crossroad. We were searching for a saviour and it was dangerous. We searched and finally because of his record of performance, nationalism and patriotism, his name was among one of the three Military Commissioners appointed as Presidential Commissioner. It was a relief when these Presidential Commissioners - much as they were titular, they showed a semblance of togetherness because Wacha came from the north, Justice Saulo Musoke was from the central and Polycarp Nyamuchoncho, from the west. It gave a semblance of the country holding together under a military commission. They played their role very positively. For those of us who were here, we saw them.

Mr Speaker, I can say many things about him, but for some of us who worked under him know that he was a very dedicated, efficient, balance and patriotic person. He showed it. 

Mr Speaker, Wacha has died at the age of 94.  For some of us who appreciate economics, in development, there is a key development indicator - We have indicators such as per capita income, percentage of people leaving below poverty line, electricity coverage, water coverage, literacy rates among others. One of them where his contribution should be appreciated is his life expectancy at birth. Countries where the populations die young must be poor countries. This is very true. Life expectancy at 94, is a very useful contribution if you take into account that Uganda’s life expectancy in 1991 was 48 years at birth. In 2002, it improved to 50 years. In the last census in 2014, it is 63 years. If you do arithmetic, he is one of those who have been improving this statistics so that you may live long.

Mr Speaker, we wish you to live long. There are some people who say the old people should go home. Saying the old people should go home is counterproductive to your development indicators. (Laughter) In fact, if I were to use vernacular, those young people who would like the old people to die or retire are called ekunguzi. Ekunguzi is the person who wants his parents to die so that he inherits their property. Therefore, long live Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

I thank His Excellency the President for according a very befitting send-off to the commissioner. Do not forget the late Olwol worked with the President because his appointment as the commissioner was done by the Military Commission which the President was the Vice Chairman. I am very pleased that even at his last hours he accorded him a befitting send-off. 

May I, Mr Speaker, thank you and wish you long life. I wish Joel Wacha’s soul to rest in eternal life. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank Prof Kamuntu for the particular prayer for the Speaker. I claim it in Jesus’ Name. (Laughter)

3.03
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the resolution moved by the Prime Minister. On behalf of the people of Budyebo, I am conveying our deep sorrow at the death of Mzee Yoweri Hunter Wacha Olwol to the family, the people of Lango and Uganda at large. 

Mzee Wacha Olwol captured our imagination in Budyebo in May 1980 when it was announced over Radio Uganda that he had been appointed member of the three-man Presidential Commission. This was soon after the forced retirement of President Godfrey Binaisa. The idea of a Presidential Commission in the popular mind was at that time not only new, but also quite enigmatic because we were used to one President who is very strong and also a man of authority in the country. Now, three in one; at that time could only be equated to a trinity in the Christian faith or, for those who have done a little bit of history, the triumvirate that came in place after the assassination of Julius Caesar in the Roman Empire. Of course, there were many questions that eluded answers: Were these people equal? Who was chief among them? Did they sit in one office? Were they more powerful than the Military Commission of that time? How did they relate with that powerful Military Commission? 

The Uganda of 1980 can be likened to the board and game of snakes and ladders. I think at one time you played snakes and ladders. When you climb up the ladders, there are snakes waiting with open jaws to swallow you and you go down. That is the image I can use to describe the Uganda of 1980. 

Uganda was just recovering from the military Government of Field Marshal Idi Amin and it had gone through a liberation war. There were a lot of conflicting interests jostling with each other to take charge of Uganda: scheming, guile and cunning were quite common in that Uganda. There were strong interests of the Uganda National Liberation Front as the Umbrella group that was supposed to take charge of the destiny of the country. There were interests of the deliberating fighting groups. There were interests of both old and new political parties at that time; the old ones were Democratic Party and Uganda People’s Congress and others which were still new. There were the interests of the ordinary Ugandan people. Also, there were the interests of Government of Tanzania which was the patron of the liberation of this country. However, all these interests were not at par. They were conflicting and any slight mistake had dire consequences for that erratic person. In fact, for any slight mistake, you would go into the mouth of the snake.

Now, harnessing these interests together for the stability and tranquillity of Uganda required exceptional skill. It was that exceptional skill that Mzee Wacha Olwol brought into play as a member of the Presidential Commission. A lesser mortal than Wacha Olwol would not even dare to risk his life to serve on the commission, yet Uganda at that time needed his skills. Wacha Olwol had the skills and he never spared himself. He did not say for the sake of his family and other reasons, he would not serve because the situation was too dangerous. 

At Uganda’s hour of need, Mzee Wacha stood up boldly to serve Uganda’s interests and steered Uganda at that time through an election that saw Uganda on the 10th December 1980 with a President. We can say many things, but he is gone. All that we can do now, Mr Speaker, is to pray that the Almighty God rests Mzee Wacha Olwol in eternal peace. Thank you.
 
3.10
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I stand here to support the motion and to register my condolences as we say farewell to my dad, leader of our community and a national leader. 

Mr Speaker, when I lost both parents, I still had hope that I had a father whom I could call on should I need guidance. Indeed, Mzee may have looked old, but he had a lot of wisdom. I relied on Mzee a lot, spent a lot of time with him and there are many things that he shared with me and I learnt a lot from him.

Mr Speaker, allow me at this point to thank you personally for the role you played in helping Mzee to find out what was due to him legally; because this man was still alive at the time and the rest of his colleagues had passed on. We had a responsibility to make his life better, if we had taken care of him financially as it is required by law; but that was not happening. 

I would like to thank God that you took a personal step to make sure that Parliament passed a resolution to sort out that matter.

As we speak now, the Government has resolved that Mzee Joel Wacha, although he is not with us, he will get his benefits. Therefore, I would like to personally thank you on behalf of the family. They have not yet got it physically, but there is a commitment, Mr Speaker. We need to record it so that if the Prime Minister has anything to say, he should tell us. However, as of now, the family has not yet got the money, but there is a commitment that Mzee Joel Wacha will be paid his dues.

Mr Speaker, Joel Wacha’s character can be encapsulated as follows: in summary, anybody who wanted to know about Joel Wacha, you can know him as a man who was a trained teacher, accomplished administrator, who dealt with many delicate issues and never compromised his principles. He was a man of excellence, with a calm temperament, who ensured that whatever decision he took was implemented.

Mr Speaker, allow me to mention about three issues, which I thought I needed to share with my colleagues. First of all, I know there is nobody here who will talk on behalf of the family, but I would like to say that Papa was a good father. The children can testify that he was a good father. He was a good husband and clan leader. Therefore, from the family and clan perspective, he was a man of excellence. 

Secondly, I would like also to let members know that he was a developer. He was the first clerk to the district council. As a clerk, he formed the first administrative unit in the district and had the power to recruit, train and promote staff. The first group of administrators that Joel Wacha recruited were from different parts of Lango.

Let me this testimony since he will not live with us again; allow me to give you a few names about four or five. One of them was Makmondo Agweli who became a diplomat. Another one was Charles Apunyo from Alebtong, Michael Ogwal, Oduru Alele, John Oluk Otim Alakara – (Interjections) – he spread out from all over Lango and he made sure the qualification was standard. You had to have a Cambridge school certificate as the first qualification. The second qualification was that you had to be trained as administrator. Basically he was a teacher so he carried that passion with him to make sure his administrators were trained.

Mr Speaker, I am saying this because Lango as a district benefited. With this kind of intellectual ability and his exposure, having been a Budonian - you know Budonian those days in the 50s and 60s; you people are joking, you have not gone to school. You would only say I have been to school when you have come from Budo because Budo then was the ground that trained children of the kings and distinguished personalities. Therefore, Joel Wacha stood tall always in terms of his intellectual ability and identity. He was a man of distinction. 

Now this man transformed Lango district in the sense that he made sure he transformed the gobolola (Sub county) headquarters from grass-thatched structures to Mabaati (iron sheets) structures all over.

He made sure before that was done that he took all the councillors to Teso. Teso was ahead, they had built their gobolola headquarters with what was called Matagula. So they took the Langi-(Laughter)- We are reflecting on history. Therefore, they took the Lango councillors to Teso to see what was in Teso. The Langi came back and said: “We do not want ours to be like that but we want Mabaati”, which is colligated iron sheets. At that time, if you sold a lot of cotton and animals, you would buy iron sheets and build a Mabaati house; people would then know that you are a man of substance. The Langi wanted to make Lango a district of substance; to have all the sub county made of Mabaati. That was Joel Wacha.

As if that was not enough, he made sure that many of our children benefitted from scholarships. I cannot come out with details at the moment but one of the things I would like to remember my dad for is that he was a reconciler. He is a man who deliberately chose to remain in the background. He wanted to be a silent influence on almost every touchy issue.

There are two areas that the Langi, Acholi and people from Northern Uganda will remember Joel Wacha for; that when the Tito and Baziliyo Okello regimes took over power, things were very difficult for the people of Lango. Joel Wacha having married from Acholi, and being a man who looked at things differently, he saw the signs very early and made sure he deliberately picked up Ben Wacha, Livingstone Okello Okello and Tito Okello. They went to meet with Obote and they arrived at a decision that would benefit the whole country.

He repeatedly said, “Any disaster now will cause death which we do not want”. That was the role that Joel Wacha played. However, because certain things were not done the way they should have been done, things happened the way they did. However, he did not stop there. Even when things became very difficult, Joel Wacha, and the late Obore Ochola, made sure that they consulted with each other and formed the special association to make sure that there was reconciliation when the NRM took power in Uganda; Joel played a crucial role.

Mr Speaker, we have lost a peace maker; we have lost a father. Many of us would ask why there was a commission of three presidents. It is only me and may be the Rt Hon. Rugunda who can speak with confidence why it was so –(Laughter)– yes. You must understand the language of nationalism to understand why we had a commission of three presidents. The coup plotters who overthrew Binaisa knew why they chose the three presidents. They also know why they were chosen from the north, central and the west – the east was already represented. The chairperson of the legislature was from the east. Please revise your history –(Laughter). 

Therefore, we now had a government made up of four blocks and these were solid personalities; judges sitting together with solid leaders like Joel Wacha. He said that, “We do not want speculators; we do not want people who will rock the boat and cause more suffering to the people of Uganda”. They wanted solid people who would unite Uganda and they found those characters in the three persons that were chosen. Those three, joined to the chairperson of the legislature, they were able to come up with a good combination of leaders. 

One thing I want to remind Ugandans is – I find it difficult to forget the justification for the coup against Binaisa. At that time, the military commission headed by Paul Muwanga, deputised by the current President decided that Binaisa’s Regime had to end because Banaisa had turned State House into a proforma invoice workshop.

Therefore, check yourself, wherever you are to ensure that your office does not become a proforma invoice workshop –(Laughter)– those who bring investors into their offices in order to internalise facts. Proforma invoice workshop was the reason why Binaisa’s Government was overthrown and I think that justification still stands. I also think some of the coup plotters are still alive – one of them is our President, Yoweri Museveni –(Laughter). He must remind the people of Uganda that the reason for overthrowing Binaisa is still valid.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Government – this is one of the rare occasions where you find them doing good things. (Laughter) First to accord a state burial for our dad and also to ensure that we give him a befitting send off. But I wish, apart from giving the family what is due to papa in order to rehabilitate the home, I think it is important that something should be done in memory of Mzee Joel Wacha –(Applause). 

He was an exemplary civil servant, he was a solid leader, he was a peacemaker, a reconciler; something must be done to remind our children and grandchildren that it does not matter whether you are Lango or Karimojong or wherever you have come from, you must be like Mzee Joel Wacha to unit Uganda. Government should do something to constantly remind of the quality of the person of Mzee Joel Wacha.  (Applause)

3.25
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a very important occasion that I must speak and I decided to speak deliberately because I have a message, which is very important and I must thank you for giving me this opportunity. 

First of all, I want to convey my personal condolences and those of my family and the people of West Nile. I wish also to thank the Almighty for giving us Mzee Wacha who had lived for 94 years; very few Ugandans have lived that long and I must thank the Almighty. 

During these 94 years, which we should also pray to reach – but we do not know; we should only pray; if we do not reach there, that was your journey and you should not complain.

When you look at what happened during these 94 years, I think Mzee Wacha has contributed a lot in ways that cannot be quantified. Some of these contributions had been mentioned, for example, by our sister. Most of his contribution is not visible; it cannot be recorded, but such people have helped save many situations and people. Even in terms of employment, for those 94 years, he has paid a lot of taxes. Whatever we do now involves some taxes and he has been paying taxes for all these years – for 94 years –(Interjections)– there are a lot of services he has offered; if you have not seen them, then it is a pity – (Laughter). 

Even sitting in this House itself is a service and this was part of his legacy; they laid a good foundation and that is why we are benefiting. So we thank God and Mzee for his extensive contribution to this country. In all directions, as I said, it is very difficult to read it all, but he has done a lot.

Mzee has left us – and I mean the people from the north - disunited. We are not as united as we were at independence. If we were not united during independence, Obote would not be the President of this country. Therefore, we the people from the north must go back to 1962 – that is where our strength lays; it is in unity, but we abandoned it in 1971 and 1985 and so on - (Laughter). 

Mr Speaker, this is the message that I wish to give; we here can beat about the bush but our target should be unity. We must go back to the unity of 1962 [HON. MEMBERS: “One Uganda, One people”] and of course one Uganda. 

We, people from the north, must be thanked by the rest of the other Ugandans because even though we fought for 20 years, we still remained part of Uganda and we did not break away. We should be thanked either publicly or quietly but it is your business -(Laughter)– because we are still together in the country even if there is no war.

Mr Speaker, Mzee has left us not united as we wanted to be. However, there are still some elders that Mzee left behind who should stand up to their responsibility to bring unity – [HON. MEMBERS: “You are among them.”]. I am 78 years old, for those who do not know but Mzee was 94 years. There are some people who are ahead of me –(Laughter)– and we shall join them to bring about reconciliation as the honourable member has said. There is no solution but reconciliation. 

We are not going to hold anybody responsible – people who were not there like the youth of today cannot be held responsible for what happened in 1968 or 1971 – it is impossible as that would be against natural justice. Those people should be left alone. We should help such people to reconcile. 

The mistakes that had happened should be forgiven and people should be together. We must think together. If there is a border problem, it is nothing and should not divide us for it has nothing to do with our unity.

I appeal to all Members here not to lose hope when you go home to bury our Mzee because he has left some people. We must think of reconciling the entire north. 

In 1971, there was fear that the Amin Government killed people from Acholi and Lango – but when these two came back, they also killed us in the West Nile –(Laughter). So, whom are we going to hold responsible? We should rather forgive those killings and then reconcile. 

We must appoint a committee for reconciliation so that we do not waste time. That is the message, Mr Speaker. May the soul of our brother rest in eternal peace. I thank you. (Applause)

3.34
BRIG. INNOCENT OULA (UPDF Representative): I thank you for this opportunity, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to this accomplished citizen of Uganda.

The old man lying before us here was a respected and trusted citizen of this country. He earned this respect. I recall that between 1986 and 1987, there was an upsurge of insurgency in northern Uganda and Lango sub region in particular where the sons and daughters waged war against the Government of the time.

At that time, this old man lying down here was the Chairman of Lango Community living in Kampala, Jinja and Entebbe. Together with other elders from the sub region, they put their feet down and said they would not allow such a senseless war to continue in their land and more so, by their children.

They agreed that the best they could do was to call and tell them to lay down their arms – this is what he did. Because of this respect that he earned, I have never heard of a rebellion where the fighters lay down their arms courtesy of the talk of their leaders – and I must say there have been many rebellions in this country. 

When the rebelling people of Lango heard that Mzee Wacha Olwol and other elders had sent a message for them to lay down their arms, they did just that. This was the respect that he earned because of his actions. (Applause)

Mzee Wacha lying here wanted every Ugandan to love one another. I remember and hon. Cecilia Ogwal has just alluded to it – you all know that there was a coup in 1985 and the two communities of Lango and Acholi were trading barbs against each other. They would even go as far as killing each other.  

However, Mzee Wacha came up and said there was no need to wage war against each other. No tribe in Uganda should wage war against another because it is primitive. He said that the people who were being abused, killed or falsely accused will be the same people who will pull you out of a bad situation tomorrow.

What Mzee Wacha was saying is that we should live together because each one of us, irrespective of where we come from or what we believe in, have something to give to the other. Each of us has to benefit from one another. 

He said we had to love one another because each one of us will have a problem and the other person that you are blaming, abusing or plotting to kill by God’s luck will be the person who will pull you out of a bad situation tomorrow. 

The Prime Minister has just said that he was a patriot. Indeed, he was a patriot. Mr Speaker, the home we are going to lay Mzee to rest on Sunday is just a mile apart from my home. Many a time when he was home, I would get time and go visit him.  

There was this particular day when I went to visit him and he said, after we had talked, that we young people had to work hard for this country. You have to give your best for the country. He said we should never rush to get wealth and that we must be loyal to our country – those were his words. 

No wonder as previous speakers have stated, he lived a life without blame and because he had that type of ideology where he put this country first, that is why even when his dues delayed to be paid to him, he never complained. However, I am aware of some leaders who have been imprisoned in Luzira and when asked why they did not pay their debts, they said it is because the Government had not paid their dues. However, this old man kept quiet for all these years and never complained. I think there is a lot that we can learn from him. 

As I conclude, I would like to say, Mzee you have left a legacy that we all can pick a leaf and draw lessons from. We are aware you have lived a fruitful and clean life that we should emulate. Mzee Wacha Olwol, rest in eternal peace. I thank you.

3.42
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to a gallant Ugandan on behalf of the people of West Budama South, Tororo, and on my own behalf. I feel the pain of losing an elder at his age; his death definitely reminds me of my late father’s death, who would have been his age mate.

Mr Speaker, I join the rest to admire, even in death, Mzee Joel Wacha Olwol; a man who studied in Lira but also went to Kabalega, to Buganda and worked in Buganda and later on became a civil servant and a commissioner in the Presidential Commission. These days, this is not possible; you are born in Tororo, attend schools in Tororo, marry in Tororo, work in Tororo and die in Tororo. The exposure that our elders had had a great impact on how they got groomed and related with one another.

This is a serious message for us, the young people, to learn. We instead go for each other’s necks and we are quick to point and call each other by tribe. I believe he died first a Ugandan and a Langi later on. Mzee Wacha Olwol put Uganda at the forefront. How many of us do that? This is a challenge to us and a point for reflection.

Most peaceful people live long and this is the evidence that this gallant Ugandan was a peaceful man. Bitterness kills us every day. There is no further evidence to his peacefulness and calmness than the longevity of his life. I believe if the late Wacha Olwol had suffered from pressure and bitterness, he would have been consumed by death long ago. How I pray that we shall see each other as Ugandans first before we see the religion and tribe. 

Mzee Wacha Olwol joins many other presidents who have died. May you, Mzee Joel Wacha Olwol, tell the first President of Uganda, Sir Edward Mutesa, that we are still struggling with tribalism. May you tell President Milton Obote that the situation has not improved. Tell Idi Amin Dada that we are still being divided along political lines. May you tell Yusuf Lule, Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa and the rest that Uganda is still on the periphery.

We have had several presidents but he was a lucky person. We should congratulate Lango subregion for grooming leaders. It is on record that two times, presidents came from Lira and even a presidential commissioner came from Lira. How we admire from Bukedi, Teso, Karamoja and Busoga. Maybe one day God will remember us and give us the leadership of the Wacha Olwol side - no tribalism and where you are not afraid to be you. Even now as I speak, you are now seeing more than I am saying because of your tribal screening. 

This Uganda would be a better Uganda if only we had more of the Mzee Wacha Olwols. May you send my regards to my late dad. Safe journey; where you are going, we all shall follow suit. 

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I rise to support the motion on behalf of the people of Kinkiizi East in Kanungu and the greater Kanungu, Rukungiri, where also one of the presidential commissioners, Polycarp Nyamuchoncho, came from. I would like to convey my condolences to the family, Ugandans, the people of Lango and all of us in the House. 

I was still a teenager in the 1980s when Mzee Wacha Olwol became one of the presidential commissioners. Therefore, I may not have experience like that of the Prime Minister and Prof. Kamuntu, but I was old enough to follow what was happening. I recall in our village, we were the only ones who owned a radio and the whole village would gather to listen to Radio Uganda news, and therefore we would follow what was going on. I used to help interpret to the villagers what was being broadcast –(Interjections)– No; hon. Amama Mbabazi is from another village. (Laughter) 

I would like to thank God for enabling him live for 94 years. The Holy Book mentions our lifespan as being 70 years or 80 years for those who are strong; beyond that, it is pain and struggle. Currently, I am half his age and I pray that I reach his age and even surpass it. Recently, the oldest person died in Indonesia at 146 years; so, our lifespan can go beyond even 100 years. Therefore, we all pray that we can have that long life and be able to use our life on earth very profitably the way Mzee used his. We are thankful for the great achievement that he was able to register, including being a leader of this country in those months when he was part of the Presidential Commission.

Mr Speaker, a debate of this nature and a reminder about his life greatly reminds us where this country has come from. It reminds us that once upon a time, presidents were chosen from boardrooms. Those are historical facts which are on record. Gratefully, I think we have since moved so that presidents and other leaders are chosen by Ugandans through a ballot. We want to salute and thank those Ugandans who have struggled for this progress. 

I heard my sister, the Leader of the Opposition, saying that she is waiting for a transition where a leader changes peacefully to another. I always see that happening every five years. (Interjection)- Yes, every five years since 1996, I see this happening. That is how I replaced the former MP in my constituency, and I am sure that is how you replaced hon. Loyce Bwambale, who was Woman MP for Kasese.

Having been voted three times by the people of Kinkiizi East to come to Parliament does not mean that the people are not democratic; they have always chosen me as the person to lead them. Therefore, if we can continue to give a chance to Ugandans to elect their leaders, then that is okay. Our duty as leaders of today is to acknowledge the progress which has been registered so far and consolidate this democracy and unity in order for Uganda to continue moving forward. I am sure we are on a steady path of progress as a country.

Finally, Mr Speaker, at least for the record, we should tell the country that some few years back, the President directed that former presidents and their families should be given an ex gratia payment. The “trinity presidency” - the three commissioners - were paid Shs 1 billion, which was shared equally among the three families. That should go on record again so that an impression should not be created that no payment has been done.

The last debate we had in this House was to harmonise the law so that the former presidents, including the presidential commissioners, can benefit in accordance with the existing law, and we agreed as Parliament. Therefore, I am sure the commitment is still there that the former presidents, including the commissioners, will benefit in accordance with the law. I just wanted to put that on record so that the record is very clear. Thank you, Mr Speaker. May our Mzee rest in eternal peace.

3.54
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise in support of the motion by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 

I take cognisance of the fact that Mzee Wacha Olwol’s life has elicited a lot of very important and far-reaching comments on the Floor today. I think this comes about from the very fact of how he lived his life and conducted himself, and the roles he played at critical and trying moments in this country. There was mention of his role at the time of Independence in drafting the Independence Constitution. All of this stems from his love for this dear country of ours.

Fast-forward to 1980; although I am slightly older than my colleague from Kinkiizi East, I had my first opportunity to really see politics. However, I think what many people miss is the experiment which Uganda tried to make in 1980. If you look carefully and search the whole of Africa, other than I think Botswana and Mauritius, there was no multi-party democracy in Africa at that time. 

There were contentions, which we had in Uganda, and many came together to remove what was perceived as a regime which should not be sustained. The problem came about regarding what happened next. It is often easy to come together against what can be perceived as a common enemy, but on how to forge a common destiny, I think we get the best lessons from Mzee Wacha Olwol. He exuded quiet confidence, distinguished service and dedication for this country.

I have listened carefully to the cries for unity and I think we really need to challenge ourselves: Are we ready to embrace a united Uganda? There are many in this country who will still argue that there is a democracy deficit, something which was there in 1980. Another experiment Uganda made in 1980 was that it was the first time for a sovereign nation to request foreign observers to participate in the electoral process and give a clean bill of health. Despite the report of the Commonwealth Observer Group of 1980, we did not escape the problems which followed. Throughout all this, we had great people like Wacha Olwol keeping focus on the prize, and that prize will have to be a united Uganda with mutual respect across board.

Throughout Wacha Olwol’s long distinguished career, there is absolutely no scandal which can be found. His life is truly a lesson for our generation and generations after us. I think we have to rise to the task on how to forge that Uganda which he believed in and worked for at the time of the struggle for independence - a Uganda where, in 1980, we were at crossroads; a Uganda where when ethnic problems were leading to loss of life in this country, Wacha Olwol always stood firm on the side of what is right and good for Uganda.

I am truly humbled and honoured to be able to stand here today to pay tribute to a great son of Uganda. He was a true nationalist. Despite coming from Lango and being educated across Uganda, all his efforts were for Uganda. I, therefore, would like to support the appeal made on behalf of unity. However, let us also be cautious; maybe not tomorrow, maybe not in the near future, but we are going to have to deal once again with difficult questions. I hope amongst our senior citizens and also amongst our active politicians, we have people who can stand up and truly represent a vision which can forge that common destiny of a united Uganda.

On behalf of the Uganda People’s Congress and on my own behalf, we thank Mzee Wacha Olwol for his great service to Uganda and may his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.00 
MR KENNETH ONGALO-OBOTE (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for according me this opportunity on behalf of the people of Kalaki to pay tribute to this great Ugandan. I would also like to extend my condolences to his family. 

Mr Speaker, it says a lot about our history and how we keep records of our history that up to this morning, many Ugandans were asking who this man, Wacha Olwol, was, what was he, what did he do and why does he deserve to be given a state funeral. 

I think this speaks very negatively about us as a country, where we have come from, where we are and where we want to go. A country that has no sense of its history cannot surely claim that it is knows its destination. 

I would like to appeal to those who are responsible for the education of our young ones to ensure that the proper records of this country are kept. I would like them to make sure that Mzee Wacha Olwol and the two other commissioners are accorded their rightful place in the history of this country. 

Since I came to this House in 2011, I have been cognisant of the fact that most of our former leaders that have left power have died in poverty. I often wondered as I observed and watched my brothers like hon. Hamson Obua, hon. Okot-Ogong, hon. Anthony Okello and many of the leaders from Lango fight in this House over payments due to these fallen men. I often asked myself what kind of country we are that a man who made this country and was a great leader, as we have heard, lived not far from this House and yet we continued hiding behind laws as a reason for failing to accord him what was truly due to him. 

We have heard of the history of this country and how power violently changed hands from Obote I to Idi Amin, Yusuf Lule and Godfrey Binaisa. One would have thought that these three gentlemen would have followed the same path and somehow tried to find a way to cling onto power. However, they were the first in the history of this country to hand over power peacefully when an elected Government was constituted. 

While I stand here to pay tribute to him, I would also like to remind this House and my country that people are judged by the way they treat their elders and by the way they treat those who once were leaders and may not be leaders anymore. I have often found it very painful that people who have served this country very diligently, especially Members of Parliament, are totally forgotten when they leave this House. Some of them even die without as much as a ripple in this House. It then remains up to the President to decide whether they should be accorded a state funeral, whether they should be brought to this House and if history should record the fact that they are dead or not. I think this is unfair.

Personally, I believe that I have given enough service to this country to be brought to this House and accorded due respect when I die, even if I have left this House. That is the least that this House can do for me. I have lived close to 50 years now and 10 of the best years in my life have been spent within these four walls. I call this home, and it is the only place where I will probably not be accorded due respect if I die after I have left this House. No wonder, some of us do not want to leave this House. We would rather die here than outside. Not long ago, hon. Willy Ekemu, who was formerly a Member of Parliament, passed away and it was not even heard of; I do not know whether this House was informed. 

Therefore, I think this business of deciding, as if it is a favour, on who should be brought here and who should not should be changed. This country and its people have chosen to have the leaders they have now. We are 443 Members of Parliament not out of our own choice but out of the choice of our own people. 

Mr Speaker, there is a saying that you cannot make omelette without breaking eggs. If you want leaders, you should look after them as leaders. I find it very embarrassing when I read in the media about this bloated House, about how much Members of Parliament earn, as if it is our mistake. It is our people that want districts; don’t they realise that when you get more districts, you get more leaders? Our people want more counties but if you get more counties, you get more Members of Parliament. Therefore, it is not up to us. However, once we become Members of Parliament, I think we should be accorded the due respect that we deserve as leaders and as people who are shaping, one way or the other, the destiny of this country. 

I am humbled to have been able to stand here and pay my respects to this great man. I hope, as I begun, history will accord him his rightful place. I also hope that our syllabi will accord him and the example he and his colleagues set a very prominent place for us to learn that peaceful transfer of power is possible. We should learn that a president who has left power can continue living in this country and can die in this country. If we can do that, this country will be on the right path. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for according me this opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have visitors from Kasambya County in Mubende District. They are represented by hon. Benny Namugwanya and hon. Gaffa Mbwatekamwa. They are here to pay tribute to H.E Yoweri Wacha Olwol. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

4.09
MAJ. (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (NRM, Isingiro County North, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion to pay tribute to Mzee Wacha Olwol for his contribution to Uganda’s politics and development. 

Mr Speaker, many people die in this town after long service and they are not brought here. However, when the whole nation decides to mourn a person like him, as Members of Parliament we should look forward to this. I have read the interviews he had with several people and you could see that he was a nationalist, as early as that time. 

I would like to associate myself with my aunt, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, when she echoed the spirit of nationalism. These people had Uganda at heart. If you see what he did, even before he was recognised to high levels, you could see that this was a Ugandan that was full of purpose. Our children are crossing borders and marrying all over the place; one of my daughters is in Oyam, another one is in Kigezi, my sister is in Fort Portal and my other sister is in Buganda. These people were doing this when there were no intermarriages and we, as Members of Parliament, must know that we belong to each other. 

I would like to thank the Government for according him a decent and befitting send off. However, as we celebrate a life well lived, a life of an accomplished and polished Ugandan, we should think about ourselves. I was reading his CV; he was picked from Lango to go and represent Lango District in the two famous pre-independence meetings. He was also one of those few that were selected to go and study public administration in UK as early as 1957. 

Mr Speaker, I therefore would like to thank everyone among us that has contributed anything towards the life of this gallant Ugandan. We should borrow a leaf from his life. We should, as Members of Parliament, really echo and continue what these people have started. I thank you, Mr Speaker. May his soul rest in perfect peace.

4.13
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to express condolences from the people of Kalungu to the bereaved family. 

Being a professional primary teacher, I taught social studies at primary school level and one of the topics we taught in primary 6 was Uganda’s political history. When I was teaching that subject in primary 6, when I would start talking about these three men, children would enjoy my lesson. They wondered how Government would run, managed by three people. However, I would like to tell the truth that by that time, I would not give proper details as to why it was like that. I have just learnt this from hon. Cecilia Ogwal today here on the Floor of Parliament. People who do not know how we teach at primary level are saying “wrong things”, but when you go to secondary school, you expand on this and I am not a history teacher at secondary school level. 

Many times I have said that this country needs to set up a council of elders. Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for allowing to give us a Special Sitting. If it had not been for that, Ugandans would not have known. When you go to South Africa, they treasure their old leaders. Go and look for Desmond Tutu. During their independence celebrations, they would show Nelson Mandela on the screen, seated in his house, and he would talk to the gathering. In Uganda, we are here talking about “hakuna mchezo” and these people are forgotten. (Interjections) At least you know we are teaching Swahili in schools and if you are not learning it, you are in a wrong place.

Mr Speaker, recently, in my constituency – and I will bring this evidence to you - I went to attend a burial and an old sheikh, who is around 90 years old but still very strong, gave me a chit, which I first kept in my pocket. This gentleman wrote and started from the date the President promised the elderly Shs 20,000 and the hour, and since that day, the President has taken so many days, hours, minutes and seconds without paying and the amount they are demanding from him is now Shs 3,000,000. If this is multiplied by the hours they have spent without getting it, he needs Shs 30,000,000 including interest.

When we talk about honouring and giving these former leaders respect and giving them their ex gratia payments, we are not giving it that kind of weight, Mr Prime Minister. People who age need to enjoy their money when they are still around. They want to enjoy it. If they are Catholics like me, they want to see themselves enjoying. That is why we have retirement benefits. It is not that we are getting retirement benefits to basically cater for our children; no. I, Joseph Ssewungu, have to leave this Parliament and I will still enjoy. If I want to go to Kampala Club, I go there and if I want to fly out of the country, I do so, enjoying my benefits.

When people come here and then you start giving answers and remedies after your failures, this does not hold. Recently, in the Catholic Church – on Saturday I was with hon. Simeo Nsubuga, he can bear witness - His Eminence Cardinal Emmanuel Wamala was celebrating his 90th birthday and we, Catholics, contributed money to construct a museum at his birth place and it is already in place. That will earn him income.

I was here when Gen. Moses Ali was talking about how they are divided; it is true. We need to first get Catholics, Muslims and Protestants to put up something like a museum at the birth place of hon. Wacha Olwol so that people can come and see the leaders we had, who managed to take up Government when there was turbulence. When you talk about the 1980s, you cannot leave the Democratic Party out. This is because it was between DP and UPC but UPC stole our votes and that is a fact. (Laughter) You know, we are totally divided; you can see that one side is seated here and the other one there.

Honourable members, I was about to ask Prof. Kamuntu but he is not around. Let me ask the Prime Minister because he was there: How often did you visit this man? How often did the President visit him? Someone was boasting here how the President appointed him. Someone you appointed and when you become a President, you forget him for 30 years! These are things that you must pay attention to. Look for those particular people – the historicals - find out where they are, visit them and know their condition so that by the time they die, they feel happy that at least people have been paying attention to them. 

Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. However, there is this business of giving medals on Labour Day and the rest; you greet the President and everybody that goes to greet him does not want to leave because they have issues and that is the only moment they have to see the President. You have ministers and you wanted them in big numbers. These people must be given respect. This gentleman was stronger than most of us here but we have remembered him only at this time. May his soul rest in peace. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.19
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join the rest of the Members to convey condolences to the bereaved family and the nation at large. On behalf of the people of Bukooli County North and probably Busoga region at large – You will allow me to use my natural title; when you are a prince and it comes to functions of this nature, you talk on behalf of the whole kingdom, therefore allow me to do so. (Laughter)

I want to centre my tribute on the late between the period of 1972 and May 1980 when I was a kid. In 1972, when H.E Wacha Olwol was a Permanent Secretary in the President’s Office, he was forced to retire by Amin’s Government and he settled in a place called Corner Amach in Lira. When he was in his home, Amin’s soldiers raided it and by God’s grace, he managed to survive. It is at this time that his late beloved wife called Alice convinced him to leave this country and settle in western Kenya in a place called Bungoma. 

It is at that time that he exhibited skills and talents of a hardworking husband. He was able to procure a Peugeot pickup and began transporting goods and people to western Kenya. According to the records we have of 14 December 2014, when he was being interviewed by Daily Monitor, he said he was about to settle in western Kenya given what he was earning at that particular moment in time.

He is also remembered as a freedom fighter and much has been said about him in that regard. However, I want to specifically point out what he did in 1973. He contacted and linked up with Dr Obote and other freedom fighters in Tanzania and started recruiting young Ugandans who joined a group of freedom fighters. Prominent among these recruits was Maj. Ogole, and we all recall what he did during the liberation war of 1979 as one of the commanders.

He is also remembered as someone who was not a glutton and as a true nationalist who humbly settled in Lango. Even after the overthrow of Idi Amin Dada, he never agitated or requested the then Government for any position. It was through the goodwill and recognition of his contribution that he was appointed a commissioner to the Presidential Commission of 1980. 

With those few remarks, allow me to bid thee farewell my grandfather. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, can we now agree on the time? Can we limit it so that we share the remaining time, so that we finish by 5.30 p.m.? Can we do two minutes to cover everybody with the exception of the honourable member from Oyam, whom I will give three minutes? 

4.25
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Oyam, I would like to convey condolences to the family. 

Although people have thanked Government, I would like specifically to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for being very active and vigilant. The late passed on at about 7.30 a.m. and when the Prime Minister was informed, he quickly called a meeting at 11 a.m. and set everything moving. Just within this short period, he liaised with you and we are now able to bid farewell to the late and handle all the other administrative intricacies to send him off in this manner. I thank the Rt Honourable Prime Minister and the Speaker for that.

I got to know Mzee when as Lango Parliamentary Group we were trying to chase for the retirement benefits for former presidents. At that time, the law did not permit this. This led us to meeting the President, who then wrote a letter for all the former presidents to be paid ex gratia and indeed, he was paid. For this particular payment, a resolution was made after we discovered that indeed, while we tried very much to look at the law at that time, there was a provision that when Parliament makes a resolution for any former head of state, then he can be paid according to the emoluments that are for former heads of state. That is why this particular resolution was made, but the ex gratia was paid.

Mr Speaker, many people have of course talked about him being a reconciler and unifier. In Lango subregion, as I stand here today, there is a manifestation of this not only on both sides of this House but even on the burial committee; there are no parties because he brought everybody together when he was alive. 

After he died, in Lango everybody is joining hands together across all political divides to mourn the great son of this country. Therefore, indeed, he was a unifier. He was somebody whom we looked at as an elder in Lango community and who if you had an issue that divided people in Lango - (Member timed out.)

4.29
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to join this House in paying tribute to the late Yoweri Hunter Wacha Olwol. On behalf of the people of Lira District and Lango as a whole, I would like to convey our condolences to the family and to this country for the demise of our beloved father.

The man we are paying tribute to was a man who was confident, dedicated, a man of integrity, caring and smart both in body and mind. Mr Speaker, you saw this for yourself - I think it was in March – when we brought him to your office; we sat together with him in your boardroom and you appreciated the smartness of the 94-year-old man. I would like to congratulate him because he never left that smartness.


Mr Speaker, I had always known Mzee because our home is not far from his. However, it was in March when I interacted with him one-on-one, when he made a call to me as his Member of Parliament. He recognised and knew his Member of Parliament. He wanted us to follow up on his benefits. This is the reason you accorded us time in the order of business and we requested Government to pay him. I would like to thank Government very much, especially the Prime Minister, who has assured the people of Lango that much as he will not benefit himself, his benefits will be paid.

I would like to thank Government for the ex gratia that was paid to him. It was an oversight because in the real sense he should have been paid every five years, his house refurbished, furniture replaced, a vehicle bought for him and security provided. However, if you went to his home, all those are not there. Mzee was a servant of the people. He emerged from a teacher up to the level of Administrative Secretary in the Office of the President, and this called for integrity. He was not corrupt and he was a hardworking man.

Mr Speaker, if you follow history, the rest of his friends like Erinayo Oryema and Archbishop Janani Luwum perished in 1977. Forty years down the road, we are eulogising Mzee today. I would like to thank God for his life. I leave this for this House and Government: we used to have civics and political education as subjects. It is not that if we are taught political education we shall all become politicians, but it helps us in history –(Member timed out.)

4.33
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Mr Speaker, I would like to second the motion - I will later propose an amendment - to pay tribute to His Excellency Wacha Olwol, who was not only my voter but also came from a neighbouring village in Amach. 

We grew up knowing him as a man who was very distinguished in his service. The epitome was when he was appointed Permanent Secretary in the Office of the President. You know that he groomed many people in this country. The Rt. honourable Prime Minister was at that time working in that office and also his Excellency the President acknowledged in his letter when he was the PS. His Excellency Wacha Olwol played a great part in the current leadership and we just wait to see when those cadres he groomed will admire him and retire in time as he did. 

Mr Speaker, in Amach, Mzee Wacha Olwol was a development oriented person. We saw many of the small processing plants, the grinding mills, tractors including shops from his work. People of that area have lost a very great leader and somebody who has been there for them. At this time, we think Government should stand with us. That is why I would like to quantify the statement made by hon. Cecilia Ogwal, that as a leader who was highly educated, the people of that area deserve some commitment from Government to set up a memorial structure, for which I propose a vocational school, so that we can remember him and his contribution. As a Member of Parliament, I can assure the House that we have land and we also have the political will. If it is possible, let us amend the motion and include a commitment by Government to put up a structure.

Lastly, I would like to welcome all of you to Amach on Sunday where the burial will take place. As the Lango Parliamentary Group and as the area Members of Parliament, we are there to receive you. In line with this tribute where many said he was a very good man, he nurtured the Prime Minister, the President and so many others, we would like to see you in Lango so that you see some of the problems that we have, which sometimes you may not understand and appreciate when we talk about them here in the House. When you come to my constituency, you will be able to see some of them and interact with our locals and then we can give our Mzee a befitting send off.  

I would like to thank Government for the contribution –(Member timed out.)

4.36
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. On behalf of the people of Oyam where the late was born, I would like to support the motion by paying tribute to the late Mzee Yoweri Wacha Olwol.

Mr Speaker, I would like to support my colleagues who have suggested that there must be something done to remember the late. However, I would like to differ a bit and talk about the three presidential commissioners. Can this Government do something to remember these three people who have been forgotten? In yesterday’s New Vision, the picture which was published was of another elder from Lango Subregion called Charles Olop, not the one of His Excellency Wacha Olwol. I saw it with a lot of sadness in my heart. 

We thank Government very much for the effort that they have made by giving a befitting send-off to Mzee. However, I feel that as a Government, we must move a step ahead and do something for these three Presidential Commissioners who did tremendous things for Uganda. 

Secondly, the late was very trustworthy and reliable across the board; politicians would go to him to seek guidance. He was not active in politics but we used to go to him to seek his opinion on very many important things. It is very rare these days to find a man of his calibre who is trusted across the board, like in the religious, political, cultural circles and at family level. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to make it known that the late has left a legacy of a stable family including the extended family. I remember as I was growing up as a child in Lira District, the late came near our home and – (Member timed out.)

4.39
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are here eulogising a man who probably lived and performed most of his duties at a time when most of us were not born. However, sitting here and listening to the fact that he was a teacher re-affirms the very reason I came for this session. I came with curiosity to find out who this gentleman was. Hearing that he was a former teacher, I see that the gentleman lying here is still lecturing and giving us more lessons of the forgotten 1979 and 1980 politics. 

Mr Speaker, as they say, history normally repeats itself. In March 1979 when he saw that Idi Amin was about to fall, Nyerere said, “Please, come over” and there was the Moshi Unity Conference. In that conference, it was decided very clearly that since we had the UNLA – the army then – that fought alongside the Tanzanian forces and overthrew Idi Amin, we needed to have a front that would be the political wing headed by Yusuf Lule. 

Mr Speaker, there were 22 people that went there. When they came back, Lule was the executive head of the committee of the UNLF, which was the political wing of UNLA. The 22 people constituted themselves into an advisory parliament to Lule. No wonder up to today, most of our resolutions as Parliament are considered very advisory to the Executive. As if that is not enough, Lule was considered to be entrenching the interest of the Baganda and they got him off. (Member timed out.)

4.41
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I join the rest of my honourable colleagues to pay tribute to our late grandfather. 

Mr Speaker, when Gen. Moses Ali spoke, he brought out something very important that you once stated four years ago in Entebbe, that we should use our past as a resource for the future. I think it is very clear that this country still remains divided. What Gen. Moses Ali puts across relates to the work that the late did for this country. I think it is time for this Government to have a deep reflection on our mechanisms of reconciliation. This country needs a national reconciliation law as a fundamental basis for a sustainable future.

The late was a son-in-law of the Acholi from the house of Chief Ogwok of Padibe. Because of this relationship, he brought a lot of closeness between the people of Acholi and Lango. I remember when the incident happened relating to Joseph Kony attacking Lango, when the late Okullo Epak was still alive; they had to go on radio in Lango to voice a concern that was arising as a result of what was coming and he offered his advice. He stood for reconciliation for this country. The Government of Uganda, as a permanent legacy, should put in place this law. (Member timed out)

4.43
MR GUTOMOI ABACACON (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Mr Speaker, I rise to join the voices paying tribute to the great man who is lying down here. On behalf of the people of Erute County North and myself, I feel I should express another sad moment as I hold this piece of paper. This man lying here helped me a lot. I was arrested and detained in this Parliament, in Room No. 215, for six hours. I was destined to go away from this country. However, when he called me, together with my uncle, Mzee Nikanori Apita, they restrained me. I was described as a very dangerous man. (Laughter) 

He was the definition of Lango in the sense that when you are entering Parliament from the main gate, you see that emblem in the portrait of Amuka, the rhino. Therefore, this man was very humble and we all know his humility. He was an intelligent man and then one of the most hostile minds in this world. In Lango, we have those people. He represented the part of humility and people like Oyite Ojok and Gutomoi Abacacon took the wildest part of the people of Lango but he restrained me.

Mr Speaker, I am holding a sad document regarding one of our sons called Maj. Polar Awich who conned the late Mzee Wacha Olwol of Shs 75 million from that ex gratia payment -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I think you leave that line. That matter came up when we had a meeting in my office and it was resolved in the presence of Mzee Wacha Olwol. Please, leave it. It was Shs 89 million and he was the one who gave it to Maj. Polar Awich. He said it himself.

MR ABACACON: Thank you very much. That did not come to my knowledge. Mr Speaker, we were really disappointed when we learnt of this. However, now that it was resolved, I would like to appeal to the family who might not have known that this matter was resolved.

This man was a great man of Okii me Okabo clan in Lango. Many of our people learnt and benefitted a lot from him. As a teacher, in those days with my uncle, they exhibited very high standards of teaching because out of his 45 candidates in Junior 2, only one failed and that was his nephew who was staying with him. For those who are able to remember, at one moment when Lango was in total problems during the beginning of President Museveni’s administration –(Member timed out.)

4.47
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Mr Speaker, I join the rest of my colleagues to support the motion by the Prime Minister of Uganda to pay tribute to a great man who has done a wonderful job for the country. I would like to thank the family who gave him all the care while he was at home that enabled reach 94 years.

Mr Speaker, when somebody dies, even though we praise him, he cannot hear, but the most important thing is what we can learn from the life of Mzee Wacha Olwol. First, we must learn that this person was born deep in a village of Uganda, deep in a village in Lango, but he was able to study in Kings College Budo. What is the lesson to us Ugandans now? Do we still have that level of education in the villages in Uganda to enable somebody from deep in the village to join the rest of the rich children of Uganda to study in Budo? That is a question that we have to think about as leaders of this country and as the Government, to make sure we improve the level of education in the country now.

Secondly, the Leader of the Opposition talked about peaceful handover of power. Mzee was 94 years old. Remember, in Zimbabwe, we have a President who is over 90 years old. If he did not want to hand over power, he would still have been in power up to now. It is a lesson to leaders of the country, that when you are in leadership, you have to hand over power peacefully. You cannot finish the work of this world because the world does not belong to you alone. In addition, we are just walking through this world; we are not going to stay in it for ever. Who are we grooming to take over from what we are doing in the country?

Thirdly, what I think is important for us to learn is the national culture of the Presidential Commission at that time. Do we have that in Government now? Do we have a President who is from western Uganda – (Member timed out.) 

4.50
MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to also support the motion to pay tribute to our fallen leader.

Mr Speaker, I am happy that our great leader, whom we are paying tribute to today, shared the same name with our current President. The person lying here was called Yoweri Hunter and our current President is Yoweri Kaguta. My interpretation of this is that the hunter really hunted for freedom and independence of this country. We need to think about how he sacrificed and had a heart for this country. He comes from Lango subregion and I too come from Lango. On behalf of the people of Kole and Lango subregion, I want to say that we have lost a great leader.

As I was interacting with some Members of Parliament, I must say that I realised that history is dying in this country. Some Members of Parliament do not even know the late, His Excellency Wacha Olwol. They were saying, “If we go to the Floor of Parliament today, what would we say? We have nothing to say about the late.” Others were walking away. However, I encouraged some of the Members to attend plenary and I told them that you never know, leaders come from different parts of this country and the same leaders will be brought to Parliament and people will talk about their legacy.

Mr Speaker, the most important thing is how someone lived and how the person ruled. The legacy that you leave behind is the most important thing. Again, to my dismay, some leaders outside there and our own children do not know history. They are learning about Vasco da Gama, Speke and Burton, among others. If you ask some of us to tell you the name of the first president, the second, the third and the current President of Uganda, most of us will not be able to say a word, just like our children now.

If I may ask the Ministry of Education and Sports, is the ministry no longer teaching the history of Uganda in the syllabus? In those days, you used to teach these things, like the honourable member for Kanungu was trying to explain. I do not hear about them now and that is why the late was not known by most of the people in this country and especially the young generation. 

Mr Speaker, something must be done to revise history so that we know –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, remember you have two minutes each. I will go to the Member for Kwania. 

4.54
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late H.E. Wacha Olwol.

Mr Speaker, Wacha Olwol is a true hero of this country for all the good things that he did and that have been mentioned by the Prime Minister. Wacha Olwol loved peace and unity. He loved people and he loved this country. That is why he preferred to live a simple, humble and quiet life. We have paid tribute to people in Parliament here who lived lives full of controversy, lives that were not peaceful and that did not unite people, and even when they are dead, controversy, disunity and divisions continue. 

For Wacha Olwol, his legacy of unity and peace is following him even in his death and I know it will continue even when we are laying him to rest. That is one legacy that he has left that many people should remember. When you live by the sword, you die by sword but when you live peacefully, even when you die everything will be peaceful. I believe this is important.

Mr Speaker, we are talking about history and recognising former leaders. In Uganda, it is only the negative part of a leader that is promoted. It is only that negative part of the former governments that are talked about. The good parts are not talked about. This is what is promoting division and tribalism and making uniting this country become very difficult. Let us change and begin to promote the positive aspects of former leaders so that we can be able to unite people because there is no leader –(Member timed out.)

4.56
MS PAUL AMORU (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Dokolo North and on my own behalf, I am humbled to join the House in paying humble tribute to the great leader. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to highlight two areas, which I think are important lessons that we can pick as a Parliament and as a country. One is that today, we are witnessing an eloquent illustration of the significance of history or record keeping. I think it is an opportunity to reflect on the important events that have shaped the history and the future of this country. That is why you have heard that many people, including leaders, did not know much about the events that are very key and central to the destiny of this country.

Mr Speaker, in 1980 I was not yet born but I am attempting to reconstruct –(Laughter)– I was thinking aloud. I was reconstructing the events of that time and from what I have read, Uganda was facing uncertainty. We had just come from a protracted struggle and there was disunity, pain and hatred and we were looking for leaders who would help us to transit. Our elder made it to the –(Member timed out.)

4.58
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Otuke, I would like to say sorry for the loss of our father. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to say that in terms of sports, if Wacha Olwol was an athlete, I think we would group him under people like Kiprotich, an Olympics gold medalist. The Acon who is standing here, my story will come later in a short time.

Mr Speaker, in our country, we always remember people for just 10 seconds and after 11 seconds, they are forgotten. I would like to say that in order to remember the history of someone, we need to start speaking engagements. That way, we can bring the story of someone who has done an extraordinary thing to light. 

As I speak, many Members of Parliament and Ugandans may not know me. In 1990, I became the first Ugandan to win a gold medal without shoes. Now the United States of America invites me to each and every state for speaking engagements and my history is being written in the United States of America but not in our country. (Applause) I would like to say that Wacha Olwol should be put in the books of history of this country –(Member timed out.) 

5.00
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the people of Kioga and on my own behalf, I grieve with the family, the people of Lango and Uganda at large upon the demise of our grandfather, the late President Wacha Olwol. 

Mr Speaker, like it has been said, indeed Wacha Olwol was a decent civil servant. He was meticulously clean, both in character and body. Indeed, he became a role model. He served with integrity and there is nowhere in our records that he grabbed any property for his personal benefit. He was able to ensure cohesion at a very difficult time when he was one of the titular heads of state. 

There are a few observations I would like to make. Mzee Wacha Olwol and two others were presidents in 1980. However, for a very long time, legal opinion that was advanced by the Attorney-General was to the effect that they were not. I remember when hon. Ekemu was Attorney-General, he clearly stated that these people were not heads of state. Probably, the only person who knew they were heads of state was Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. 

This lack of knowledge on the part of the Attorney-General was despite a clear provision of Legal Notice No. 5 of 1980, which stated that they were heads of state - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We need to come to Ajuri to wind up the debate. Please wind up the debate in three minutes.

5.02
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, I rise finally on your list to pay tribute to Mzee Wacha Olwol, as he was fondly called. 

As highlighted by my colleague, Legal Notice No. 5 under which Mzee Wacha Olwol and his two colleagues served this country in 1980 is very clear. There is no doubt, as it was decided in Constitutional Case No. 1 of 1979, that a legal notice has the force of law. Therefore, there is no doubt that Mzee Wacha Olwol and his two colleagues were Presidents of Uganda. If there is any Ugandan in doubt, then he should come to us. Young as we are, we have read the history of this country. 

Mr Speaker, let me say that in 1980, at a time when, in my honest opinion, lawlessness reigned supreme, when the hopes and aspirations of the people of Uganda on issues of governance and leadership dwindled at a very fast rate, when duty called under that legal notice and when appointed by the Military Commission, Mzee Wacha Olwol and his two colleagues selflessly offered themselves with dedication to provide leadership to this country. We need to give them credit for that. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I would like to emphatically say that in Wacha Olwol you would see an accomplished civil servant or public servant. Let me refer to him as the encyclopedia of public service in Uganda. There is no other vocabulary I can use. 

Mr Speaker, I know many young people have been wondering who this man was. Legal Notice No. 5 of 1980 vested in the titular heads of state powers, privileges and prerogatives that are enjoyed by the incumbent President and former Presidents of Uganda. These three were equally sworn in, in the way we witnessed in 2016 President Museveni getting sworn in by the Chief Justice of Uganda. Even after swearing in, they signed the oath book ordinarily signed by the President after he or she is sworn in. That is a very brief history I can put forward to support –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. On that note, honourable members, let there be no doubt that the late Wacha Olwol, the late Nyamuchoncho and the late Musoke were collectively Heads of State of Uganda for the period they served. In fact, anybody doubting that would have no basis in anything except an opinion that should not be respected.

An issue that has been raised, which we have actually studied closely, was whether these payments that were made should have been made again. The Constitution was passed and it provided some limitations under the transition provisions. Laws were enacted after that, like the Presidential Emoluments Act, which provided limitations. The only avenue that was possible at that time was for the leaders who were alive to be paid what is called ex gratia and that was done.  

When we looked at the law again, we found that under the Presidential Emoluments Act, cross reference is made to the parliamentary emoluments payments law that requires consideration for such leaders, when they are alive, to be treated by a resolution of Parliament annually. When this matter came up, I called a meeting and the Minister of Public Service and people from the Office of the Attorney-General were there and we had this dialogue. 

The intention of the law then was to limit the way in which all those people before the 1995 Constitution accessed money from Government. That is why these particular provisions were made. The reason we used to make the latest resolution that was passed was that they were three in one, so when one is alive, all of them are alive. Therefore, the benefit that accrues to any one of them accrues to all of them because they have families. Therefore, because His Excellency Wacha Olwol was alive, the other families could benefit. That is why the resolution sought Shs 1.2 billion for the three families. That is what was passed and subsequently to be handled in accordance with the way that the Government will deem fit. 

That is the background to this and let there be no other discussion about this thing. The matter is settled and this money should be paid, Mr Prime Minister. It is proper to do the right thing under the law.

Honourable members, Wacha Olwol closes a chapter of history. This debate is one of the debates I have enjoyed. I am not debating now but concluding this particular item. (Laughter) Wacha Olwol closes a chapter of a period that this country should not forget. 

What the bringing up of the three people as presidential commissioners demonstrated was that Uganda had become completely ungovernable and it could not be managed by one person. Therefore, they had to source three strong people, including Wacha Olwol, to guide the country. The others were Justice Musoke and Justice Nyamuchoncho. The three of them provided guidance on what should happen next. It had become too much for an individual; the interests were too divided for an individual to bring together and thus three people were brought together and they guided this country. 

By the time they were becoming joint presidents, so many people had become presidents and gone too quickly. A statement is made about Lule, for example; he was 68 years old and he ruled for 68 days. (Laughter) That was too short a period but that speaks of the history of this country. 

Therefore, when we talk about Uganda today, we must not lose sight of how far we have moved from 1980 to date. We should not lose sight of that. It does not matter what we are talking about but we must remember that we have been in some places where things were tough and we are where we are because of the cumulative work of all responsible citizens of this country that have brought us this far. Therefore, let us celebrate where we are. 

In the passing of His Excellency Wacha Olwol, we are now awake. If he was to write a book, he would write a very good book because he lived for a long time under the colonial government and also under post-independence.

I thank you for the spirit of this debate but we must not lose sight. Like hon. Komakech quoted me, I said we must use our past as a resource for investment in our future. We must not discard it because it informs how we take decisions and how bad things can get. We know this because if Uganda was a human being, it would be full of scars from head to toe –(Laughter)– but it is not. Therefore, sometimes we forget the scars, which is unfortunate. May his soul rest in peace.

Honourable members, I now put the question to this motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to His Excellency Yoweri Hunter Wacha Olwol, and particularly that Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the loss of His Excellency Wacha Olwol; secondly, that it takes cognisance of the services rendered and contribution made by His Excellency Wacha Olwol to Uganda; third and finally, that this Parliament collectively prays to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved and grant our departed elder, statesman and friend, Yoweri Hunter Wacha Olwol, eternal peace. That is the motion.

I now put the question for the adoption of this motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Regarding other matters that have been raised, what we normally do is to capture them in the minutes and forward them to the Prime Minister; for example, the issue of the schools and all those things. Part of the minutes will be extracted and submitted to the Prime Minister for further consideration and processing. Thank you.

East African Community Anthem

National Anthem

(Exit of the late, His Excellency Yoweri Hunter Wacha-Olwol)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. I would like to take this opportunity to recognise those who I had left out - the hon. Emily Otekat and hon. Florence Ibi were also in the VIP gallery. Thank you for coming.

Honourable members, thank you for making the time to be here. As you are aware, plenary has been suspended for purposes that we all understand but now let me communicate that we will resume plenary on Tuesday to handle the business that is pending before us. However, this special sitting is now adjourned. Thank you.

(The House rose at 5.19 p.m. and adjourned to Tuesday, 9 May 2017) 
