
Thursday, 8 May 2014

Parliament met at 3.14 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the Vice-President and Members of Parliament, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I request you to join me in welcoming our guests in the public gallery; they are members of the Kakamega County Assembly in Kenya. Please stand up; you are welcome. (Applause) They are led by their Speaker, Mr Morris Buluma.

Hon. Members, I appeal to you to come to Parliament tomorrow so that we have a special sitting to pay tribute to the late hon. Elinathan Bisamunyu, former Member of the Legislative Council, as well as the First and Second Parliaments of Uganda. At that time, he was a representative for Kigezi in the present day Kabale. And the last time he was here was on the day we had a special sitting to commemorate the Golden Jubilee of Uganda’s Parliament. He was up there in the gallery. 

So the body will arrive here at 10.00 O’clock and lie in state until 2.00 p.m. when we shall come in to pay tribute to him. So I ask all Members to come and we do the needful despite it being the end of the week. He really deserves a good send off.

Hon. Members, owing to the amount of work we have, I will give Members time next week for their private business. For now, let us proceed with the Order Paper.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.17
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Madam Speaker, I guess today the statement is on Members’ iPads.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I have confirmed that it is there. (Laughter)

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: And I will read from my own. 

Madam Speaker, the Uganda Registration Services Bureau (URSB) established by an Act of Parliament and Government last reviewed fees for the celebration of marriages in the Registrar’s Office in 2005. Whereas fees for the registration of Muslim marriages has never been revised since 1906 despite the continued growth in the cost of service delivery, civil registration in Uganda remains largely donor-funded and driven whereas the responsibility of registering births, marriages and deaths that occur in Uganda is vested in the state under Article 18 of the 1995 Constitution of Uganda. 

It is out of the monies that URSB remits to the Consolidated Fund that we envisaged Parliament to apportion the bureau funds to efficiently and effectively discharge its marriage registration function, including but not limited to the production and transmission or delivery of the marriage registration material. 

The adjustment of fees is reflective, therefore, of the high cost of production and distribution on the market. The revision of the fees was guided by the feedback from our autonomous survey and comparisons of charges for marriages that occur in other establishments in the jurisdiction.

URSB as created by the laws of Uganda is mandated to evaluate from time to time the practicability and efficacy of the relevant laws and advise Government accordingly. URSB is mandated to charge fees for some of the services performed by the bureau.

The statutory responsibility provides efficient marriage registration services. The adjustment in fees is reflective of production and distribution of marriage materials, collection of records, maintenance of civil register, provision of conducive environment, including marriage rooms to enable celebration of marriage under the civil registry, inspection of facilities to enable celebration of marriages under the Marriages Act in other places more easily accessible by the public.

When you compare with our neighbours: In Rwanda a civil marriage costs approximately 50 pounds equivalent to Shs 209,250. This compares favourably with the revised fees. In Tanzania, a civil marriage fee there is approximately TShs 47. There is a fee of approximately TShs 22,000 for the entry into the register for marriages and an additional TShs 7,000 for the international marriage certificate. This sums up to about Shs 117,000. Marriages in the Registrar’s Office in Kenya cost KShs 2,000, equivalent to Shs 59,450. A special licence costs an additional KShs 6,250 to waive the 21-days’ notice whereas gazetting a venue costs the additional KShs 10,000. However, it is important to note that the Kenya Law Reform Commission is revising Kenya’s marriage laws. There is Marriage, 2013 Bill which also gives their cabinet secretary authority to prescribe fees.

Nonetheless, Kenya ranks higher than Uganda on the index of socio-economic development and has a less degree of dependency on donor-support to finance civil registration in the country whereby charging lower fees does not render civil registration sustainability vulnerable in Kenya.

Faith-based organisation vis-à-vis civil marriages

Generally, for mosques and churches, the marriage fees range from Shs 200,000 to Shs 800,000. Civil marriage in the Registrar’ Office currently costs Shs 200,000 for Ugandan citizens with the provision under the various marriage laws for the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to reduce the amount of the fees prescribed when he or she is satisfied about the poverty situation of the parties. For non-Ugandans, the cost of a civil marriage in the Registrar’s Office is $150. 

It must be reflected that the increment in the fees for the celebration of marriages is only limited to marriages celebrated in the Registrar’s Office. Charges for the marriages in mosques and churches are not fixed by the URSB; the aforesaid are required to remit Shs 35,000 only being statutory fees for marriage registration. It is worth to note that for the faith-based organisations, the increase in fees is only by Shs 10,000.

Need to harmonise marriage registration fees

The resolution to revise marriage fees was spurred by the need to foster the spirit of non-discrimination based on religious affiliation as enshrined in the 1995 Constitution of Uganda, through harmonisation of marriage registration fees for the Hindu and Muslim marriages with the Christian and civil marriages.

There have been press reports about the increment of marriage fees and were clarified on the 29th of April. The fees as amended by statutory instrument No.22, 23, 24 and 25, which came into effect on 10 March 2014 as gazetted under volume C7-No.14 of the Gazette. And as mentioned above, the increase that affects faith-based organisations is only by Shs 10,000 – from Shs 25,000 to Shs 35,000.

It is worthwhile to note that for Muslim marriages, the fees were last reviewed in 1906 whereas for civil marriages, the fees were last reviewed in 2005 despite the continued growth in the cost of service delivery.

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Members, you had wanted to know why the minister was making it difficult for people to get married but he has explained that the increment is only Shs 10,000. I think Members are satisfied.

3.25
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Civil marriage is really supposed to be accessed by everyone and an increase of Shs 10,000 is not just “only” as the minister mentioned. This is because that is an equivalent of $4 and every shilling counts.

Madam Speaker, the people in Agago who would want to marry by way of civil marriage are not going to afford that amount. I will give you an example: Just three or four weeks ago, one of my voters who comes from Patongo sub-county complained to me that he wanted to get married but Agago District was not on the map –(Interruption)

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rose on a point of order. Is it in order for the Member who represents Agago to tell this House that someone who was in need of getting married found the fee a hindrance when he is going to feed a family? Is it in order for her to support someone who cannot afford Shs 10,000 to marry? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Franca Akello, what is the cost of a chicken in Agago? (Laughter)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, that question is very difficult to answer because the cost of a chicken ranges from Shs 5,000 to Shs 10,000. But the point I was making is that Shs 10,000 is not little!

But secondly, I was giving information that my voter came to me particularly to complain about the Uganda Registration Services Bureau who told him of the increase of that amount, and also that the chief administrative officers are supposed to get these forms from URSB and most districts do not have them. So even if you have money, my district, Agago, will not be able to purchase or a voter will not be able to buy it because he has to go through the district.

THE SPEAKER: Then you should be asking the minister to make sure that the forms go to the sub-county but not to say that it is too expensive for Agago. I know the Agago people.

But hon. Members, do we really have to spend much time on this?

3.29
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support registration of marriages and it is very important, particularly to peasant women. When we were going around explaining to the public about the marriage Bill, we found that most of the women were not married – in legal sense – because they were just living together without the marriage being registered or even dowry being paid. And we were saying that they could go to the sub-county and have their marriage registered so that they can have a certificate to show that they are married.

Most men do not want to spend money in that respect. So this increase in fees is a good thing but it also has a disadvantage to the peasant women. In Bugiri, Shs 10,000 is a lot of money to the peasant. (Interjection) Yes, we may sit here and think it is not; please look at this through the eyes of the peasant man. And I think a majority of the women in this House who represent peasant women should be opposing this because the men – 

THE SPEAKER: Will you take information?

MR OGUTTU: From a woman, yes.

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and the Leader of the Opposition for giving way. The Leader of the Opposition talked about Shs 10,000 being a lot of money and yet culturally people pay dowry in millions of shillings. So if somebody is able to pay millions of shillings, why not pay that Shs 10,000? And you are all aware that we are now looking for money through all means because the donors are pulling out. Why shouldn’t marriages contribute to our national budget?

MR OGUTTU: Madam Speaker –(Interjection)– from another woman? Yes. (Laughter)

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. I am a woman MP for Iganga District which is mixed and near Bugiri and I also worked in Bugiri for seven years. I know the Bugiri men and I know – (Laughter) - Yes, why am I bringing that background? I know they are very hardworking people because part of the rice consumed locally in Uganda comes from Bugiri. So when you talk about the rural community not being capable of affording Shs 10,000 then it means even you as the Leader of the Opposition are not doing enough to empower them.

So we know that our people are capable of paying at least the Shs 10,000 or even more. So can you please join our wagon so that the registration can be carried out?

MR OGUTTU: Thank you, honourable ladies for that information. But – 

THE SPEAKER: There is another woman seeking clarification. (Laughter)

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to be clarified on whether it is Shs 10,000 or the increment is by Shs 10,000. We are adding Shs 10,000 to a figure to make it Shs 35,000. So I want to be clarified whether we are talking about Shs 10,000 or an additional Shs 10,000.

MR OGUTTU: Members, the figure is being increased by Shs 10,000 to Shs 35,000. But I would like to appeal to the Members: How many marriages are registered in your constituencies even at Shs 25,000? There are few marriages which go to churches or mosques in our society today; majority of the marriages are move-in or cohabitation. So my appeal to you is that we should make it easy for peasant men to register their marriages –

THE SPEAKER: There is a point of clarification.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I want to seek clarification from the Member. He says that most of the marriages are “come and we stay together”. I represent Isingiro County North and I know a greater part of where I come from; people go and introduce and are officially married. He should clarify to this House which majority of the people he is referring to – is it those in Bugiri because it cannot be the whole country? 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the whole idea why people introduce is to show that they are able to live with the wife and look after children. What group is the Leader of the Opposition speaking for in this House?

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude; I think we are taking a lot of time on this.

MR OGUTTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What I am talking about is what I have seen in the villages of Uganda and particularly the areas of Bugiri and Busia, which I am familiar with. Most of the marriages in our villages are not registered. And they are not registered partly because of ignorance and partly because of costs. You are compounding the problem by increasing the fees and I have stated it here that you are disadvantaging peasant women since they will not be in registered marriages. (Interruption)

MS LUMUMBA: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition for giving way. Madam Speaker, let us not make politics out of everything. This is something the rural women need more than men because culturally, it is we, women, who get married to you, the men and it is we who need the document to show the public that I am married to Mr Lumumba. What is currently happening is that the registration is not done at the sub-county. If this money is meant to simplify life for the ordinary woman – to have the registration office at the sub-county, it is the more reason I urge the Leader of the Opposition to support it so that the rural women you are talking about can have a document to show that they are married. After the cultural marriage, we should go for the registration so that the women can get their security.

MR OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, I want to make it clear; I am not opposing registration – I support it 100 percent but I am asking that you make it simpler, easier and cheaper for the peasant men to register their marriages. Since you are making it more expensive, therefore, they are going to dodge registering these marriages. And I want to tell women Members who represent other women that it is in your interest that registration of marriages is made cheaper. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we do not need to take too much time on this matter. The question was whether the minister had increased the fees and he has explained it. If you feel it is too high, bring a motion to reduce the fees here. Let us move to the next item.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE HIV/AIDS PREVENTION AND CONTROL BILL, 2010

Clause 41

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 41 be part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Kenneth Omona): Madam Chair, clause 42: Offences relating to breach of safe practices of HIV prevention. We propose deletion of the entire clause because there are already standard procedures regarding all safe practices or procedures, which are intended to prevent other diseases or this condition being attended to. And we think that there may not be a need to single out HIV.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, there is a proposal to delete Clause 42.

MR KAFUDA: Thank you, Madam Chair. From the beginning, we came up to say that we really want to protect the HIV patients. And during our amendments, we stood as a House and agreed that these people should not be discriminated against. And my concern was that we should not specify the HIV/AIDS as a disease to be –

THE CHAIRPERSON: What are you addressing? What part of the Bill are you addressing?

MR KAFUDA: The same issue, Madam Chair. I am supporting the deletion and I am trying to justify.

According to the Penal Code, clause 171, it says: “Any person who unlawfully or negligently does any act which he or she knows or has reason to believe to be likely to spread the infection of any disease dangerous to life, commits an offence and is liable to imprisonment for seven years.”
So my issue here was not to single out HIV/AIDS because it is already catered for under the Penal Code. So we should delete that clause in order to protect the HIV patients.

Madam Chair, if we go on with that clause then it means that what we have been doing is nothing because people will not go for HIV testing. That is the justification I wanted to give.

MS SANTA OGWANG: Thank you, Madam Chair. As I was reading this Bill, I thought clause 42 would handle people who transmit HIV unintentionally. I will give an example: In the case of murder, you can do it intentionally or unintentionally and there are different punishments for the two. And here in clause 41, we have given punishment to those who transmit HIV intentionally; but what about those who do it unintentionally? For example, I have not tested for HIV and yet I am positive then I go to transmit it without knowing that I am HIV positive. But at the end of it, I am taken to court and it is proved that I transmitted the virus unintentionally. I thought this was covered by clause 42; where are we going to handle such a problem? Won’t it create a lacuna in the law, Madam Chair?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, we have covered that; this provision relates to wilful – it means that you know and you are doing it intentionally.

Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 42 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, Clause 43: Penalty to offence relating to obstruction. We have proposed deletion of the entire provision because this provision is overly broad and many of the penalties are already catered for here. And we think that passing it in this form may lead to likely abuse since there are other clauses that talk about offences and penalties. So we think this is not necessary, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you sure? There is no offence for obstructing or preventing the implementation of this Bill? What problem do you have with that?

MR JACOB OBOTH: Madam Chair, I agree with the committee chairperson’s proposal. In view of the fact that every offence created in this legislation has a punishment; now we are creating, in clause 43, an offence called “obstruction”. It is quite a good proposal but without other details, it might be difficult to implement it. What is obstruction here? In law, the word “obstruction” is clearly known. Would we take the same obstruction here without giving details and yet the construction talked about is that, “A person who obstructs or prevents any activity related to implementation of provision of this Act in any manner commits an offence and shall be liable for a fine of not more than 240 currency points” – that is Shs 480,000 – “or imprisonment for a term not more than ten years or to both”?

Madam Chairperson, the offence of obstruction here is quite broad and I share the same fear of the committee chairperson. We have defined it sufficiently enough to punish those who will be breaching the provisions of this law under the relevant sections but not this general provision. That is my thought, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does the mover have anything to say about that? You are okay?
Okay, hon. Members, I put the question – yes, hon. Aleper and hon. Ababiku? 

MR SIMON ALEPER: Madam Chair, I tend not to appreciate the point that was raised by my brother. When you talk of “obstruction”, this Act contains a number of provisions and we have been talking about research, counselling – Now, given a scenario whereby under this Act, somebody is due to carry an activity related to research or to counselling and then somebody comes up to stop that person from carrying out that activity, where do we bring that punishment? And yet this particular clause provides for a penalty for a person who intends to interfere or even to stop somebody from carrying out what this Act provides for. 

Probably, I would think that we should be arguing about the term of ten years – I do not know the basis of the ten years. But we could reduce that term but at least this provision carries a lot of sense because we could deter people who may interfere with the provisions that are in this Act relating to counselling, testing – for example, if somebody goes to interfere with the health workers when they are testing others. So this particular provision deters those people from obstructing that activity.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chair. Before the committee chairperson moves the amendment to delete this clause, I need some clarification about the original intent of this provision.

Secondly, as legislators, our interest is that after approval this Act should be implemented. And when I relate to this “obstruction”, my imagination is about any obstacle that will hinder the implementation of this Act.

Lastly, we are talking about prevention and control of HIV/AIDS and this has got many complaints and we have to ensure that all what we approve here is binding. Otherwise, my interest is that they should provide more information or build this point so that this Bill, after its approval, is implemented and not just shelved. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I want to give you an example of something that happens in our society. One day I went to hon. Kabaale’s area to a town called Idudi and then the citizens brought me some children and said, “Madam Speaker, we want you to solve a problem here; these children belong to a sect called ‘666’ and they do not allow education, immunisation and a bath.” Suppose you have a chairman in a village who says, “In this village, nobody will take HIV drugs,” isn’t that obstruction?

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, I take the concern of hon. Ababiku but if it was possible for me to re-play hon. Oboth’s contribution, he said that in general law, there exist penalties for offences of obstruction. And as it is in the draft here, it is very broad; like when it talks about “obstructing in any manner.” I think this is very broad, just as we said in the amendments.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is a question of evidence, honourable members - 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, the example coming from the chairman is very relevant but that is not exactly what could benefit those children. We have such people either in Mbale and other areas including a few of them in Tororo. We could make a specific provision, but this one “a person who obstructs or prevents any activity” – the first victims will be ministers of Government; the second group – it is easier said than done. You cannot make a law that cannot be enforced. 

But if we intend to have a lacuna like the chairperson is saying, then we can have a specific provision that focuses on those culprits who prevent children from getting those services under this Act. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I only brought that as an example which I know about on obstruction of Government services: no education, no immunisation, no ID cards, no registration. 

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Looking at Clause 43, hon. Oboth’s first worry was because obstruction had not been defined yet we know that when we make a Bill, the definition comes later. So, I buy the idea of my sister to retain this clause because there are people who might obstruct the implementation of this Act when it comes into law. So we think that since hon. Oboth is a learned person, he will help us to define this. 

MS GALIWANGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I also propose that the clause remains because it is said here “people who obstruct or prevent.” If we cannot define “obstruct”, at least we can define “prevent”. So whoever prevents any activity that is related to the implementation of this Act we have. We have other clauses. Someone might want to stop the implementation of any of them, and should such a person get away with it? This person is liable to conviction. So I propose that the clause remains to defend the implementation of this Act. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. We keep making this point that the reason why we have this Bill in the House is because of the gravity of the problem we have, and we are trying to make sure that we go an extra mile to fight HIV/AIDS through prevention, treatment and all this. 

So I do not think that this clause is harmful to the Bill. It actually helps us to stop those who are discouraging the implementation of this Bill. So if the problem is the definition of “obstruction”, then we can define it and be specific in the interpretation clause. But let us go an extra mile to make sure that those who want to discourage the implementation of this Bill are stopped. Thank you. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, clause 43 is a very interest clause. We have people who have opted to stop HIV positive patients from accessing drugs. A guy goes on the radio and says, “Please, do not take the drugs; prayer alone will help”. And yet we know in science that there is no way this disease can go even when you are on drugs, it remains there, but you do not transmit – it becomes lower when you are on drugs. 

Madam Chairperson, I want to urge my colleague the chairperson of the committee on Health, that for purpose of making sure that we call to order those people masquerading in medicine, who say they are giving soil to treat HIV - those ones are there in villages. I heard one in Sembabule; that you can take chicken soup and the virus goes. This is the law that will catch them! 

If you stop someone from taking drugs by convincing him yet you know you are wrong, it means you are killing this person for life - even ten years is not enough! 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, join me in welcoming in the gallery students of Maganjo Institute of Career Education from Kyaddondo County North, Wakiso District, represented by hon. Kasule and hon. Seninde. You are welcome! (Applause) 

Honourable members, is the chair still insisting on deleting this clause?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When hon. Oboth insinuated that when we pass this provision, ministers might be the first victims was somehow basing on the fact that since this is a Private Member’s Bill, therefore, you can find a minister obstructing and preventing it. 

I want to inform this House that Government and the Ministry of Health is embracing this Bill and we are participating in this Bill. Therefore, do not be worried that you will find a minister who is supposed to implement an Act of Parliament, who is a Member of Parliament either as ex-officio or a full member from a constituency obstructing it. So I urge Members not to worry about passing this Bill, and I would like to request that the question be put on this provision. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question – 

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, you can advise on this. We are talking about penalty for offences relating to obstruction: “A person who obstructs or prevents any activity relating to implementation of this Act, in any matter commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine of not more than 240 currency points, or to imprisonment to a term of not more than ten years or to both.” 

Let us just propose this with the provision of the Penal Code on sabotaging Government programmes. Now, if we have a provision in the Penal Code of sabotage of Government programmes and already penalties spelt out, are we intending to make another provision with another penalty? Otherwise in the way hon. Bitekyerezo explained, if it is a question of misinformation it is covered under 44; if it is a question of obstruction, it is covered under the Penal Code. So I would think 43 is redundant; unless you advise to the contrary. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I wish you could stop sending the population on fishing expeditions. You want a peasant in that village where we went with you, in Pader, to first check here and then go to the Penal Code and then go to the Electoral Commission – what are you doing? These laws are not for us; they are for the people of Uganda; they should be accessible. 

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, I concede but there are already offences that we passed yesterday and looking at the penalty here, it is so big compared to other offences that we have passed –(Interjections)– I concede, but I just wanted us to amend the penalty downwards. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, having had Government assurance in this matter that there will be no obstruction and prevention and having known that – the penalty, Dr Omona, is very minor; I think we retain the Bill as it is. 

THE CHAIRPRESON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 43 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 44

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, Clause 44 has a title, misleading information or statement and one says: “All statements or information regarding the cure of HIV shall be subjected to scientific verification.” I am not sure what we mean here. The cure of HIV – HIV is a virus. I think we should make a law which is very clear. If I have information on HIV as a virus on its forms and how it looks like, which is different from what you know, I do not think you should incriminate me for that. Besides, if there are new findings on HIV and it is written in Red Pepper and other papers –(Interruption) 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, I want to inform hon. Anywarach that the cure or treatment of HIV has to be scientifically proved. However, we have some people who go and make concoctions which are not scientifically proven and they are making lots of money from our people in the villages. And because there is no law to catch them, they continue like that. You cannot base on merely reading a newspaper because it might be a tabloid. What is binding is scientifically proven drugs that can be given to people. By the way, there is no specific cure for HIV I say that as a scientist. We only have drugs that can bring it down and you have a prolonged life and you can die of old age. Even the capacity to transmit it can go very low; the viral load becomes very low if you have used very good methods. But the cure is not there for now. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I hope that you have been living in this country. Do you remember somebody who was living on Masaka Road serving soil for a cure – she was called Nanyonga. And people were paying for that soil. And in the Seventh Parliament, there was an Arab man, Madiana, who was serving salt; and people were paying Shs 2.0 million per dose until this Parliament exposed him and he was deported. But he had made so much money. 

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I support this, but I think we need to capture more. If you look at Clause 44, I wonder where we are going to put the media houses. Many herbalists go to radio stations and advertise their drugs. They sell jerricans of herbal water and people are buying. So are we targeting the media houses that advertise them or are we targeting only those who sell?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, there is Clause 44(2) which says, “Publication of statements or information referred to under subsection (1) shall be attached with both evidence of pre and post HIV test results”. That is enough. 

MR ANYWARACH: Dr Biteks, personally, I have no problem with the framing of this section, especially (1). But if we intend to have a legal target that we intend to have, then we should make it clear. Is it the cure of HIV; because HIV is a virus. 

And the other issue is, there are so many scientists fighting: Prof. Luc Montagnier of the Centre for Disease Control has his own understanding of HIV/AIDS. A man who used to work with him, called Peter Dasburg, also has his own information. Now, all these are scientists. That is why we have in The Red Pepper, sometimes they write that there is a new hope for a cure of HIV where transplant of bone marrow may lead to a cure. The next time they say there is new hope of use of Marijuana. 

So I propose that if we want to talk about HIV, we should not talk about that and instead talk about the AIDs component. We say, all information regarding the cure of AIDS – and we leave HIV out of this; so that we are clear. And say: “Shall be subjected to scientific verification.” Otherwise, HIV has been debatable and research is still ongoing. So we need not to curtail the hands of our researchers down in Masaka. 

DR TUMWESIGYE: I want to thank the honourable member for giving way. I want to improve on his formulation. There are people who have HIV infection but who have actually not developed AIDS. So we can just say, “HIV infection”. 

I also wanted to correct the impression that Luc Montagnier is from Centre for Disease Control. I believe he comes from Pasteur Institute in France.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, is it okay to amend as the minister has proposed by adding the word “infection”? 

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, I want to thank hon. Anywarach for the proposal he has made. If you look at 44(1), this statement is misleading because what we cure is not HIV; we cure the condition. But I want to correct hon. Anywarach that AIDs can be cured; AIDs is a condition associated with a certain complication of infection of HIV. So you can cure AIDS. 

So I agree with the proposal by hon. Anywarach that we amend this to read that, “All statements or information regarding the cure of HIV infection shall be subjected to scientific verification.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 44 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OTADA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The term, “Scientific verification” is very important and I thought that it is important in circumstances of both cure, prevention and control. When we only talk about “scientific verification” under (1) and we restrict ourselves to a cure, how about the popular campaign about circumcision that it prevents HIV infection. Is it scientifically proven; and if it is, why don’t we capture it under (1). Such that if that campaign of circumcision is going on, it must be scientific. 

So, why are you, Mr Chairman, restricting yourselves to scientific verification for only the cure and not prevention and control? I want you to think about that.

DR OMONA: Thank you, hon. Otada. If you proceeded with the reading, and see 44(3) it also mentions prevention and control. Particularly on the issue you are raising on circumcision, just like it is put here. Every scientific verification goes through a number of processes, a number of research protocols and the results are peer reviewed before the researchers can publish. 

In the case of circumcision, this research was done in Uganda here and a number of researchers have done it and there have been a lot of co-studies. Results have been published. They also state clearly the percentage of risk reduction in transmission of HIV as associated with circumcision. 

So this does not talk about a cure. In this, we may not capture every research done. Every day, there are researches done; but every research goes through verification. So we may not be able to state all the verification processes of research. But what we know is that, every research which is published has to undergo all those processes and we may not list all those here. But what we are emphasising here is scientific verification. 

If your concern is about prevention, hon. Otada, 43(3) captures the issues of prevention as well. 

Madam Chairperson, I do not know whether it is already passed. But it would cause no harm if in clause (1), we added HIV infection /AIDS because all these are related and they all need scientific verification. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Yesterday, when we were discussing Clause 40, many Members rose up to discuss the issue of medical practitioners who give false results. So, I thought this would be the clause where we could include that because we have seen many clinics giving false HIV results. 

If you recall, the undercover report from The New Vision did provide that information. So I want to propose that we add under four to state that, “A medical practitioner or any other qualified medical officer who gives false HIV/AIDS results to a client commits an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine of not less than 500 currency point or five years imprisonment.” That is my proposal. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us deal with the first amendment. I put the question that clause 41(1) – 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, hon. Otada has made a point that why should we emphasis cure alone in (1). Why can’t we, for example, say that all statement of information regarding the prevention, cure and control of HIV/AIDS infection shall be subjected to scientific verification? If you talk only about cure, it is as if prevention is not subjected to scientific verification; let us do that to be comprehensive. 

DR TUMWESIGYE: Madam Chairperson, whereas I understand the reasons behind trying to add prevention and control to this, I think the spirit behind this clause was mainly for people who declare that “Now, I have a cure for AIDS” and they make money. If we add control or prevention will dilute this particular clause; it will also unnecessarily put a burden on Government to provide scientific verification on other control measures. So I plead that we leave this to cure – (Interruption)

GEN. KATUMBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Even on prevention – we have heard statements like, “When you are a man and you go for a virgin young girl, you do not contract HIV.” That is a statement that must be scientifically proven. So I think prevention should be included. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: In addition; one day, one of our colleagues informed us that if you sleep with a pigmy, you do not contract HIV. 

DR TUMWESIGYE: Madam Chairperson, I understand and I can concede as far as prevention is concern; we can say, “Prevention, treatment and cure.” But when you talk of “control” it includes so many other things. Control is so huge and very difficult to determine. 

MR OKOT AMOS: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want some clarification on this statement, “HIV infection”. It appears so broad because when you say, “HIV infection or AIDS” and you require proof - you know the symptoms that follow HIV and AIDS, and somebody can cure diarrhoea and cough which are related to HIV infection. 

So to me, this part of the clause is misleading. People normally take it literary. When you go out there, somebody says, “I have a drug that can cure AIDS”. People think the virus will be removed from the body and not just that particular disease mentioned. So at this point if you bring in, “HIV infection” someone may say, “Yes, I cure diarrhoea” and that will dilute all meaning. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, honourable members, why are you wasting time. I think we have agreed that we need to include the amendment of hon. Otada in 44(1). 

Okay, I put the question that Clause 44(1) be amended as proposed by hon. Otada. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a new clause - 

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, if we are suggesting a new clause, I think the suggestion by the honourable minister should actually be a stand-alone clause. Here, we are looking at misleading information or statements by non-professionals. Now, we could bring a stand-alone clause by professionals and non-professionals. 

However, what she was trying to suggest is a new sub-clause under clause 44 and I think that we could put a new stand-alone clause that must penalise medical practitioners who give falsified information. That should also go up to professional negligence of people because I am looking at a situation where somebody comes up with falsified scientific findings; debatable, detestable but insists, gets through Government and then begins - God should forbid, I am giving an example of circumcision -

THE CHAIRPERSON: But it is still misleading information. Hon. Members, I put the question that a new clause be created as proposed by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 44, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 45

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 45 do stand part of the Bill.

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In clause 45 on general penalty, we propose that we substitute the currency points and years of imprisonment with 48 currency points and two years respectively. This is because we think this should provide for a lesser penalty because we think the one provided here is too harsh.

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Chairperson, I seek further clarification from the chairperson on clause 45; general penalty. I am not convinced that we need this clause. I believe that whatever is necessary has been covered in all the clauses. Why are we bringing in an element where it will be upon someone’s discretion to say “Okay, this was not covered and therefore we are going to use it against you?” I am not comfortable with this clause, Madam Chairperson, because I believe that we have covered many of the clauses that need to be covered and people may hide under this and bring in any new element.

MR KAFEERO: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. I think the argument by my colleague, hon. Ssebagala, does not hold water because science is not as static as history. It is actually dynamic. Things keep changing all the time so there can be new discoveries, which are not captured as we speak. If something like that comes, it can only be taken care of by this very clause. So we should retain this clause.

MS NINSIIMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When I look at 43, we are talking about obstruction and preventing any activity related to implementation of provisions of the Act. In 45, we are again talking about a person who contravenes the provisions of this Act and giving the specific penalties for that. Don’t you think they are related? In my view, I think this one is a bit redundant since we already have a penalty for that under 43.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, I think the intention was to cater for offences that are not known.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, the guidance you are giving is actually what I wanted to say; that when you are making a law like this one, you never know what could really come out when the matter is in court. So it is a general principle of legislation that you make and this was the earlier position I had but this general provision gives the cover. The only disagreement I have with Dr Omona is about reducing it because you never know what kind of offence it is and what it will attract. So why do you want to reduce? Leave the clause as it is.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, hon. Oboth. I want to support what hon. Oboth is saying. When you look at clause 20(2), we actually passed this and it is on confidentiality of test results and counselling information. It says, “A person who contravenes sub-section (1) commits an offence” but there is no penalty there. So the other general clause could cover such and others that may not have specific penalties. Thank you.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, can you give me the opportunity to get information from the chairperson before I conclude? Hon. Dr Omona was giving me information.

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, I was actually giving the same information that the hon. minister has already provided to hon. Oboth.

MR KAKOBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The information I wanted to give is actually what hon. Oboth has talked about. My issue was on reducing the penalty. I do not think we should do that because it talks of “Not more than”. This means it could be less than that. I do not see what the chairperson is worried about.

MS KATAIKE: I also want to join the majority that we retain this as our point of reference for any new situation which may come up if we cannot defend it. Our lawyers are always smart and they will ask us to refer so I would rather we retain the section containing the general penalty.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 45 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, on clause 46; exemption to question of a risk, we propose to substitute for the words “The provisions of this part” appearing at the beginning of the provision, the words “Sections 39 and 41”. The justification for this is just for specifics.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So what are you proposing?

DR OMONA: If amended it will read, “Sections 39 and 41 shall not apply to any transmission of HIV by a mother to her child before or during the birth of the child or through breastfeeding.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 46 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 46, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 47

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, in clause 47; laboratory analysis, we propose to redraft the entire sub-clause (1) to read as follows: “(1) A medical practitioner or qualified officer who takes biological samples or specimen from persons in discordant relationships or from a person who will test positive initially and later test negative shall forward a sample to the Ministry of Health laboratory for authoritative confirmation.” We have done this also for clarity and specifics.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 47 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 47, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49, agreed to.

The First Schedule

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the First Schedule – 

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, (a) we propose to insert the words “Third Schedule” on top of the words “Informed consent form”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are handling the First Schedule. Do you have an amendment on the First Schedule?

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, I am sorry. We have no amendment there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the First Schedule do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

First Schedule, agreed to.

The Second Schedule

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Second Schedule do stand part of the Bill. Is this form part of the Second Schedule? It seems the form is part of the Second Schedule, isn’t it? So you can submit your -

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, I do not know where but somewhere as we were looking through the draft, we had proposed an amendment so that it is chronological. If you look here, we have the First Schedule then it jumps to - okay, we have the First Schedule, the Second Schedule and the Third Schedule. So I think, Madam Chairperson -

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is no Third Schedule. That form is part of the Second Schedule.

DR OMONA: Yes, Madam Chairperson. We had already made that amendment earlier on to call that Third Schedule part of the Second Schedule.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chairperson, I think there was a typographical error. That form should be the Third Schedule because it is different from the Second Schedule, which is “Universal precautions”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Hon. Members, I put the question that the Second Schedule do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Second Schedule, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now you can move your amendment.

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We had actually referred it somewhere to call this informed consent form the Third Schedule. On this schedule, we propose to insert the words “Third Schedule” on top of the words “Informed consent form” appearing on page 25 of the Bill and thereafter, effect the following changes in the informed consent form.

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Regarding the informed consent form, there are situations when the person who is being tested is in a coma so I feel that we should add, after the name of person, name of guardian or parent. This is in case the person who is being - or next of kin. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Isn’t it under (11)? Doesn’t it fall under (11)?

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, you proposed rightly. If you look at paragraph (11) of the Third Schedule -

MS KABAALE: Madam Chairperson, it is there on (12).

DR OMONA: Yes, it talks about the concern being raised by hon. Kabaale.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that the contents of page 25 become the Third Schedule. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Third Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now we can go back to the clauses.

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, I thought the amendment we made is to call that the Third Schedule but the amendment that you have proposed is on the Third Schedule. 

We propose to amend paragraph 9 as in the Schedule which reads, “Date of discussion with the medical practitioner”. We propose to insert the words “Or qualified officer” after the words “Medical practitioner” to ensure that there is consistency in the usage of this phrase, which we already had in the past Bill.

In paragraph 10, we propose to delete this entire paragraph because we feel it is redundant. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that the Third Schedule be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Third Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, we can go back to the clauses, which we stood over.

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, I beg to be reminded by the chairperson. I propose that we come back to clause 2, which is the definition clause.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We will do that last.

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, yesterday, on clause 13, which is on HIV testing for purposes of criminal proceedings, in our amendment we had proposed to rephrase the head note and the entire provision of this clause.

We had proposed that clause 13, with the amended headnote would read, “HIV testing of persons charged with sexual offences.” We proceeded to say, “A person who is charged with a sexual offence shall be subjected to HIV testing for purposes of criminal proceedings and investigations.”

This was the amendment that the committee had proposed and Madam Chairperson, as I said earlier, this requirement to carry out HIV testing during criminal proceedings would only be necessary in sexual offences with direct link to HIV transmission like rape, incest and defilement.

Two, it would not be necessary to carry out HIV testing on a person who has already been convicted as this would amount to discrimination. It would instead help for purposes of prevention because conviction comes later than the 48 hours required to give somebody post exposure prophylaxis so it would be for the purpose of controlling HIV.

Madam Chairperson, this was our proposal. There were debates on this and there was a proposal by the learned colleagues in this House that it should not be charged because to charge somebody might take long. Charging may take place a day or within some hours but amending it to read as, “A person who is arrested for a sexual offence shall be subjected to HIV testing for purposes of criminal proceedings and investigations.” This is where we ended, Madam Chairperson, before we stood over this clause.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, what would happen to convicts engaged in acts of sodomy?

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, this would still be very relevant. In this case, if this act takes place, what should be done to protect the hitherto uninfected partner would be to have compulsory or mandatory testing of HIV for both of them.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, you said that it is not necessary to test after you are convicted. That is why I am asking you, what would happen if convicts engage in acts of sodomy?

DR OMONA: You are right, Madam Chairperson. I think the purpose here should state the point at which contact is made with the person involved in this act. It should not necessarily be conviction or a charge or arrest.

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. We are on clause 13 where HIV testing is for purposes of criminal proceedings and the chairperson has amended that it should be for sexual offences only. I recall a recent situation that occurred around Mulago where a nurse attempted to infect a child. In case the nurse had infected the child, not sexually but by injection, where would we put such a situation? Thank you.

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, the example you gave is very crucial and I would think if this read as, “A person who is apprehended for a sexual offence…” because apprehension here can occur even when somebody is already convicted or not convicted or charged but taken or suspected to have gotten involved in this kind of act. I think this would serve the purpose of this Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So what is the amendment you are making?

MS KABAALE: Madam Chairperson, you moved a very serious concern that supposing the offence occurred in prison, where do you put that? Because the chairperson is amending the criminal side of it but supposing the person is in prison and is raped, how do you consider that? That is the clarification I am seeking. Thank you.

DR OMONA: Thank you, honourable. I take it that even inmates are not insulated from offences. They can still commit more offences but for the purpose of this clause, Madam Chairperson, if it is okay and reads well, I would amend to have it read, “A person who is apprehended for a sexual offence shall be subjected to HIV testing for purposes of criminal proceedings and investigations.”

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When my sister hon. Kabaale was raising the issue of a prisoner committing more offences while in prison, specifically she was talking about - because I asked her - the prevalent problem of sodomy especially in Ugandan prisons like Luzira and others. How can this law help people who are incarcerated in those prisons not to fall victim to that practice? That is the issue and maybe the chairperson could help us.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Actually, when you read this statement, which is trying to isolate and talk about sexual offence while leaving the others out, this might not necessarily serve the purpose. This is because sexual offences can also be catered for elsewhere and also in (14). My thinking is that if we are to leave sexual offence, then we might as well leave injection drug abuse and others because there are many people who are taking young people, introducing them to cocaine, taking money from them and eventually even transmitting the virus to them. 

So in case this clause is to remain, then it should not apply only to people with sexual offences. Rather, it should also apply to - okay, sexual and criminal is okay.

MR KAKOBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I tend to agree with the chairperson because much as we have cases of drug abuse and all that, eventually what it turns out to be is a case of sexual offence. I do believe that with his formulation, the amendment can take care of even those who are in prison and practice sodomy because even if you are convicted, if you commit another offence, you can still be apprehended and it will take care of that. Basically, there will be court so I do agree with the chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 13 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 28

Part 6; HIV/AIDS Trust Fund

DR OMONA: Thank you. Madam Chairperson and honourable colleagues, you may recall that yesterday, the Chairperson directed that we consult and nominated hon. Members with whom we should meet. I want to report that among the Members that you nominated, hon. Mwiru was not available as he travelled out of the country. His Excellency, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya was out of reach and we could not get him. Those of us who were around; myself, the chairperson, the vice-chairperson of the HIV/AIDS Committee and hon. Kataike, the former State Minister for Health and now Minister of State in charge of Luwero Affairs met.

We met for close to two hours and as I report, the contention that exists is where to house the fund as you had directed. The meeting concluded that we ask you for more time so that we can consult and we will report to the House on Tuesday. The reason for consulting is that we are looking at already existing institutions as proposed in the amendments. We had Ministry of Health and then there was also a proposal to have it housed in the Uganda AIDS Commission. 

What this small group wants to look at are the existing institutional frameworks within those institutions so that we can ably and confidently report to this House where we would propose this fund to go. If you do take this, we request that we report to the House on Tuesday.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, that clause is deferred for further consultation. What was the other one? We also asked you to look at how we shall input into the Finance Bill; the source of money is also attached to that part.

Clause 28, stood over.

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, we will comprehensively look at that amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We cannot complete until we have finished.

DR OMONA: There was a proposal yesterday and you had asked that we draft something on clause 29 (3) where we are talking about ethical regulations and we had to specify the regulations as prescribed by whom.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But there are other proposals that came in during the debate about other definitions. So, why doesn’t it also be deferred to Tuesday so that you – because it was adding the health practitioners and a number of others. There were like three or four definitions.

DR OMONA: Much obliged.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we defer it also until Tuesday to report on those bits.

Clause 29, stood over.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Madam Chair, among the terms of reference that this committee is going to be looked into – I know very well that we passed that this money should go to HIV testing kits and treatment or at least we did indicate the purpose to which we are establishing the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Did we?

DR TUMWESIGYE: Yes, we did talk about HIV testing –

THE CHAIRPERSON: You mean we have tied it to particular activities only? I think that we just debated and did not take a decision. 

DR TUMWESIGYE: That is why I am raising to say that they should critically look at what that money is going to do because that also has an impact on where the fund should be housed. You know that there is a debate whether that money should only go to drugs and HIV test kits or should also go to other interventions like behavioural mobilisation and others and this would help the House once they come out with a proposal on what the money should be ring fenced to do. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, you can also pick up the report of the delegation that we sent to Zimbabwe? Use that as part of your working documents and report on Tuesday. So, please move the House to resume. We cannot do interpretation today as it is the very last.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.57
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Medard Bitekyerezo): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.57
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Medard Bitekyerezo): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The HIV Prevention and Control Bill, 2010” and has passed clause 41 with no amendments, has deleted clause 42; passed clause 43 without amendments; passed clause 44 with amendments, passed clause 45 with no amendments; clauses 46 and 47, clause 49 passed with amendments and clauses 13, 27  and 28, Part 6, have been stood over for purposes of looking for the source of money and Clause 29 (3) has also been deferred so that we can look at ethical regulations. Schedules One and Two have been passed with no amendments and the Third Schedule passed and amended and put on top of the “Informed consent for”. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.59
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Medard Bitekyerezo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Members. Let us go to the next item.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP BILL, 2012

THE SPEAKER: The Minister for Finance, move your Bill for the second reading.

5.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I need to make sure that my chairperson is around before we consider the Bill.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “Public-Private Partnership Bill, 2012” be read the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded, members of Cabinet? The Bill is not seconded? It is seconded by four members of the Cabinet.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, the Bill entitled, “Public Private Partnership Bill, 2012” is certainly a very important one to this country and it is well over due. 

The objects of the Bill are as follows: To consider PPP agreements; it will also consider the functions of the contracting authorities, accounting officers, project officers, project teams and evaluation committees, the role of the private party in the PPP arrangement, the management of PPP contracts or projects, project inception feasibility studies for the PPPs, disqualification of bidders and evaluation of PPP bids, PPP agreements and monitoring of projects implemented under PPP, bidding methods, procurement procedures and related matters. 

Madam Speaker, there are certain guiding principles that must be followed when enacting a PPP law and one of them is that there must be a clear project definition and the project size and complexity are very important. Not every project can lend itself for a PPP arrangement and therefore, those are some of the considerations because the private sector demonstrates innovation, initiative and expertise in providing certain services and infrastructure. That there must be a competitive private sector market and PPPs therefore, require the private sector market to be capable of responding to the identified needs of the Government.

There has to be value-for-money achieved. Value-for-money is the ultimate test of any project that is implemented under PPP arrangement. I want to put a rider here that value-for-money does not necessarily mean the lowest price. The project must demonstrate best economic advantage to improve effectiveness as well as efficiency in service delivery. 

What is also very important under the PPP is direct transfer allocations of risk to the party or parties that are well placed to mitigate or manage those risks. There are certain risks that are best managed by the private party or sector while the government retains control and assumes the responsibility of certain risks. A typical example is that the design and construction risk is moved over to the private party and that includes the cost and completion time of the project. 

There is also the financial risk where we have fluctuations of interest rates, inflation, operation and maintenance which are best managed by the private party. The procurement process must be very fair and transparent and for that, projects have to have what is called a comprehensive preference cost. 

There must be a signed contract in place between the government and the private party for any PPP project to succeed. The contract should identify roles and responsibilities of the parties. The contracts must also be well drafted by experts and managed throughout the relationship between the private party and the government.

Last, but not least, there is a need to effectively communicate to the public to understand PPPs. Communication must be planned and carried out as an integral part of the management process. 

Madam Speaker, some of the benefits to be derived from PPPs are as follows and in many countries, particularly developing countries, Uganda inclusive, financing needs for current and future infrastructure projects normally outstrip the resources available to government and hence budget constraints and acknowledgement that private parties are more efficient and have the knowhow in also managing some of these risks. This is one of the reasons why governments around the world are resorting to PPPs.

Madam Speaker, Uganda has lagged in that because there are a number of countries that have enacted PPP laws and they have worked extremely every well. Just to mention few of the countries; we have South Africa, Malaysia, some EU countries, United States, Singapore and many others. I am very sure that many honourable colleagues have been to many of those countries and you have seen the state of the infrastructure in those countries. Most of that infrastructure is in the hands of the private sector.

Therefore, one of the benefits of PPPs is that there is improved quality and quantity of infrastructure, construction times are reduced tremendously and are normally within budget because that risk is entirely assumed by the private sector. 

In PPP structures, that transfer of risk is what causes the private party to perform. The private party will only realise its investment after the project has been completed and is performing very well because that is what is imbedded in the performance contract.

There is also the evidence that there is better quality in design and construction under the PPP compared to the traditional procurement system. I would like to briefly define what we mean by traditional procurement system: this is where the government borrows money from the World Bank, ADB or any other financial institution, advertises through an open tender for those who are interested to undertake infrastructure, such as, a road and the contracts are normally for two to three years and after the completion of the construction, the risk is entirely borne by the government. And as such, you can see that many of our infrastructure in the country, particularly the roads, start to fail and the reason is because the government would have already assumed the risk after the contractor has completed. 

But under the PPP, it is a long-term relationship where the private party and the government enter into a contractual relationship for 10 plus or could be less, but traditionally, it is for a long period of time. Therefore, what this means is that if the private party is to maintain that road for 10, 15 or 20 years, the contracting party will do the best to minimise the issues of maintenance or being called upon to come and maintain that infrastructure and that is one of the key benefits of PPP.

It also helps Government to avoid borrowing. Under PPP arrangements, the government does not need to borrow provided the project is commercially viable. Of course, there are instances where a project may not be commercially viable but in the strategic interests of the country, the government will enter into a PPP arrangement.

So, Madam Speaker, the reason I say that this Bill is way overdue is that; the tendency in this country has been that we always borrow for roads, bridges, power stations and yet those are all projects that are commercially viable and best undertaken by the private sector and that is where value-for-money comes in.

PPP methods of procurement of projects are every efficient because as I said before, private parties assume certain risks that they manage better than the government. The private sector is known for innovation and we always give alternative solutions to problems that will arise.

Last, but not least, PPPs are very effective and efficient in creating that conducive working relationship between the government and the private sector and as you know, the economy of the country is private sector led and we have, as a country, lagged behind in inviting private parties to come and undertake implementation of strategic infrastructural projects in this country. Those are a few of the highlights as to why we feel that this Bill is very important. 

I know that it is a technical Bill and therefore will invite Members to read this Bill so that you comprehend what provisions we have put in the Bill to have a law that will stand the test of time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much. The Chairperson.

5.11
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Anthony Okello): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to present the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Public Private Partnership Bill, 2012.

Introduction

The Public Private Partnership Bill, 2012 was read for the first time on 19 February 2013 and referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for scrutiny. The committee has, in accordance with rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, scrutinised the Bill and now presents its findings to the House.

Methods of work

THE SPEAKER: That one the members can read.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: You can read the methods of work. But, Madam Speaker, what I want to emphasise here is that the committee also undertook a benchmarking trip to Malaysia and South Africa to study the legal and institutional framework of PPPs and for purposes of understanding what is happening in the region, we also consulted the PPP Act, 2013 of Kenya.

The objective of the Bill has been stated by the minister and I think that Members can recall that.

Understanding the Public Private Partnership

According to the National Framework Policy for Public Private Partnerships (PPPs, 2010), a Public Private Partnership:
    a) Refers to a medium or long term contractual arrangement between public and private sector to finance, construct/renovate, manage and/or maintain a public infrastructure or the provision of a public service;
    b) Involves the sharing of risks and rewards;
    c) Delivers desired policy outcomes that are in the public interest. Clause 4 of the Bill describes Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) as a commercial transaction between a contracting authority and a private party where the private party performs the function of the contracting authority on behalf of the contracting authority for a specific time period and; (a) acquires use of the property, equipment or other resource of the contracting authority for the purposes of executing the agreement; (b) assumes substantial financial, technical and operational risks in connection with the performance or use of the property; or receives a benefit for performing the function through payment by the contracting authority or charges or fees collected by the private party from the users of the infrastructure or service or both.

Public Private Partnership projects in Uganda

PPPs are relatively new in Uganda. As such, not many projects have been developed in this manner. The following are some of the key projects undertaken under PPP arrangements: 

Rift Valley Railways involved in a concession and operation of railway tracks and wagon ferries in Lake Victoria; management of Kilembe mines; construction of Bujagali power dam; Kalangala Infrastructure Services Project; Electricity for Rural Transformation (ERT) project- Management of power lines and distribution; Nakawa –Naguru housing project; provision of education services (UPE, USE); serviced accommodation for the  Uganda Police Force. 

Key observations on the Bill

Justification for the Bill 

Despite the existence of the policy, the implementation of PPPs projects in infrastructure development, for example, energy, transport and concessions of assets in energy, transport, water and tourism, without a clear legal and institutional framework has led to adoption of ad hoc processes and responsibilities thereby leading to mixed results.

The committee recommends that PPP legislation should therefore:
    a) Provide legal capacity for public bodies including local governments to enter into PPP contracts. 
    b) Create more certainty and investor confidence. 
    c) Streamline the institutional framework for the management of PPPs.
    d) Address the overlap and confusion with other laws covering procurement and privatisation.
    e) Overcome procedural, legal impediments, that have hampered the operation of PPPs in Uganda.
    f) Introduce funding for economically viable projects which may not be financially viable without Government support.

Application of the Act excludes Local Governments

Clause 4 defines a contracting authority as a ministry, department of government or any other body established by government and mandated to carry out a public function but does not include a local government. 

The committee notes that this is a departure from the policy, wherein, local governments are recognised as having contracting capacity to enter into public private partnerships. 

Secondly, under the Local Government Act, the powers assigned to local governments include, (a) making local policies and regulating the delivery of services; and (b) formulating development plans based on locally determined priorities.

With this understanding, local governments have direct responsibility in implementing the policy since they are mandated to deliver services and, to some degree, provide infrastructure to their residents. 

Furthermore, the committee is aware that the ministry of local government has developed PPP guidelines for local governments in line with the policy and these are being used by some local governments especially in the operation and management of markets.

Since 1997, the main challenge to the decentralisation policy has been the financing of projects to deliver better infrastructure and services to the citizens. The committee is convinced that local governments are essential in designing, constructing, maintenance and operation of infrastructure or services that are developed in their areas of jurisdiction. 
Therefore, PPPs would provide an opportunity for local governments to achieve initiatives unique to their areas of jurisdiction such as working on community roads, valley tanks and dams, agriculture, forestry, among others.

The committee recommends that clause 4 be amended to extend the application of the Act to local governments.

Institutional framework for managing Public Private Partnerships

Under clause 12, the Bill envisages the creation of a department in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the purpose of managing the PPPs. However, the bureaucracies and well known inefficiencies in the public sector, may affect the effective operation of PPPs. PPPs are driven through having a quick responsive relationship when dealing with the private sector. 

The committee recommends that the envisaged institutional framework for the management of PPPs in Uganda needs to be revisited. The committee proposes that a PPP committee be established to formulate policy guidelines and ensure that all projects are consistent with national priorities. This PPP committee would consist of the permanent secretaries of the ministries responsible for Finance, Lands, Office of the Prime Minister, local governments, the Attorney-General and four persons from the private sector.

The PPP committee would be supported by a PPP unit within the Ministry of Finance to serve as a secretariat and technical arm of the committee, as well as provide technical, financial and legal expertise to the committee and contracting authorities. 

The committee further proposes that in order to avoid conflicts with other departments within the ministry, the Permanent Secretary shall, in consultation with the Public Service Commission, make rules for the administrative and financial framework of the unit as well as the relationship of the unit with other departments in the ministry. This arrangement creates the required efficiencies, accountability, quick enforcement and effectiveness envisaged in the National Framework Policy.

The committee recommends that new clauses establishing a PPP committee as well as a PPP unit be introduced as part of the Bill.




The role of Parliament

The committee notes that the Bill is silent on the role of Parliament in the development of PPPs. PPPs have a potential risk of creating future contingent liabilities and in most cases, involve implicit financing like guarantees, subsidies, tax waivers or incentives.

The committee, therefore, recommends that clause 18 be amended to provide for the approval of Parliament to be sought before an accounting officer signs any agreement. This process ensures that proposed PPPs are affordable, provide value-for-money and commitments arising thereof, are within the debt management limits and above all, are consistent with national budget and policy priorities.

Project development facilitation fund

The PPP project process is very complex and involves the use of substantial resources. The process involves identifying projects with PPP potential; structuring and appraising feasibility studies; designing PPPs contracts, conducting competitive PPPs procurements and monitoring and enforcing PPP contracts. 

The feasibility studies act as a basis for initiating and negotiating PPPs, as well as offering guidance on processes on competitive bidding, evaluation and negotiations between the public and private sector entities. These are very expensive studies and in absence of funding, cannot be undertaken. 

The committee notes that most contracting agencies cannot afford resources to conduct reliable feasibility studies, undertake evaluation or preparation of bid documents and, where required, the hiring of consultants. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that a deliberate project development facilitation fund be created. The fund will be used to support contracting authorities in the preparation stage of a project, the procurement processes and project appraisal and also provide a source of liquidity to meet any contingent liabilities arising from a project. The funds may also be used to settle scores for the transaction advisors. Experience shows that these scores are very high, Madam Speaker.

Traditional public procurement methods

The committee observed that the procurement of Public Private Partnership projects shifts away from the traditional conventional approach of procurement. In fact, the policy recognises that PPP will be used alongside conventional public expenditure and funding forms to achieve new investments in public services. 

The key difference between traditional procurement and PPPs is that PPPs require the use of an output specification by Government to describe the output the private sector must provide as part of the complete service, whereas conventional procurement involves the procurement of distinct elements of a particular project through an input-based specification. The table below presents the major differences between conventional/ traditional and PPP approaches. 

Conventional procurements are funded directly via public budgets; PPPs are funded via private financial resources without public sectors explicit guarantees. 

Conventional procurements take short term designs and contractual contracts of two to four years; PPPs are one long term contracting integrating design, building, financing and maintenance.
 
Conventional goes with input based specification; PPP is  output-based specification. Conventional has immediate impact on public sector financial position; PPP has impact on public budget spread over the duration of the concession.

Conventionally, government retains all of life asset risk; PPP, the private sector retains all of life asset risk.

Conventional has extensive public sector involvement at all stages of the project life; PPP’s public sector involvement is through enforcement of pre-agreed key performance indicators. 

Conventionally, handover qualities are less defined; PPP ensures end of term handover quality is defined.

Conventional is applicable for projects with high socio-economic returns and those justified on strategic consideration; PPP is applicable for projects with commercial viability.

Conventionally, government is usually liable for construction time and cost overruns; under PPP, private contractor is usually liable for construction time and cost overruns. 

Conclusion

The committee notes that public private partnerships are a strategic tool for economic development. While the public sector is accountable for ensuring that the public services get delivered, it is not in many cases the best service provider in terms of cost, quality and ability to manage commercial rates. 

PPP offers better value for public money. Rather than simply cut back on these services in the face of budget deficit, the government can work with the private sector to transform the way such services are delivered and reduce on the financial burden.

PPPs help Government shift the risk and falls of operating expensive assets on to private sector operators who have the capacity to operate those assets more efficiently and effectively. This allows Government to focus on its core competencies of delivering public services. However, PPPs are not without significant challenges.

The committee notes that the following are prerequisite for an effective PPP agenda:
    a) A supporting and enforceable legal and regulatory framework, for example, there should be respect for commercials laws. These improve predictability for all parties as regards to likely outcomes thus augmenting investor confidence.
    b) Clear-cut institutional roles and responsibilities which minimise confusion and promote efficiency. 
    c) Quantifiable economic benefits arising out of the PPP over weighing the financial cost and accruing to the majority of Ugandans. 
    d) Consistent government policies to ensure viability. The government system of budgeting should be clear and transparent to avoid buyers towards public private partnerships.
    e) Efficient, effective and coordinated PPP processes. These are around the project circle that minimises transaction costs.
    f) Existence of strict astounding practices strictly for Public Private Partnerships that are consistent with good governance and international accounting standards. 

The committee recommends that the Public Private Partnership Bill, 2012 be passed by Parliament subject to those amendments. I beg to report. 

May I now take the privilege to lay on Table the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Public Private Partnership Bill, 2012? Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

In addition to the report of the committee, allow me lay on Table the following:

    1. Reports of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on a benchmarking trip to Malaysia to study the legal and institutional framework of PPPs in Malaysia. 
    2. A report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the study tour to South Africa to study public private partnerships.
    3. The PPP framework policy and also remarks by hon. Gabriel Ajedra, the Minister of State for Finance in charge of Investment at the retreat that the committee had on this Bill. 
    4. The Kenya gazetted supplement No. 27, the PPPs Act, 2013 and;
    5. The minutes of meetings of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development while considering the PPP Bill. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Chair, and the members of the committee. The report has been signed by at least 13 members, so it is eligible for debate. Hon. Ababiku, three minutes. 

5.33
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker for this opportunity. As the Ministry of Finance is represented, there is this recommendation that a deliberate project development facilitation fund be created. It reminds me - and I am sure also the other colleagues - about our resolutions to create special funds. So, I request the minister to tell us why the establishment for a special fund whether abroad or otherwise has not been well implemented. Funds have not been got for the desires for which the resolutions were made.

Secondly, we are very good at making shifts where we have challenges but on this, I need to really be convinced and guided. The chairperson and the minister emphasised so much the failure of the traditional methods of procurement and this is an inside administrative challenge and many of the issues which we have shared in this House have been on signing of MOUs. Now that we are going into partnership with the private sector, as Government, how far have we prepared ourselves so that at the end we won’t enter into risk ventures where the country will pay highly? There were issues of Umeme and this House has heard about them. So, we need that guarantee before we approve some of these things because where we fail, we normally shift – 

I can cite the example of where we have many authorities because many sectors have failed. So, those are the two areas I have concern over. Thank you. 

5.35
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I wish to thank the minister and the committee chairperson. I agree with the committee and the minister when they say that PPPs have got advantages such as transfer of risks, innovative designs, thrill of public funds for other purposes and so forth. But we will appreciate, Madam Speaker, that PPP is a rather new phenomenon in this country and the relationship between the government and some private companies that the minister cited is limited to concessions. Actually, he errs when he says there is a PPP arrangement where a private company is going to construct housing for policemen. That is not true. This project has not taken off merely because we do not have an enabling law and the minister should know that.

I would like to cite certain disadvantages that while we are right on this law, we should be careful about the following. In my considered view, we might stand out as disadvantaged for which we have got to plug the loopholes. Backdoor borrowing where the cost is born by the public - implementing a PPP programme could be considered as back door borrowing where the public may not be getting a good deal.

There is also increased financing cost, Madam Speaker. When we ordinarily borrow from agencies or banks, for example, the government - you know the interest on our borrowing is low. In the case of PPPs, we are going to deal with companies that must make profits. They may not even have adequate financing for the projects that they would seek to undertake and therefore they are going to go to banks and borrow. So, as we make the law, we have got to tread very carefully in order not to make mistakes.

The other one is inefficiency especially where we have technocrats who do not pay attention when drafting agreements. This may prove very costly to us as a country. I would like to propose that to avoid ambiguity, we define the scope of PPPs very clearly in particular in terms of the type of contract to the sector. We should not jump for PPP to fulfil certain political pledges just for the sake of it. We have got to properly select which sectors we feel are priority sectors in this country and therefore need financing. We also have got to review the project sites. Where we feel, as a country, we can go about and juggle around with a project by our own financing, there surely should be no need for us to enter a PPP arrangement.

We need to set our precedent right. Value for money; we have to be sure that whatever is being put on ground is something that we can see as giving returns for the money that is put in. There must be competition; not just taking in every Tom, Dick and Harry because without this, we would not be able to get a good deal. 

There should be transparency. I believe that if we pay very special attention to those areas in writing this law, it is going to make all of us proud. I thank you very much for this time, Madam Speaker. 

5.40
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by thanking the committee and the minister for moving the motion and seconding it. This is a Bill that we have been crying for as a country which can take us very far. As the minister noted, it will really help us as a country to avoid this kind of borrowing  that has made us unsure of how much and how far we have really – I can say mortgaged this country and with many other advantages that the minister mention.

But, my worry goes to what the chairman reported - he made mention that there is need to include local governments which are about 112, which I am very happy about. But, we know what happens in local governments; even just creating district service commissions many times causes us problems. So, I want the committee or the minister to clarify on whether – because the minister talked about the exercise which will come in – do we have this exercise at the level of local governments which helps us ensure that the country is safe – because this will involve a lot of signing contracts? We have seen problems in this Parliament whereby many contracts have been signed more so by technical people including the Attorney-General and so many other people but many contracts and agreements have gone bad for this country. So, how sure are we that in this case we are safe? 

More so, we have 112 local governments and all of them - because I sit on the Committee on Local Government Accounts and all of them may begin running for this kind of arrangement. What criteria do we have to say that district A should not sign for this contract; district B should not enter into PPP? What criteria are we going to use to choose the districts that will enter into this contract because most of them, if not all of them, will enter into this contract and I don’t know what it will mean for this country? 

In addition, if we say that these districts are going to enter into this, as a Parliament, we need to approve it urgently for that matter. I do not know whether we are going to create another committee or a select committee which will be responsible for these many other PPP approvals because Parliament is going to approve and all these local governments will be interested - the government agencies, the ministries; how ready are we as Parliament to also engage in this or should we wait or should we do our oversight roles or should we also meander in all stages? That is another dilemma that I want clarification on before we go into passing this law. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.38
MR FRED EBIL (UPC, Kole County, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank Government for bringing this law and I want to thank the committee for producing a good report. Madam Speaker, this Bill shows how far we have come as a country to realise that Government cannot do everything and I want to appreciate Government for recognising that it is time for us to allow the private sector to also participate in infrastructural development and other development projects. 

My worry, as the people’s representative in Kole, is one and I believe the people of Kole wouldn’t allow this Bill to become law without putting forward their views or their fears. Their fear is that Government has always had good projects but the only problem is corruption and this corruption is within Government itself. So, our fear is how are we going to prevent this good project from failing due to conflict of interest and probably the same people who are in that select committee or people who award some of these projects being owners of the companies or shareholders in the companies which will be awarded? This is the only problem as we would say and it may frustrate this good idea that Government has come with. I thank you very much.

5.44
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I must congratulate the committee and Government for rising up to the challenge, recognising the fact that this is the law that is going to save us. It is the only provision of the law that will help Government have the commercial business orientation. It is the only law that will prevent the issue that we have been crying over, of corruption, where we have big Government undertakings and people mess it up. When you have public private partnerships, it is a guarantee that you have other people who are going to help you. For instance, the issue of Umeme that we just considered a few months ago could not have arisen; even though Government recognises it as a public private partnership, it is not. A scenario where Government undertakes projects without having feasibility studies, this law should cure. 

I agree with the committee’s recommendations to create a PPP unit under the Ministry of Finance. I also agree with the committee in creating a public private partnership committee and Madam Speaker, at committee stage, we shall be able to share experiences in other legislations that are available from other countries and experiences. 

But I want to implore us that this is the right law at the right time. If we are to make any significant progress, we needed this law yesterday. If we are to avoid and fight corruption that we hear of at procurement taking ages because everyone wants to steal money; when you have a private partner to work with, you employ international accounting standards. It is yours but it is ours and the role of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, being aware that this would be a public private partnership –(Interruption)

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the hon. Member. From his submission, he talked about procurement and I want to get clarification from him. Under the PPP, we cannot avoid procurement. How is procurement going to be done because if it is not properly clarified, that is the beginning of corruption? 

The committee has observed that the feasibility studies are very expensive and the projects - when you talk about borrowing, Government will avoid borrowing but the burden will be taken to the private partner. So, I want clarification specifically on that so that when it comes to procurement, it is clear that under the PPP, this is the way we are guided. Thank you so much.

MR OBOTH: Thank you for seeking clarification on issues of procurement. You are right to say that we cannot do without procurement but what we are talking about here, in this PPP proposal, is that the procurement is customised. It is not going to be this lengthy procurement. In fact, this particular law is seeking to amend certain provisions of the PPP –(Member timed out.)

5.51
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson and his team for this precise report. Among the advantages that you mentioned on page 9, the issue of timeliness in doing the work is very important considering the wastage of time that we have seen in the conventional approach. 

But I am a bit sceptical about using permanent secretaries on this committee. These are people who are really very busy. We could bring in more problems and because it is not easy - personally, I have been on committees where we had PSs that you could rarely see. I was a member of the PMA steering committee but you could not easily get a permanent secretary to sit for even once in two years. 

So, we should think about it. This arrangement really is going to save Government a lot of money. We should look at the advantages in terms of what we save and get a committee because it is not about permanent secretaries. We don’t want to pay them; they are already civil servants but if we got people whom we can pay, still the advantages and the money we save is so much that we can be able to fund a committee that is a bit independent and has the time.

The other issue is supervision, which has not been properly mentioned in your report. The issue of supervision throughout the work and even these arrangements that are already in place that you have talked about is very important. We have a market in Lukaya, which is by the road side but it has taken about four years now to complete. It stalled and yet there is nobody who is supervising and someone found out that there is a private person who is actually a big person in the ministry who owns the company that was contracted to build the market. So, we need to have in place a body or a committee that can supervise without fear or favour. Thank you.

5.55
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a good report well presented. I also agree with the recommendations made by the committee. One and most important, was on the local governments. Local governments must be involved directly in this PPP arrangement because you remember we decentralized services; local governments have services, which were decentralized but then the districts have been lacking funds to carry out some of the operations in the local governments.

However, if we involve the PPP arrangement in the local governments, then it means the government is also shifting some burden, which was in the Ministry of Finance in financing certain projects. The local governments can have very good projects like housing because the committee sited the housing project of Nakawa. So, I can go under PPP arrangement and have a housing project in Busia and generate revenue. Therefore, the local governments are going to generate enough revenue to carry out their activities.

That is also just one of them. Maybe even hospitals and also the delivery of services is normally required at the lower levels, which are the districts and the local levels because you do not have them up here. That will help Government to generate revenue because even the local councils need payment from what has been collected as local revenue. So, here, we are going to empower the local governments to generate their own revenue and, therefore, the burden on the central government will be lifted.

I also agree with the creation of the PPP unit to handle all the matters under the PPP and then, also, under the Ministry of Finance, to have a project development facilitation fund. It seems the committee is opting for a private thing, separate from the central ministry itself, which means that the Ministry of Finance is not delivering as it is supposed to do.

I also would like a clarification on the definition of “private”. We are talking about private - are we talking about our own private local companies or we also have a component of foreign private investors – (Member timed out) - just one minute, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MS TAAKA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. If we have the foreign private investors, we also need a strong legal framework to handle such contracts. I also want to know whether BIDCO in Kalangala is also under the PPP arrangement or not. Thank you.
  
5.59
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee. I would like to say that I believe in the spirit of PPP but I also would like a lot of clarity in this matter. 

The committee should have told us what models of PPP we are dealing with. If you are talking about the situation where you are going to guarantee the private sector 100 percent and therefore, no money from the public sector, let us know. If you are talking about a situation where we are going to co-share so that we have a percentage of public funds in that investment and the private sector has another percentage, please, let us know. If you are talking about a situation where you are going to go for a complete concession and then we are guaranteeing the loan, let us know because you can treat all these scenarios as though they were uniform. You will need something different for each model that you are going to adopt.

When the committee argues here that you see, one of the benefits is that we are going to shift the burden from public resources, without telling which models they are going to take, I do not want to agree with them. I know you are going to have a situation where you cost-share if you co-share on a project. Should you co-share on a project, we will require the involvement of public procurement guidelines because our money is there - we will require the involvement of the Auditor-General of this country, because our money is there. That is why the examples quoted in the committee report, to me, are very disturbing. I will tell you we put money during CHOGM on the Commonwealth Resort Munyonyo, Marina and up to today, we are not allowed to audit them but our money is there and the Auditor-General cannot audit our money, which we put in there.

We passed the RVR concession and you know what a disaster it has become. Government went all over the country saying there will be trains in Teso. Up to today, I have not seen one or half a train going to Teso or to Lango. RVR is a disaster – they have ferried all our wagons and taken them to Kenya.

The Bujagali dam quoted here is one of the most expensive dams in the world; so, what type of PPP are we talking about? Pioneer Bus Company - this House guaranteed Pioneer Bus Company to borrow that loan. Now, they are not on the road. Soon enough, the children of this country will be paying some of those loans.

So, the committee had better tell us in very clear terms how we will deal with the audit in this PPP; two, how we will engage in regard to procurement because the essence of the PPP was that we would get value for money, we would also get competition –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude. 

MS ALASO: That we would also get a fair deal but now, in a situation where all these matters have been lumped together, we will do what we normally do as a country: Write a very good policy and implement it disastrously and have no value for our own money. Let the objectives of this PPP be very clear to this country and let us know how we will audit our engagements in the process. Thank you.

6.03
MR LATIF SSEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me, first and foremost, to appreciate the Members on this side have really put in a lot of time in as far as this business is concerned. If you look at the other side and you compare it with this side, we need an appreciation that indeed, we outnumber the other side and that is a very good sign –(Laughter)– even on the front bench -

Madam Speaker, I greatly support PPP but with some questions and clarifications raised. One, our colleagues told us that they went for benchmarking trips to various countries like South Africa and Malaysia. I wanted to know whether in the East African Community, we do not have any country that adopted the PPP some years ago. If we have it, then it was also very important that we compare because Malaysia is miles away in terms of development and in terms of wealth as well as South Africa. So, we wanted to see -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssebaggala, when the chair was presenting, he presented a Bill of the PPP of Kenya; it is part of our records.

MR SSEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. If that was a comparison, I believe that we have a lot to learn from the Kenyan experience as we compare with the experiences from other countries. (Interjections) If the information is on my time, ask the Speaker - (Laughter) - on condition that she allows you.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I am a member of the committee; the information I would like to provide is that PPP is just as hon. Okot said, this is where Government fails to provide a service and is partnering with another entity – it is a global resolution trend - I am happy that hon. Ssebaggala went and trained in PPP in Australia. The PPP in Australia has no difference with the one in Kenya and the one in Uganda because the law matters a lot to work within a frame work. Even if there is a PPP law in Johannesburg –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Kakooza, you are smuggling –

MR SSEBAGGALA: Thank you very much for the information. Madam Speaker, as we try to embrace PPP, we must put into serious consideration, that indeed, embracing PPP does not mean that the government is now going to abandon programmes that they are supposed to do as a government under the guise that now we have the PPP. I will request the minister to ensure that as government, we continue carrying out our responsibility in as far as providing services to our people is concerned.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, Members have been suggesting a unit in the Ministry of Finance; I was proposing that we have a PPP Authority –(Member timed out.)

6.08
MS GRACE NAMARA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion. I thank the committee for this report and secondly, I would like to say that this legal framework should have been in place a long time ago. The committee has brought it out clearly that a number of projects have been going on under this arrangement but without a legal framework in place.

I believe the Nakawa-Naguru project has stalled because of fear, maybe, of those partners that there is no legal framework to protect them and in my opinion, now that this legal framework is going to be in place, the partners will feel protected since there is this clear legal framework in place. 

Secondly, Government has been getting external funds that come with high interest and I believe that once you partner – I mean this legal framework will give an opportunity for Government to partner with local investors – we do have funds here in our country. Government should stop looking at foreign funders in this case and should re-consider our local funders. I do believe in this case that the interest rates or even the risks that come with this will be minimal.

Thirdly, I agree with the committee that local governments should also be allowed to enter into this arrangement. However, clear guidelines should be in place on how to enter into this.

In addition to that, the Ministry of Local Government should strengthen the supervisory role. Otherwise, much as I agree that the local governments should be included, they may misuse the opportunity.

I would like to share one fear that there are a number of projects that have been running under this arrangement; government has lost money under this arrangement under unclear circumstances. Today, it enters into a private partnership with a private investor, the next day you hear that the government has sold its shares under unclear circumstances. That is what –(Member timed out.)

6.11
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. If you want to know the magnitude of PPP, the committee ought to have mentioned the oil sector where now we are in the PPP arrangement, just to show you that it is alive with us and without a legal regime.

Whereas I support this piece of legislation, I expected the committee to have underscored one fact, that we are not ready yet by our conduct and the minister knows this. When you look at the domestic arrears that we have, this clearly shows you how unprepared we are to engage with the private sector and failing to pay them and then, the arrears growing in interest and litigation.

For the local governments, I want us to be conscious about this because again, you know that local governments are dependent largely on the central government. You also know very well that PPPs are not for every project; they are for large projects. I would not want to involve local governments in PPPs where as I support their cause.

Thirdly, I want the committee to point out one international regime, which is called the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, which involves taking the fight against corruption to international proportions. The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1976 prohibits foreign companies from coming to give bribes to people who award contracts and vice-versa. It also provides very stringent measures against the competing companies, which come from a different state and right now, we are talking about 40 different countries, which subscribe to this international law. It requires a leveled playing field for companies to get contracts awarded to them and I want the committee to take note of this very important international piece of legislation. 

Finally, the role of Parliament - I agree with the committee. However, I would like the committee to add the role of Parliament, the role of politicians and the role of politics. Business has a direct nexus with politics and that is why when we talk about a business environment, we talk about political predictability. I think the assignment for us, as Members of Parliament, is to try and legislate a course for this country where it is predictable for an investor to know that today if the NRM government is not in place, there is no disturbance to one’s investments. Usually, PPPs involve colossal investments, which require stable political dispensations to be in place. I support the motion.

THE SPEAKER: We shall have hon. Asamo, Bahati – Yes, hon. Bahati was the first; I had sent him out to do some work for me.

6.15
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to support the motion on the PPP Bill coming to the House. I just have a few issues to raise on which I would need clarification. 

These are big contracts; how much of our local human resource do we use? Do we have the capacity to provide human resource to work in these institutions? I ask this because we might even get human resource imported into the country and our young people will still live without any work. 

Secondly, from the few projects that we already have in the country like the markets, you find that people do not even use those markets. I do not want us to build white elephants. I will give the example of a hospital; the private partner might need to get some money out of this hospital, are we ready for such kinds of environment? Are our people at that stage of supporting themselves to buy these commodities that are coming on board? I think this should also be clarified.

Madam Speaker, you know it is about English - public and private - but we have been having a privatisation policy. What went wrong with it? Why are we now joining them together? Could I learn lessons from this, so that we see how to move forward now?

Another thing I fear is that if this is a shared role between Government and a private person, supposing government fails her part of providing the money to support that project, are we going to stop half way with the project? Does it grow grass?

Madam Speaker, on the issue of local governments, I want to agree that we should involve them but we should identify in which areas. If you need a big chunk of land, for example, you might need to involve the local government or sometimes they also need to supervise. However, they cannot be involved in the nitty-gritties of supporting these big contracts. You all know in Uganda it is about nfunirawa, so I think there is need for us to be very critical when we involve the local governments. What is their role in this? You will find councillors saying, “You know, I am the one who brought you here; I am the one who is in charge of a, b, c, d”. 

Madam Speaker, I want to support the idea but I also want to re-echo the issue of corruption. I hope we will not go and identify the multi-million dollar people and find that behind them, we have the face of maybe a minister, a Member of Parliament or some other politician. We want to avoid the issue of the oil debate which was here sometime back. If this is clarified, I will support the motion. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.18
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I do so because of two points.

In my opinion, the PPP Bill will help us solve one of the challenges that we are facing, the challenge of unemployment. It increases investment in the country and in a way, increases opportunities for business and creates jobs for the young people that we are all looking for.

The second point in support of the Bill is that we are facing a bottleneck in our economy, and that is bureaucracy especially in procurement. On average, to get a serious procurement or investment through the bureaucracy, it takes us almost one and a half years. So, this Bill comes in to solve that problem, to ease the way we do business and also create confidence among the investors that are coming here.

Madam Speaker, I support the proposal by the committee that Parliament should scrutinise these PPPs before government commits itself to them. This is because most of these PPPs are going to create liabilities for us as a government and also as a country. So, it will be unconstitutional for these liabilities to be created without Parliament looking at them because Parliament is mandated to look at the borrowing by government and such issues. 

I really support this motion. This Bill has been long in coming. We hope that it will get out of the way as soon as possible.

6.21
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues in thanking the committee for a very good report. I would like to allay the fears of Members because this law should have come yesterday. It is a very important law that will really change the shape and lives of Ugandans and go a long way in developing our economy.

Hon. Otada did mention the domestic debt – it is actually now standing at Shs 1.2 trillion. This is not because government is not able to pay the domestic debt; it is because government is investing in long-term investments like infrastructure, where you cannot easily see the returns. So, this will go a long way in freeing government from investing in long-term investments and they will now focus on short-term investments where some bit of development or money in circulation can be seen. So, I really support the motion as this law will really develop our economy.

Madam Speaker, Members have talked about this partnership involving local governments and some other sectors. These PPPs are for large projects, which are long term; we are not talking about investing in markets or in small roads. If these partnerships are encouraged or taken into consideration, government will now focus on those short-term projects, which affect the population and not at the long-term and very big projects that need a lot of money.

As we encourage these partnerships, we must also be mindful of the way these arrangements will be managed. We must have very clear rules and regulations. Very many people, mostly international business people, are looking at investing in this sector because this is where they can make money. Government is not required to bring money upfront. So, these investors will look for a very big project where the government is not putting in money and then they will bring their own money. If you are not careful, at the end of the day if you give a project a certain period of time, say seven or 10 years, the investor will say, “I have not been able to reap my money; I need more time.” So, we have to be very careful and mindful of how we put in place this arrangement. (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR MAWANDA: We also must be careful. This is a partnership that actually grooms corruption. Last year, when the European Union was discussing investments, it was observed that more than € 170 billion had been lost through these kinds of arrangement. So, we must be very careful about how we enter into these partnerships. These are very good arrangements but we must be very careful on how we get into them. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you debate also address clause 2 on the application of the Act. It identifies the areas where this might apply.

6.24
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report presented. 

The committee brought out the advantages of the PPP arrangement. This is one of the structural adjustment programmes that the country is trying to adopt and you know that we already have had others before, for example decentralization. Sometimes we do not see or bring out the disadvantages when we are enacting a law of this kind. Wouldn’t it be good for you as a committee to also give us some of the disadvantages associated to this arrangement? This is important because we might get into this kind of law and find problems discarding it.

The committee has suggested that the private sector retains the whole-of-life asset risk. This is part of business. I do not think there is any businessman who can refuse to transfer risks to the consumer, and the consumer here is Uganda and you are part of Uganda. Given that in our society most technical people are dishonest, at the time of billing - maybe during the time of feasibility studies – supposing they over bill? 

You have given us examples of construction of the dams and so on. We have the experience that quantification was not done according to the market standards and they are going ahead. If we go wholesome with this kind of law, are we not going to put our population at a bigger risk than we expect? When you look at the population poverty index of Uganda, for example, this is a developing country, so our population may not be in position to pay back all this money. Somebody may argue that we can take loans, but for most of the loans that we take as a country, the interest rates are so low. (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you so much. My argument is about the loans. Yes, we can take a loan but when you compare it with this capitalistic economy when we are trying to adapt to this position and the profit-making body which these people will reap from us, I think there is a small reservation here that the committee should critically consider. Supposing our population fails to pay back the loan, shall we not mortgage all our social assets? There are some missionary health centres, for example, where some people go and pay for services but our population is so poor now that they cannot manage to meet such costs.

Finally, I would like to request the committee, during their response, to give us some evaluation reports of those projects that have already been taken up. On the point of the involvement of the Parliament, I do support that, otherwise the rest –(Member timed out).

6.28
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for coming up with this report. Before I continue, I would like to state that I am 110 per cent in support of this Bill. It should have actually come yesterday to sort out most of the challenges that the country has been facing in this regard.

I want to agree with the committee’s recommendation on the role of Parliament in approving those transactions before an agreement is signed. My support is based on the experience that this country has gone through. So many officers, including ministers, have fallen victim or have over exercised their powers and in the end led to the loss of colossal sums of money. I think involving Parliament before an agreement is signed will be a check for some of those transactions that went bad. I agree with the committee on that.

According to the latest Auditor-General’s report, it has been observed that we are losing a lot of money in commitment fees because we always approve loans here that are not utilized instantly. There was a loan that we approved in 2009 to construct a power line from Mayuge to Bwondha; to date, there are no poles, nothing has been done and government is silent about what happened. However, this money is already attracting commitment fees and those are charges that we are already paying for. By going through PPPs, I think we shall minimize such costs. We shall be able to tell the contractor the type of project we need in the country and those challenges will be sorted out.

The PPPs will also sort out the issue of infrastructure development. I know that so many investors have expressed willingness to partner with Government to sort out the accommodation problem in the Uganda Police Force and Uganda Prisons Service. The Nsambya Police Barracks, or even the one at Naguru, leaves a lot to be desired and yet a number of investors have been willing to partner with us to put up modern accommodation facilities, but they could not do that without an enabling law. So, I think this is the way to go. 

I would like to appeal to honourable members, who may have reservations with this cause, to join the cause. Let us approve this law wholeheartedly and have these issues sorted out. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

6.31
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for the report presented. I support the motion because I think this Bill has been long overdue.

I have had the experience of working with PPPs because my constituency is largely being developed under the PPP arrangement. We have two major partners. One of them is BIDCO, which is planting palm oil trees. They save over Shs 60 billion, which this country would have spent on the importation of palm oil. We also have another partner called Kalangala Infrastructure Services. This one is developing the islands by providing power to almost every village in my constituency. They are also providing two new ferries; one has already come in and another is being licensed and will be launched in August this year. They have also worked on the roads and extended tap water to almost every village on this island. 

The PPP arrangement is, therefore, a modern way in which Government is doing business to develop the country, so we should support it. However, if it is poorly handled, it can be a very big manipulative tool in which not only the country but also the people could be manipulated. You will recall, Madam Speaker, that in 2004 I tabled a petition here on issues to do with BIDCO. I did this because there was no institution to properly handle issues raised by the people and the concerns of Government with this arrangement. We also did not know much about this PPP until we went to State House and met with the President and the minister. That is where it was sorted out. However, now there is even no institution to do the follow up. 

I will give you an example of one of the issues that came up. In the agreement, it was stated that 10 per cent of the revenue from BIDCO had to be remitted to the district. Now we do not have anybody to follow up on this issue. We do not have anyone to follow up on how this PPP is working – (Member timed out _)

THE SPEAKER: One minute for you because you are talking from experience.

MR BADDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to suggest that this committee comes out strongly to recommend to this House that we set up a strong institution to oversee the activities of PPPs wherever they are and to also follow them closely. The partners we attract are good business partners but they are also capitalists - they are after money and maximizing profits.

Madam Speaker, you will recall that in 2011 I again tabled a petition here about the Kalangala Infrastructure Services because there were so many manipulative clauses in that arrangement. If I had not looked closely through this agreement, we would be like the Red Indians on those islands. This House helped me and we immediately went to the President with about 11 ministers and in three days, about 40 clauses had been amended. I was there. So, we need to work with informed people and a strong institution to follow up the PPP arrangements as much as we support PPP –(Member timed out)

6.36
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Much as my colleague is experienced on this issue, I might need the same time because I also have enough information in regard to the same.

While I support the proposals from the committee, I would like to say that for every advantage, there is always a disadvantage. In most cases, we may not focus on the advantages because they are anyway expected. We need to focus on the disadvantages and see how to avoid the necessary risks involved.

Madam Speaker, as we analyse these proposals, we need to be very clear on what kind of PPPs we are taking on. Are we looking at build, operate and transfer; build, own and operate; build, transfer and operate? Any kind of PPP you take on will either determine the risks in that arrangement or otherwise. 

The other question we have to ask is: do we have the necessary manpower to help Government negotiate the best deals out of these PPPs? We have had examples of very bad deals even with direct agreements. We still have Umeme on table. How sure are we - that is the confidence we need from the committee - that this time round we will get the best agreements out of this?

The other point we need to emphasize is that Government may not have the necessary information on different projects but the private sector always has that information at their fingertips. This private sector, which always has information about projects at their fingertips, will negotiate with Government, which may not readily have the same information; how is Government prepared to match the private sector? If the private sector is more prepared than Government then they will pick the best out of these deals.

Madam Speaker, we also need to be informed on how prepared we are for microeconomic shocks – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: The reason I gave more time to hon. Fred Badda was because he has two PPPs in his constituency. I do not think you have any. (Laughter) Okay, half a minute.

MR MIGADDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I already have one and a second one is on the way.

Madam Speaker, we have had a number of microeconomic shocks in different countries. In a situation where Government enters into a PPP with investors from a country, which later experiences a microeconomic shock, how prepared are we to continue moving on when the investor we partnered with is experiencing such circumstances? How prepared are we so that we are not locked out? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.41
MS SARAH NETALISIRE (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to add my voice to the voices of my colleagues in thanking the committee and the minister for having brought the Bill on the Floor of Parliament.

We needed this law long ago. Instead going for privatization we should have gone for PPPs. I would like to cite the example of Umeme. When Umeme was given this contract, they robbed the country. After achieving what they wanted, they are now selling off their shares. If we had taken the PPP route with Umeme, we would have given the Auditor-General powers to audit both the shares of Government and those of the private investor.
I agree with honourable colleagues that we need this law, first to give powers to the Auditor-General to carry out an audit of the funds from both the private sector and Government. Let me give another example relating to CHOGM. When people like Sudhir were given money to expand their hotels, the Auditor-General could not step in to carry out an audit and recover the money. By the time he was given those powers, it was too late for us to recover the money from Sudhir.

Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with the committee’s recommendation that Parliament gets involved and that Parliament should authorise any agreement. That will help Parliament to have a say in the recommendations we make. I always feel so bad whenever I watch Andrew Mwenda on TV insulting Parliament. He says we have no powers to act and we do not have the power to cancel the Umeme contract. So, maybe when this law comes on board, Parliament could have powers concerning this because Parliament’s role is to appropriate funds. 

My only worry, Madam Speaker, is with my government. When we get into these deals with the private sector, we always delay so much in fulfilling our obligations. I can cite the example of the loans that we borrow. After borrowing this money, at the time of starting to utilise this money – (Member timed out).

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for you to conclude.

MS NETALISIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have complained on this Floor of Parliament about how we borrow money and we delay to utilise it. I would like to seek clarification from the minister. If we sit with the private sector and we draw our work plan and the agreement and we state when we shall start implementing the project, I know the private sector will always keep their time because it is business for them, but what happens if Government fails to meet that time and its obligation and yet we will have signed that agreement? That is my worry. How do you help me out of that? Thank you.

6.45
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for doing a good job.

My observations are drawn from the committee’s report, although I also have some queries for the minister. Let me start with the committee’s justification for the Bill. I believe that you should have added the following to the justification: One, in order to operate sustainable projects; two, to check on non-performing projects; and three, for proper monitoring and evaluation. 

When the minister gave us the justification of the Bill, he talked about drawing a lot of capital from private organisations. Recently, we have had comments about Islamic banking and I would like to suggest that you embrace it in your contributions because in this situation, the worry would be addressed. The donors could bring the money through Islamic banks and the partner, Government, would just monitor so that where there are risks, – the shocks which the Member from Buvuma was talking about - they would be handled. Thank you.

6.47
MR ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the work they have done. However, I have been provoked by Members who have sentiments against local governments being involved. I feel that there is no way we can leave out local governments. One Member even said that we do not need these local governments because we are going to deal with big projects. Where are those projects going to be implemented? Will they be implemented in a vacuum? They will have to go to the local governments because they will need land and also manpower. 

It is the local people who will suffer if they are not involved. You have heard about Buliisa and now there is Kalangala. In the beginning, there was a problem; I was not yet in Parliament but I heard that there were problems from the local people who did not support the venture. So, if we do not involve the local governments, who are the mobilisers of the local people and who should also benefit from the proceeds of the big projects, there is no way we will succeed. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.49
MR JAMES KABAJO KYEWALABYE (NRM, Kiboga East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and thank the committee for the good report they presented. However, when we come to the next stage, when we look at the details of the Bill, I pray that we carefully examine how we shall protect our country, Uganda. You will remember that the first “P” in PPP stands for “public”, which is Uganda; and the other “P” stands for “private”, who are mainly capitalists looking to get the largest amount of profit that they can from a deal. 

I would like to give an example of the development of the Bujagali hydroelectric power dam. The dam seems to have been developed at a very high cost and as a result, the unit cost of power from that dam is also high. As a result of this, the Government of Uganda has also rethought its use of the PPP approach for further development of power in Uganda. You will realise that Government is now looking for other sources of financing from other friendly governments like China for other dams like Karuma, Isimba etc. So, we must be on the lookout for this. 

We need to know how to balance between the requirements of the private investor, which is to make as much profit as possible, and the benefits for Uganda. That balance may not be easy to achieve but as we make this law we have to try as much as we can to achieve it. Of course, we should not disadvantage the private investor because if they are not going to get any profit, they will not come. That is why we have to find that balance.

As one of the Members was saying, perhaps we shall need to get –(Interruptions)

MR SSEBUNYA: Thank you, honourable colleague. I think the main anchor of the PPPs is negotiation. What we should ensure is that our negotiators always look out for the benefit of the country. Even if it is about building a new chamber for Parliament, our negotiators should look out for the benefit of Parliament and not the benefit of the private party. 

MR KYEWALABYE: Thank you, colleague, for that information. In fact, one thing I had forgotten to talk about is that since we are the ones who need –(Member timed out).

6.52
MS JENNIFER MUJUNGU (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee and the minister for this report. I support the motion because with this law in place, I am sure Government will be in a position to enter into contractual obligations with private partners to do infrastructural development.

Madam Speaker, I am a member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and I can tell you that all the institutions under the Justice, Law and Order Sector (JLOS) always rent office space. In some cases, landlords have even thrown them out and they have ended up in court. As a committee, we have been appealing to Government to have this law in place. With such problems of institutions, departments and agencies of government having to rent office space, at least this law will save the situation. Paying rent in the long run is very expensive and at times they are even unable to pay this rent. They are always complaining that the Ministry of Finance does not give them money. So, I am very sure that with this law in place, certain problems will be solved.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of local governments’ involvement, I am not against local governments being involved in PPPs but this is a contractual obligation and that means that these local governments must have the capacity to enter contracts. If a local government can have the capacity to enter into a contract, then it is okay for them to go ahead and get involved. However, what the Bill should clearly state from the very beginning is the guidelines on how these local governments should come on aboard. If there is need, there should be a threshold because the revenue collection of our local governments is very low. They get funds from the central Government and at times, it is little money, which cannot even fund the existing programmes that they have. 

I read some of the comments about this Bill and these partnerships will be given power to do things like roads and valley dams. I believe that these will really need a lot of money. In a district like Ntoroko, revenue collections are very low and so they cannot even afford to put up a dam. So –(Member timed out).

6.55
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to thank the committee for the work well done and also to support the motion. 

A lot has been said but we have to be very careful because many people have been hiding behind the policy on public private partnerships. We heard the projects that have been mentioned here and the Naguru-Nakawa project was one of them. When this project started, it was a housing project but it has now stalled and we now see the plot being shared out among certain individuals. These are long-term investments and if we are not careful, we are going to sell our country in bits.

I feel that we have to take a lot of time studying the provisions of this Bill and also looking at the benefits to our country and people. People have talked about employment and yet we are seeing the so-called investors coming in with their people whom they employ. If we do not put in place provisions to safeguard against the so-called private partners, we are going to see unemployment increase. So, I appeal to Members of Parliament to see to it that we consider the benefits to our people. Recently, people in my constituency petitioned Parliament about a certain pastor who is trying to take a stretch of the entire Lake Victoria shore and there are about three sub-counties affected. He is hiding behind the public private partnership policy, even before the law is in place. 

Madam Speaker, I think that this law, as many have said, should have come yesterday. I support the law and I call upon Members of Parliament to give it more time and commitment because it is going to benefit many of us and many of our people. I thank you.

6.58
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I also want to add my voice to the Members who have contributed to this motion. 

First of all, I want to thank the committee for the report that has just been tabled here. I am a member of the trade committee of this Parliament and I want to concentrate on areas where I know that this arrangement has been carried out, and this is my friend’s constituency, hon. Badda. I have visited Kalangala with the Committee on Trade and we visited Kalangala Infrastructure Services. They are mainly providing four services: the ferry connecting Bukakata to Kalangala; construction of a 65-kilometre road connecting the island; extension of power to the island; and provision of clean water to the islanders. The arrangement is good and I would support it, but we have challenges. The most important challenge that we have is corruption within this arrangement. There are poor negotiating skills on the side of Government. When you look at the agreements, the Government is set to lose.

Secondly, there is lack of proper supervision and monitoring. The ferry which is plying between Bukakata and Kalangala, for example, consumes a lot of fuel - we estimated more than 300 litres per trip – and there is no close supervision on the side of Government. This Government invested Shs 16.7 billion to buy shares in Kalangala Infrastructure Services under the PPP arrangement. I am a trader and I always want to put my money where I can benefit and get returns. I want to challenge anybody here to tell me what we are benefiting from this investment as a Government – the Shs 16.7 billion. How much do we get out of this? (Interruption)

MR BADDA: I want to give information to my colleague, hon. Kiyingi.  For Government, their purpose is not to get profits and money, although you can make a valuation on this. Government actually benefits through extension of structures and services to its people. That is where Government benefits. Government gets this with the assistance of a person who has technical experience, using some other person’s money and doing business timely. However, I agree with you that monitoring is very important because it can lead to corruption and manipulation. (Mr Kakooza rose_) 

MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI: Hon. Kakooza, before you come in, I want to appreciate the contribution made by hon. Badda. Kalangala has a peculiar –(Member timed out_)– One minute, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You are generous. (Laughter) Hon. Okupa.

7.03
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. It is good that we are not going to conclude this report today. I want to implore and urge Members that now that we shall have this weekend, can we take time and read more about these PPPS over this weekend? There is a lot of information out there and now that we have iPads, just goggle and get information so that by the time we come to dealing with the Bill, we are well informed.

Hon. Amos Okot asked what the disadvantages are. I just want to mention a few and I also want to find out from the committee how we are going to guard against the disadvantages of the P3s. When we were in Algeria two weeks ago, we found out that one of the disadvantages is that in most of the developing world, we do not have a strong private sector. So in such arrangements, we are going to rely on foreign investors. Won’t we then face the risk of being dominated by foreigners in this sector? In this case, what safeguards are we putting in place to protect ourselves and immunise ourselves from foreign domination? If you looked at the private sector in Uganda today, there may be just a handful of people. So, I want the committee or the Government to tell us what safeguards they have put in place.

Two, there are already some pseudo PPPs that we have already entered into like the Kalangala case. How is this law going to help us? How are we going to harmonise the two - those PPPs that have been entered into before the law came into force and those after? How are we going to harmonise those two situations? I want help from you in that area.

Madam Speaker, the private sector always borrows at a high interest rate but when Government borrows as a single borrower, it borrows at a lower interest rate. We are also going to create a risk where the interest rate will be higher because it is a combination of the two - the private sector and the government sector. On the other hand, we may leave the private sector to borrow alone and when they do that, it will definitely be at a high interest rate. So, how are we going to address that? I want that clarification to come out when that time comes. 

Finally, on the issue which has been stated here about the local government, I think let us go systematically. As of now, I think let us concentrate the PPPs on the central Government. If need be, in future we can amend the law to bring in the local governments. That is my proposal –(Interjection)–You may say “No” but that is my proposal. Honourable colleagues, let us move systematically.  I do not want us to jump wholesale into the PPPs and in the end get into problems. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

7.06
MR JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the report they have given us. 

Although PPPs can really strengthen competition, they can also provide greater construction capacity. They also encourage innovation and diversity in the provision of public services and public goods. Although PPPs may be easier to finance, I think we have to bear in mind that in Uganda, and I really agree with Members on this, we are not yet ready for them because of the challenges, which hon. Okupa has just pointed out. 

The private sector in Uganda is still small and very weak and the people who will participate will be the private sector from developed countries, from rich countries, and these people will be very selective in their investments. They will only invest where the cash returns are very high and they will ignore the sectors where the returns are low. This is already happening; it happened in Umeme and it is now happening in the oil sector. They have rushed to the oil sector; several companies have come here because they know the returns are very high and the profits they are going to get –(Interruption)

MR KABAJO KYEWALABYE: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give is that we shall allow for the private sector to look for where the returns are highest, but that would free up the government to now concentrate on areas which are not so attractive. The money they would have spent in the attractive areas can now be available to go to the less attractive areas. It is the same principle that we are applying even in communication. The Rural Communications Development Fund provides funding for areas which are less attractive to the telecom companies. Thank you.

MR JACINTO OGWAL: Well, honourable member, I totally agree with you and that is exactly what we have done now. We surrendered Umeme to the hands of these investors and now we have surrendered the oil fields to them. Because we do not have the money, we do not have the fields. I will demonstrate to you how we are at a disadvantage and a risk. We have two risks: One is about these cash returns which are very high. It is really we, the customers and the government, who are going to bear the cost and it has already happened in Umeme –(Member timed out.)

7.09
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Philip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We support the motion and we thank the committee for a good report. 

Public private partnerships are the way to go for the modern development of economies of the world. However, when we go clause by clause, we should be very careful to protect the interests of Uganda and the interests of Ugandans. It is very important that we do that because we have seen quack investors coming to our country and ripping us off. The most famous story was the one of Masese Fish Factory and the investor from Iceland. We lost out on that. We support PPPs and I think they should be an opportunity for us, if we engineer them well, to create a more proactive serious middle class and not one which is parasitic, which steals from the public. 

We also think that with PPPs we shall be able to invest in areas where the returns are low, as has already been said, but very vital to the country. We have heard the story of phosphates in Tororo for 25 years but nobody has invested in the phosphates, which are fertilizers. Maybe this will provide the opportunity to the Uganda Government and the people of Tororo, Bukedi and those in Bugiri to invest in that project so that we can have fertilizers for our agriculture.

In my lifetime, I would like to drive on a dual carriage highway from Kampala to Busia owned by Wafula and Company and Government. I can pay Shs 10,000 but drive on a pothole-free dual carriageway where I am safe. We have seen this happen in other countries and we want to do that here. I would not want to travel by bus to go to Arua as a committee member; I would wish to go by air and have an airport in Arua which is developed by the people of Arua and Government - a proper airport. This is what we are looking for in this arrangement. I think we shall see hospitals come up. Some hospitals have failed to work, but it is possible that private individuals and government can work together and provide better hospitals. 

However, we also need to focus. We should focus on capital mobilisation for local capital. I am a small capitalist in this country and we are very worried about foreign capitalists because they come and squeeze us. This law should be able to help protect us so that we are empowered to create wealth for ourselves. 

Land ownership: I would like to see peasants with big chunks of land becoming partners in projects in Kiboga or in Arua. Now you find somebody has got 100 acres of land and he is poor and yet Government is looking for land and this could be his equity in a project. So, these are things which we should look at very seriously. 

We have the example of BIDCO; there are some bad things about BIDCO but largely, there are good things about BIDCO. We are trying to create one such partnership in Bugiri-Iganga for rice growing. It has not taken off yet but we have approved money and it is for a private partnership with Government. So, we want that to happen. We should be able to transfer skills from the good foreigners - not the crooks - here to our country and we develop. We have seen China do this. All those countries - the Asian tigers - did a lot of that.

Definitely, local governments should be involved from the start. Local governments will be able to carry out some projects which are not being done by government at this time. They do not need to have foreign investments; they can mobilise local funding among their own people and carry out their activities, which will help them increase their revenue.

Madam Speaker, this is a good deal but we should be very careful with the law, otherwise it can also cause trouble. We may legislate and at the end of the day, we shall regret. However, it is a very good policy that can help our country. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, over 28 Members have contributed and I have not heard Members objecting to this Bill. It has support but what Members are talking about is the need for caution. So, I want to also be cautious and give you time to study it during the weekend. I will put the question that the Bill be read for a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: We shall complete it on Tuesday. Please, use the weekend to read.

Honourable members, tomorrow we shall have a special sitting at 2.00 p.m. to pay tribute to the late Mr Bisamunyu and before that, the body will lie in state. The House is adjourned to 2 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.16 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 9 May 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)








