




Tuesday, 5 May 2020

Parliament met at 11.14 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning’s meeting and I thank you for the work you did during the week. I would like to thank the Clerk and her team for the work they have been doing. I only have a few matters of communication. 

The first one is that during the weekend, I visited hon. Kato Lubwama who is hospitalised at the Medical Hospital. He underwent surgery but he is recovering and we wish him well. 

I also visited hon. Francis Zaake at Rubaga Hospital. I am very concerned about his situation because it is clear that he was beaten and battered. He told me that pepper spray was sprayed directly into his eyes. He was in police custody for several days and they must account for his injuries. This is violation of human rights and it is really unacceptable. 

I direct the Minister of Internal Affairs to explain to the House and to the country the situation we found hon. Zaake in and to take action against perpetrators of torture of the honourable Member of Parliament and other Ugandans. Therefore, by Thursday, we expect a reply from the Minister of Internal Affairs explaining to us what happened to hon. Zaake and what he is going to do with the perpetrators. 

Honourable members, the other matter is to do with the general impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. First is the issue of gender-based violence. We have seen reports that in April alone, 3,260 cases were reported to the police but that does not include those that were not reported. 

You may recall that a few weeks ago, I advised that in your COVID-19 message, apart from the hygiene and sanitation, you should include some counselling to families about family unity, family tolerance and coexistence. It is true that in many homes, there is tension because of the amount of time that husbands, wives and children are spending together. They are not used to spending time together so this is causing tension. We would like to urge the Inter Religious Council to intensify advocacy for peace and unity in our homes and families. 

I would also like the honourable members to take an interest in the overall impact on the economy, especially the businesses that have collapsed and the possibilities for rescue package, which the people will need. There are many industries that have been literally wiped out. The tourism industry has almost been obliterated. It seems that now, virtual meetings are going to compete with hotels and conference halls in hosting meetings so it is going to have a very big impact on the way we live and how we earn our living. 

Therefore, I would like to ask the Committee on National Economy, after you have dealt with the urgent loans, to invite the private sector and all other stakeholders so that as a country, we can start discussing how to coexist after the pandemic is over. The pandemic is new and no one was ready for it, no one has experience of it so all of us, including the developed countries, are grappling to find solutions on the way forward. 

Honourable members, today we have quite a bit of business. You will recall that last time when we took a vote on the cities, it took almost the entire day so we are hoping that today, we could do the roll call and at the same time issue ballot papers to the members so that as we do the roll call, they also take their vote. I hope that will help us to shorten the time. 

After the vote is taken and as the counting and tallying is going on, we can conduct the other business of the House, which members will bring up. However, I just want to advise that we have again looked at the four motions on the Floor and we realise that the motion on Moroto Municipality has been overtaken by events. We created the city last week so there is no point in altering the boundaries of the municipality. We should not even take a vote on that one. 

As for the ones of Ishaka and Kapchorwa municipalities, they should equally not be here in this form because the municipalities were already created. What they want to do is to alter the boundaries so the motion should now be altering the boundaries of the district because we will either be moving some sub-counties or divisions in or out of the municipality. Hence, these two motions are not properly before this House. They should come in as alteration of boundaries of the district and not of the municipality. That is what I wanted to communicate. The vote will mainly be on Terego; item number 3 of the Order Paper. Thank you very much. 

MR OUMA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My procedural issue is, sometime back in 2018, there was an issue that I brought before this House and indeed, I laid the papers before this House concerning the creation of Sigulu District. The ministry wrote this letter and said: 
“We are proposing the creation of the following districts, whose financial implications had been approved by the Ministry of Finance: Namayingo District, Sigulu District….” 

I am seeing the creation of Terego District coming up and during that communication, Madam Speaker, you told the Minister of Local Government that when he is bringing the creation of any district, he must make sure that Sigulu District is on the list. 

Madam Speaker, the state minister then said, “Most obliged.” However, I am seeing the creation of Terego, which I support sincerely but I would like the minister to tell us whether that directive you gave was accepted. Where is Sigulu District, whose financial implication was approved in 2009? Are we proceeding well to create a district without the Ministry of Local Government bringing Sigulu District, which they said they would bring? Thank you very much. 



THE SPEAKER: Minister, this has been a perennial complaint. Can you tell us why we do not have Sigulu District? 

11.24
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true Namayingo District sent a request for creation of Sigulu District with its headquarters at Sigulu Island and the sub county headquarters. There are others, including Bwera, Katwe and Hima districts, which I have found on table. However, the process of consultation was not yet concluded.

Therefore, I beg that you give me time, I go back and finalise that process. I will get back to Parliament on the way forward for these districts. In the next 15 days, I should be able to do that. I thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay, that becomes a Government assurance. In 15 days’ time, the Minister for Local Government should come and give us an update on Sigulu and the other outstanding districts. 

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Madam Speaker, my issue was about NSSF not about the new districts.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, after we have taken the vote, when we are counting, we shall discuss those issues. 

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine was seeking guidance from your communication about the state of affairs of hon. Zaake. As we sit to pass the districts, it is horrifying that one of ours can be seen in such a sorrowful state; the way he was tortured and the way he appears in such a sorry state.

Madam Speaker, under no circumstances whether under the COVID lockdown should the Member of Parliament be treated, be brutalised and be tortured for only one thing that he was attempting to distribute food illegally. We all saw the photos when he was picked from his house, and we all saw the photos from the televisions on how they were able to produce him in an ambulance before court. 

Today, it is hon. Zaake but if it is being done to a Member of Parliament, how about other millions of Ugandans under the pretext of the lockdown. Madam Speaker, we would have waited for when the districts are over but to sit down when one of us is on oxygen for no reason; not that he was a terrorist, not that he was caught trying to kill people, not that he was on rampage – (Interruption)   

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give is that when they came to arrest hon. Zaake, he surrendered in and he was handcuffed. Indeed, the honourable Member of Parliament was not distributing food; he was packing food at his home.

Secondly, when the President was talking, he said: “Yes, it was wrong.” However, there are facts that there are some ministers who distributed food physically and collected people. The President directed that those ministers should be arrested and among them was the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Microfinance)(Mr Kyeyune Kasolo) and hon. Robinah Ssentongo said the same, hon. Rosemary Seninde, to mention but a few.

However, up to now, these ministers are at large and securing a bond for hon. Zaake was as difficult as going to heaven. So, this selective prosecution is unfair. When you go to Uganda Media Centre, which has become a centre of attacking and saying whatever they want, the Spokesperson of Uganda Police Force, Afende Enanga is playing with the situation of this young legislator. 

So, we would like to know, as the minister comes as per your directive from your communication, the state of these ministers; we have the footages of the ministers speaking live, giving out food and nobody has arrested them but they are instead guarded by the security operatives. However, the young man who had not even started distributing food and had moved nowhere is bundled and beaten under detention. This is unfair. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that even these officers from the Prime Minister’s Office who were arrested, they don’t have any offence which approves that to a later stage but because of the elephant within that Prime Minister’s Office - the money you talked about which has produced the expired milk and fake beans is causing people to suffer in this country in this lockdown. 

I always say, I am a presidential material; when you look at me here I am not a simple person. Being a legislator and going through an election to enter this Parliament, qualifies me to be a president of this country, come what may. So, you don’t just come and beat me the way you – Mugabe never did this in Zimbabwe although he ruled for all those years. That is the information I wanted to give, honourable member. 

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What is very surprising is that they arrested hon. Zaake when everybody was watching and they handcuffed him clearly in broad daylight. 

It is of great shock that after hon. Zaake had been arrested, we could see him in hospital with wounds to that level. It is the Uganda Police Force that arrested hon. Zaake. Madam Speaker, maybe we could know from here, whether in the Police Force we have people who are not police officers. We could not expect the Police Force that we are here every day fighting for their rights, fighting for their welfare and fighting for whatever could make them better are the same people torturing to the extent of wishing to kill.

We may not be aware but there could be people who are interested in may be killing Members of Parliament. It is not the first time Members of Parliament are treated to that level. It is not the first time that we are seeing Members of Parliament being tortured to those levels with such wounds. Maybe, when the minister comes, Madam Speaker, we should be informed that there are people who are not bothered, their interest is to make sure that one day they register a dead body from the Members of Parliament.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we heard the President properly. We wonder whether he was lamenting or he wanted to inform us that hon. Zaake had been tortured and he was aware and his friends were also distributing food. However, in a relaxed way, in a friendly way and in a calm way, he said: “Why?” And it ended there; we have not seen anything. If it had been hon. Zaake giving food and they had arrested a different person by now, hon. Zaake would be in. But he has kept quiet, his ministers have kept quiet and his people have all kept quiet, including those law enforcers. Tomorrow, they will find another Member of Parliament like me and arrest maybe next time, they will just cut off the head. So, we need to know.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, they have always told us that that van where they put people have goons that put on masks. They have sharp knives and everything. Maybe, the minister should also come and tell us the secret inside those vans where they put these people. Maybe it is where they have those hot plates where we are told they boil and cook some of those parts of those people. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

MS ANNET NYAKECHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise here to give information and to first of all, also thank you for the concern you always have whenever Members of Parliament and the general public are arrested. (Applause)

Particularly, I had taken long without talking on the microphone about my predicament. Madam Speaker, I would like to begin by thanking you for sending a delegation of members led by hon. Elijah Okupa to visit me in prison. I was arrested recently and I stayed in jail for seven days without appearing before court. I did not have a file.  

I was not arrested alone. I was arrested together with my husband, my two brothers – one is my driver and the other is my PA, whom they had just come to pick – plus several other innocent Ugandans.

The treatment that I got while I was behind bars was not good. There is a lot of abuse of human rights in our prisons; there are many people who are in jail and nobody is bothered about when they will ever come out. 

My brother, John, was taken to CMI. He is an innocent civilian. He is simply a brother to Nyakecho, but he was arrested and taken to CMI and tortured for three days. 

The issues that are happening in this country – when you rise up and disagree with Government, you become a criminal. 

As I speak, our freedom in this country is limited. Hon. Zaake is critically ill. He could lose his life. Many other Members of Parliament, like hon. Kabaziguruka, were tortured too. Honourable members of Parliament, it could be you tomorrow. 

As we speak, there is a presidential candidate, just because he declared his interest to vie for presidency in this country, he has been in jail for more than two months now and nobody is talking about it. Nobody wants to grant him bail; nobody wants him out. 

Is it a crime to be a Ugandan? Isn’t this our country? Are we foreigners? Why are we being stepped on? 

I was slapped in my cell by an ordinary OC Station, simply because I complained. They brought in Chinese nationals at 1.00 a.m. in the morning. That was the time we were beginning to hear about Coronavirus. I asked whether they had tested the people they had brought into our cell and whether they had been cleared of the Coronavirus. 

The OC came with many policemen and they harassed me. Our beddings were taken away from us. That night, I slept on the floor, Madam Speaker -(Member crying)- he assaulted me. I asked myself whether that is the payment I get for being a Member of Parliament. I have all the right to be treated like a human being. 

Very many people are suffering behind bars. I have a platform; I can rise up and speak on this Floor. I can stand on this podium and talk about the sufferings because I have a platform. How about the innocent youth who are grabbed and put behind those bars and nobody is there to speak for them? They have no access to food or justice. If I could be denied and my file was only produced because court ordered for it, how about those ones who have no voice? 

Is it fair that Ugandans should be treated in this manner? Is it fair that because you say that you support a certain presidential candidate named Gen. Tumukunde, you should be arrested and ill-treated? Doesn’t the Constitution allow for people to hold elections every after five years? 

I know I have my issues of Tororo coming up, but this one is also serious; I had no charge. At the end of it all, they said that I had obstructed police arrest. 

Madam Speaker, we were arrested by over 300 armed personnel, very fiercely dressed. We could not even look them in the eyes. Can you obstruct such men who are ready to shoot at any point? 

I remember Akullo, the CID lady, giving instructions; we were first put under house arrest for two days; she said that if any of us attempts to escape, they should shoot us. This was the CID officer! 

What sort of country are we living in? Is the Constitution still alive? If it is dead, then let us burry it and we know that we are living in a country without a Constitution or the rule of law. Then we will know that we are living in a country with a life-President such that we all bow down and support him until God says otherwise. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. Finally, hon. Ssenyonga -

MS NYAKECHO: This is not further information. I would like to make a request to this House. Madam Speaker, you have a presidential candidate behind bars. He has no access to justice. His lawyers and his family are not allowed to visit him. He is Gen. Henry Tumukunde. 

I would like to beg this House to speak about it also. You are too quiet on this issue, Madam Speaker. You are an advocate for justice. Thank you. (Applause)

11.41
MR JOHNSON SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for having paid a visit to your own two children, hon. Zaake and hon. Kato Lubwama. 

The first time we tried to visit hon. Zaake, we were denied entry and we accepted. The second day, when he was taken to Rubaga Hospital, we were allowed to see him. 

These were the words from hon. Zaake and we would also like to know why, whenever he is arrested, even for something small, he is seriously victimised. These were his own words. He would like to know - as the minister is getting us information, let him answer that. 

I remember the previous week, we were here and we requested the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to tell us why in the police force we have so many policemen and policewomen who have not accessed the payroll for over two years.

When the minister came on the Floor, he told us that all those are going to be paid within a week. Yesterday, I drove to Nsambya and Naguru and I also talked to the commander of the Parliamentary Police about the same. Whenever these policemen and policewomen are deleted from the payroll, it takes time for them to return on the payroll. 

Therefore, it might be one of the reasons why those people are angry and they transfer that anger to some of us who seem to be sitting in a comfort zone. 

Madam Speaker, through your office, could you request the Inspector-General of Police to produce the list of officers who are not paid, but they are on duty and they are serving while their families are suffering. 

I have a bodyguard, Martin Kulkol who has not been paid for 18 months, but he has a family with children. How do you expect that one to survive -(Interjections)- he is not my personal guard, Madam Speaker, he simply brought to me the name. 

He is ready to be sacrificed because he wants to protect all the others. It is a big number. Why don’t they pay them? The minister came here and promised that after getting the supplementary, they were going to pay all those policemen and women who have taken time without being paid but up to today they have not received even a single coin.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe we should get the list and confront the minister with the list here. If you tell him to bring, he might bring what is not real. Let us find a way of getting that list and we ask him to explain it in this House.

MR MUYANJA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. I am going to look for the list and produce it before the end of this week. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I think that my record is clear on the issue of human rights. I have been a consistent advocate against the violations of human rights and I will continue. (Applause) However, hon. Zaake told me that he has been arrested on four occasions and on all those occasions, he has been badly, badly, badly beaten. He was asking me: “Do you know why I am being beaten?” I said: “I don’t know why you are being beaten.” 

The other thing, honourable members, is that there is now a practice of arresting people towards the end of the week and they take you to a court where there is no jurisdiction to grant you bail. They take you to a lower court, charge you and you have to go to prison; it is now a way of operation. I think the Minister of Internal Affairs should come and address us on the issue of hon. Zaake on Thursday.

11.43
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU(FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, the President addressed the nation on matters of COVID-19. In his address, he devoted quite some time to attacking Parliament and undermining Parliament’s constitutional responsibility of appropriation. He was portraying members of Parliament as thugs who are greedy – grabbing money at the expense of the population, and assigning himself the responsibility to defend them. That was meant to be an address on the performance of Government on the issue of COVID-19. 

I represent one of the constituencies in Wakiso District called Kira Municipality. This Parliament appropriated Shs 59 billion for Government to distribute food to the vulnerable people, numbering 1.5 million, during the first 14 days of the lockdown. The 14 days ended before this extremely “competent” Government had covered even 10 per cent of that population. We went for the 21 days and they have ended when this extremely “competent” Government, headed by emuhekyera, has not covered even half of the 1.5 million vulnerable people. Instead of addressing the competency issue of the Government, locking people in their houses and starving them –


Madam Speaker, it has been a nightmare for me. This is something I have never seen – I am going to be 47 years old – women older than my mother, who is 73 years old, going to kneel before my gate, pleading for one kilogramme of posho every day! Even today I had to drive to Parliament at 8.00 a.m. after meeting 80 and distributing whatever I had in my pocket. Instead of dealing with these issues affecting Ugandans, the head of state was inciting the public against MPs. 

Madam Speaker, today I want to understand: I have not seen the head of state listing Parliament as one of the essential services. I don’t even have a sticker. I have to explain to policemen of whichever rank each day I come here to transact business. Why are we being treated like we have no stake in this country? Why should Parliament that appropriates billions of money – I looked at the budget of State House; the money we appropriated for State House last year was Shs 400 billion - Shs 200 billion was for donation! If you dance very well – you are Buchaman – they will give you a billion shillings. (Laughter) I saw the head of state, who has given Catherine Kusasira billions of shillings to go and distribute, donating Shs 1.4 million and sending a whole Minister of Education and Sports to take it.

Madam Speaker, we must not accept this level of belittling institutions of state, belittling members of Parliament and inciting the public against Parliament. (Applause) Look at the budget of State House; the head of state now employs 1,600 people. That is why if you look at the item of salary under State House, it is Shs 17 billion. This is the only residence where we employ 1,600 people. Allowances are at Shs 17 billion, including for casual labourers who are just slashing the compound. Shs 32 billion is for inland travel. The total is Shs 400 billion.

Madam Speaker, this Parliament should be able to fight for its rights. (Applause) I was given a Constitution when I was swearing in and one of the oaths I took was to protect this Parliament. If I cannot protect myself, how can I protect the institution of Parliament? 

The procedural issue – (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, hon. Ssemujju. Madam Speaker, this is another serious matter. I was listening to one of our local radio stations – CBS – yesterday and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was asked by one of the reporters about this money that was given to members of Parliament. Hon. Matia Kasaija said he was not aware at all. However, during the Committee of Supply, it was the state minister for finance who moved the motion. In the same question he was asked: “What did you do with that money?” Hon. Kasaija said: “I bought maize flour and gave it to my people because I want votes.” That is hon. Matia Kasaija.

When you talk about what hon. Ssemujju has said, the First Lady brings Shs 1.4 million as a contribution but according to reliable information, Shs 100 million was spent to give her security as she was delivering that money. (Laughter) Now, you are giving Shs 1.4 million but the expense of your security to deliver that money to the taskforce is Shs 100 million! 

When the Speaker comes out with the Commission, where the Prime Minister sat – I am unhappy with the Prime Minister but it is unfortunate that this House might end without censuring anybody in the Cabinet. The Prime Minister was asked several times to give us a comprehensive arrangement of giving food to the rural areas and he refused. They all keep quiet. What they do is to attack Parliament. 

I commend you, Madam Speaker, for what you have done to defend - (Applause) You are the only one in this country who can defend Parliament and can answer the President on issues concerning the country. Ministers are now rushing, taking money to the districts – RDCs – because they heard the President telling them so. However, the right procedure would be to bring money back to the Commission. 

For the RDCs who were given Shs 59 million, we are getting information that they have received Shs 19 million only –(Interjection) –  Shs 13 million? Where is the rest? We can be here keeping quiet, thinking that this country is moving well. That is the information I wanted to give.

The President takes three hours talking and we end up covering one word from there; okwetsyamura. We cannot move like that in this country. Thank you.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the Executive must come and explain. We have had a debate here before – (Interjection) - I will take information – 

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable members, we need to do our work. We shall have time for that. Please! When I was communicating, I told you that let us do the vote and when we finish the vote, we can have discussions. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, before the vote is taken, I would like to give hon. Ssemujju some additional information. One is that while Parliament appropriated Shs 504 billion for security, all the police officers, LDUs and military police on deployment are still on normal payment; they are not earning any allowance.

They are just being given posho and fried beans, and have been ordered not to ask for any money yet Parliament appropriated money to cater for allowances for our gallant officers who work day and night, manning security check points.

I would like to move that the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs comes to explain to the country why the money that Parliament appropriated is not being paid, in allowances, to those officers. 

I went to three border posts with South Sudan - Madupei, Ngomoromo and Awenolui - with hon. Olanya Gilbert; all the police officers, counter terrorism officers, LDUs and UPDF officers have not been paid any allowances. That is the information we got.

Secondly, you must not shy away from this debate. If you are not comfortable, you have to create an opportunity for members to express themselves because this institution is under attack.

With all due respect, you are standing for the institution single handedly; I do not know what the other commissioners are doing. I am sorry to say this but we need a formal statement. I am an advocate - you were the first female lawyer to set up a law firm at Kitgum House.

There is a procedure of securing court orders. We need to be told whether that procedure was followed because they were not going to overturn a court by speeches. There is standard procedure – reviewing the order. There is an appeal procedure and so on. So, we need to be told by the Legal Department because not everything should be left to the Speaker alone.

Therefore, I would like to move that the Parliamentary Commission gives a formal statement to members on where we are, why we are where we are and why we are in all this trouble. If they have no explanation, then they should come and apologise to us for the headache we have had when elections are around the corner.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am not shying away from any debate but we need to move in an orderly manner. We have work on the Order Paper. I told you that when we finish voting, we shall discuss other things during the tallying.

The other one is that at the moment our people are in court and we are waiting. By the time we finish voting, they will be out of there to give us an update on what has happened.

MR SSEMUJJU: I am glad that we will get an update when we finish voting because this matter must be revisited. Otherwise, if we allow the Head of State to begin ordering MPs like shamba boys at his farm, tomorrow he might, for example, order me to go and surrender my salary to a priest in my constituency.

One of the duties of this Parliament - and I have said it many times when I am in my constituency - is appropriation. If that duty is taken away from us, then why are we here?

Later, when we finish voting, I will request that you give me permission to formerly move that the Executive comes here to apologise to Parliament for what happened last week.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much. Honourable members, let us begin on the business on the Order Paper.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT UNDER ARTICLE 179 (1) PARAGRAPH (A) OF THE CONSTITUTION FOR ALTERATION OF THE BOUNDARIES OF ARUA DISTRICT TO CREATE TEREGO DISTRICT

11.58
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a Motion for a Resolution of Parliament, under Article 179 (1) (a) of the Constitution for the alteration of boundaries of Arua District, to create Terego District.
The motion reads:
“WHEREAS, Article 179 of the Constitution empowers Parliament to alter boundaries of district local governments;

AND AWARE THAT, Arua District Council, at its sitting of 1st December, 2016, under Min No: ARU/DC/L215/0812016, resolved that a new district called Terego be curved out of Arua District;

FURTHER AWARE THAT, the new Terego District shall comprise of two counties namely; Terego County East and Terego County West with its headquarters at Leju Trading Centre in Ayivu Sub-County; 

ALSO CONFIRMING that as a ministry we carried out the necessary consultations and hereby request that it be resolved by Parliament as follow:

    1. That the boundaries of Arua District are hereby altered and a new district called Terego, comprising of Terego County East and Terego County West, is created with its Headquarters at Leju Trading Centre in Ayivu Sub-County;

2. And that the said Terego District takes effect on 1stJuly 2020.I beg to move.”

The people of Terego requested for a district status and it was endorsed by Arua District Council at its sitting on 1 December 2016 under Min No: ARU/DC/L215/08 of 2016.

The justification for this is as follows:
In terms of location, the proposed Terego District is located in the northern part of the current Arua District. It is bordered by Yumbe District to the north, Maracha District to the north-west, Lower Madi Okollo County to the east, Vurra County to the south-east and Ayivu County to the west.

In terms of size, it is comprises two counties: Terego East and Terego West and it has a total of six sub counties, 39 parishes and 376 villages.

Its estimated land area is 1,161.28 square kilometers. Geography is a key factor - the district lies in the Madi Plateau at an altitude of 900 metres above sea level.

It comprises a number of low-lying hills with the largest being Wati Hill. It has a bi-model rainfall pattern receiving an average total rainfall of 1,250 millimeters per annum.

The natural vegetation is characterized by open lands and equatorial type of savannah grasslands. Its distance from Arua District is about 27 kilometers. Its population, according to the 2014 National Population Housing Census is 204,009 persons, living in 37,006 households.

In terms of the economy and ability to sustain itself, I would like to state that agriculture is the main economic activity of the proposed Terego District. The main cash crops are tobacco and maize, while the food crops include cassava, sorghum, beans, groundnuts and sweet potatoes.

There are a number of markets from where the local government raises revenue. In terms of education services, Terego has 67 Government-aided primary schools with a total enrollment of 68,845 pupils. It has six Government-aided secondary schools with a total enrolment of 2,067 students and it has one technical institute.

In terms of health services, the proposed Terego District has one hospital, one health centre IV, eight health centres III and 10 health centres II.

Madam Speaker, in terms of the financial implication, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has issued a certificate of financial implication as required by law and I will lay it on the Table, indicating that Terego District will require approximately Shs 20.9 billion for its operationalisation. Part of this will be acquired from the budget of the current mother district of Arua from which Terego is being split. 

The budget amounting to Shs 2.7 billion, which is the balance required for the new district, will be provided through budget adjustment. Government of Uganda will also provide Shs 100 million as start-up funds to enable the new district to take off on 1 July 2020.

Finally, the interim leadership is as follows: The Ministry of Local Government will guide the new district on the interim leadership and the sharing of assets with the remaining Arua District in accordance with Section 180-188 of the Local Governments Act.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, and based on the above justification, I find the proposed creation of Terego District fully consistent with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. I hereby request that this august House do approve the proposal to create the new district called Terego. 

I hereby beg to move. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I put the question that Terego District be approved.

MR MAGYEZI: I beg to lay the certificate of financial implications on the Table, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Jesca Ababiku - I have put the motion but you have to vote. Can we do it separately? 

12.06
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo County North, Tororo): This is an amendment to the minister’s motion, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Move it.

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for being kind enough, as usual, to the suffering people of this country. 

I propose to move a motion and this is the title. It is an amendment to the motion for a resolution of Parliament, under Article 179 (1) (a) of the Constitution for the alteration of boundaries of Arua District to create Terego District moved under rules 58 (k) and 60 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament:

“WHEREAS the Minister of Local Government has moved a motion for a resolution of Parliament under Article 179 (1) (a) of the Constitution for alteration of boundaries of Arua District to create Terego District;

AND WHEREAS Article 179 of the Constitution empowers Parliament to alter boundaries of district local governments;

RECALLING that on 20 July 2005, Government moved a motion in Parliament for the creation of a number of districts, among which was Tororo District to comprise of Tororo County;

FURTHER recalling that the House referred the proposal to create Tororo District to the parliamentary Committee on Local Government to examine and recommend a way forward;

AWARE that the parliamentary Committee on Local Government examined the matter and recommended that:
’
    a. In the short run, the current Tororo District should remain intact;
    b. Government should come up with a competent motion restructuring Tororo District into two new districts;
    c. In restructuring Tororo District into two new districts, the Government must come out clearly on the following:
    1. The status of Tororo Municipality inside Tororo County inside Tororo District;
    2. The names of the new districts to be created vis-a-vis the existing district.’

FURTHER AWARE that the recommendations made by the parliamentary Committee on Local Government pertaining to the sub-division of Tororo District were unanimously adopted by the House on 28 December 2005;

NOTING that since the adoption of the parliamentary resolution on the creation of new districts out of the current Tororo District, Government has not implemented the resolution in spite of the creation of various districts in other parts of the country;

FURTHER NOTING that some of the problems faced by the people of Tororo District, including non-participation in local council elections, tribal tension and limited access to social services, stem from the unresolved status of Tororo District and implementing Parliament’s resolution will go a long way in resolving these problems;

RECOGNISING that the two communities currently existing within the boundaries of Tororo District are in favour of alteration of the boundaries of Tororo District, basing on the 1947 colonial boundaries;

COGNISANT of the role played by the Parliament of Uganda as a voice of the people;

NOW THEREFORE, I beg to move under rule 60 of the Rules of Procedure to amend the motion for a resolution of Parliament, under Article 179 (1) (a) of the Constitution for alteration of boundaries of Arua District to create Terego District, moved by hon. Raphael Magyezi, the Minister of Local Government, to include the following new prayers:
    1. That the current boundaries of Tororo District are hereby altered to create two new districts, comprising West Budama County with its headquarters at Nagongera, which will be elevated to municipality status and Tororo County, with their headquarters located within the boundaries of Tororo County.
    2. Tororo Municipality remains within the geographical boundaries of Tororo County.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the sector minister - Is it seconded? 

MS NYAKECHO: Please, can you second my motion? Thank you. Madam Speaker, you can see that the entire House is seconding the motion. It is seconded by hon. Angura of Tororo County South and he would love to speak to it. There is hon. Ssewungu, hon. Anifa Kawooya, hon. Acidri, hon. Waluswaka - there are very many members - hon. Esther Anyakun - (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, the numbers are overwhelming. I would like to speak to this motion - If you may allow me, I would like to speak to the motion – (Interjection) –I saw you standing, I thought you were seconding. I would like to speak to this motion.

Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been restrained to put my senior sister to order. However, is it in order for the honourable member for Tororo County North to say that I have seconded? In fact, I wanted to refuse the motion because – (Interjections) – Yes, it is the Speaker to rule.

Is it in order for the honourable member to simply count members who are even looking for seats and say that they are seconding? I can only second with amendments; when the headquarters are shifted to the counties, not where they are.

Madam Speaker, you cannot request for a district and chase away your father. When Butaleja became a district, we went to Butaleja. When Buyende got a district, it did not chase away Kamuli. I support the district, but the new headquarters should be put elsewhere. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: But now, honourable member, you raised a point of order, and yet you made a submission. 

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Speaker, I would like to speak to my motion, but I also have a seconder, hon. Angura, who will second the motion officially.

First of all, I would like to thank the Members of Parliament for the overwhelming support they have given me, so far. As you may recall, the Speaker then, hon. Ssekandi, 15 years ago, on –

MR ODONGA OTTO: I seek your procedural guidance. Just to be on record, I support the initiative of my sister from Tororo, but the guidance I seek is on the neatness with which we want to handle this serious business. We had started with Terego and there are other districts on the list, which the minister is carrying the Certificate of Financial Implications for. 

I seek your guidance on if we could dispose of some of those issues so that we go in an orderly manner. There was a motion that was substantially moved for Terego, then all of a sudden we get a derivative action on a motion for Tororo. I am wondering how neat we will be. 

Is there a Certificate of Financial Implications for Tororo? We may allow our sister to debate for one hour, I will clap my hands in her support, and then the minister will come and say, “I do not have a certificate for that district.” So, how do we proceed to save time of the taxpayers? 

MR OFWONO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The member is trying to amend the motion by quoting things of 2005. That motion came here and a district was created under mukuju. It will be very funny for this House to create a district, while chasing away – You cannot chase – I am the Member of Parliament for Tororo Municipality. If you are creating a new district with a new headquarters, where is the headquarters? It is because Tororo is already a district.

As a result, I beg that this amendment should not be allowed so that Terego’s issue continues. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do appreciate the situation in Tororo, but I think we should handle it as a separate motion instead of tagging it onto Terego. Consequently, let us deal with Terego, and then we create time for Tororo separately. We shall allow you to bring your motion separately. Do not amend Terego’s motion; bring your own. 

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Speaker, I was actually compelled because Tororo – First of all, I thank you for your support. I find it hard to talk against your guidance, but it is out of pain. I know you understand the situation we the people of Tororo County are in. It is out of pain that we bring this amendment. 

Despite a parliamentary resolution, Government has totally refused to bring forth the issue of Tororo to a conclusion. Madam Speaker, as you may recall, we even went to London – Actually, if you had allowed me to conclude my motion, I would have laid on Table this map, which we got from London because we have certified –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, that map was laid on Table in December. I am aware of it. I understand your pain, and I want to help you, but I would like to do it a proper way. I will help you. 

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Speaker, I thank the member who has brought the issue of Tororo. However, the substantive motion on the Floor is for Terego District. As I had given my commitment earlier, there are a number of new districts proposed, and I had promised I would come back to the House in 15 days. Certainly, I am aware Tororo District has taken 15 years. For each year, therefore, give me a day, and within 15 days, we will come back to the issues of Tororo. 

I beg that we continue with Terego, and you allow me to proceed in the better procedural way in terms of financing, boundaries, headquarters, and final consultation and I will come back to the House in 15 days. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we – Hon. Angura, we shall deal with Tororo District when its motion comes separately. I undertake to make sure this matter is handled on this Floor. 

MR ANGURA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, that is a Government’s assurance, and the first on the list should be Tororo please. 

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Speaker, the minister should be kind enough to give us a date. We do not know whether the 15 days are working days, or whether they include weekends. Please give us a date such that we prepare better.

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Speaker, the commitment I gave is 15 working days from today. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. From his submission, hon. Magyezi has said there are proposals of districts before his office called Hima and Katwe. They happened to be in Kasese. I have not, and I do not know any proposal that has come from Kasese about Hima and Katwe districts. I wonder where hon. Magyezi picked that information from. Is it manipulation? What is his intention in this? 

The point of order I am raising is, why is hon. Magyezi mixing issues and bringing things, which he has not be asked to do, and yet he is failing to do what he is supposed to do? Is he in order to bring Kasese into the equation when the people of Kasese have not asked for a district from him? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matters which are here do not include Kasese. In fact, I did not hear him say Kasese. I think he said Tororo and other districts. That is what I remember. Did he?

MR NZOGHU: I was listening very carefully, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, whatever it is, when the 15 days are over, those matters will come to the House, and we shall take a decision. Let us go to the Order Paper.(Mr Angura rose) Honourable member, you wait until the minister comes back, and then we shall decide. 

MR ANGURA: Madam Speaker, I have the district resolution here and it can be laid at the Table at an appropriate time when this comes up for discussion. Hon. Yeri-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not lay anything today.

MR ANGURA: Hon. Yeri should not lie to this House that Tororo has never requested. The resolution was got when Butaleja and Tororo requested for districts. Therefore, is hon. Yeri in order to lie to this august House that there is no resolution?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, those matters are not before this House. Honourable members, to fasten the process I will call ten names and you line up quickly.

VOTING BY ROLL CALL FOR TEREGO DISTRICT
    1. Hon. Ababiku Jesca – 
    2. Hon. Abacacon Gutomoi- Yes
    3. Hon. Abala David	– Yes
    4. Hon. Abigaba Cuthbert – 
    5. Hon. Achen Christine  – Yes
    6. Hon. Achia Remigio – 
    7. Hon. Achia Terrence –
    8. Hon. Achieng Opendi – Yes
    9. Hon. Achiro Lucy – 
    10. Hon. Acidri James –  Yes
    11. Hon. Acon Julius –  Yes
    12. Hon. Adeke Anna – 
    13. Hon. Adoa Hellen -  
    14. Hon. Adome Bildad –  
    15. Hon. Adong Lilly –  Yes
    16. Hon. Agaba Abbas –  
    17. Hon. Ajilo Maria Goretti – Yes
    18. Hon. Paul Akamba – 
    19. Hon. Akampurira Prossy– on leave
    20. Hon. Akello Judith Franca - 
    21. Hon. Akello Lucy – Yes
    22. Hon. Akello Rose – 
    23. Hon. Akello Silvia – 
    24. Hon. Akena Jimmy	- 
    25. Hon. Akol Anthony -
    26. Hon. Akora Maxwell - Yes
    27. Hon. Akugizibwe Lawrence - Yes
    28. Hon. Akurut Violet	 - Yes
    29. Hon. Aleper Margaret - 
    30. Hon. Alero Tom Aza -  Yes
    31. Hon. Ali Moses - 
    32. Hon. Alioni Odria - 
    33. Hon. Alum Santa – 
    34. Hon. Alupo Faith -  Yes
    35. Hon. Alyek Judith - 
    36. Hon. Ameede Agnes - Yes
    37. Hon. Amero Susan - 
    38. Hon. Amoding Monicah - Yes
    39. Hon. Among Anita - 
    40. Hon. Amongi Betty - 
    41. Hon. Amongin Jacqueline - 
    42. Hon. Amoru Paul - Yes
    43. Hon. Amule Doreen –
    44. Hon. Angella Fred-
    45. Hon. Angundru Moses			Yes
    46. Hon. Angura Fredrick		Yes
    47. Hon. Anite Evelyn-
    48. Hon. Anyakun Esther			Yes
    49. Hon. Anywarach Joshua- 
    50. Hon. Aogon Silas			Yes
    51. Hon. Aol Betty Ocan 		Yes
    52. Hon. Aol Jacqueline 

    53. Hon. Ajedra Gabriel			Yes
    54. Hon. Herbert Ariko
    55. Hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara
    56. Hon. Arinda Gordon 			Yes
    57. Hon. Asaba Paul			Yes
    58. Hon. Asamo Hellen 			Yes 
    59. Hon. Asiimwe Everlyne 		Yes
    60. Hon. Asiku Elly 			Yes
    61. Hon. Asinde Brenda 
    62. Hon. Atiku Benard 			Yes
    63. Hon. Atim Joy Ongom 		Yes
    64. Hon. Atim Cecilia Ogwal
    65. Hon. Atuhaire Jacklet 
    66. Hon. Atyang Stella 
    67. Hon. Anywar Beatrice 
    68. Hon. Avur Jane				Yes
    69. Hon. Engola Betty 			Yes
    70. Hon. Ayaka Rose			
    71. Hon. Ayebazibwe Jastine 
    72. Hon. Ayepa Michael 
    73. Hon. Ayoo Tonny 			Yes
    74. Hon. Azairwe Dorothy 
    75. Hon. Baba James Boliba 		Yes
    76. Hon. Baba Diri Margaret 
    77. Hon. Babirye Judith 
    78. Hon. Babirye Sarah 
    79. Hon. Babirye Mary Kabanda
    80. Hon. Babirye Veronica		Yes
    81. Hon. Bafaki Gordon 			Yes 
    82. Hon. Bagiire Aggrey 
    83. Hon. Bagoole John 
    84. Hon. Baguma Spellanza 
    85. Hon. Bahati David 			Yes
    86. Hon. Bakireke Nambooze 
    87. Hon. Bakkabulindi Charles 
    88. Hon. Balyeku Moses 			Yes
    89. Hon. Bamukwatsa Betty 		Yes
    90. Hon. Kawooya Anifa 			Yes
    91. Hon. Baryayanga Andrew 
    92. Hon. Baryomunsi Chris 
    93. Hon. Basalirwa Asuman 
    94. Hon. Baseke Fred 			Yes
    95. Hon. Bategeka Lawrence 
    96. Hon. Bbumba Syda	  
    97. Hon. Bebona Josephine  		Yes
    98. Hon. Bigirwa Norah 			Yes
    99. Hon. Bintu Jalia 
    100. Hon. Biraahwa Stephen
    101. Hon. Birungi Carolyn 		Yes 
    102. Hon. Bitangaro Sam 			Yes
    103. Hon. Biyika Lawrence 
    104. Hon. Bukenya Michael 		Yes
    105. Hon. Burundo Alex 
    106. Hon. Businge Harriet 
    107. Hon. Karooro Okurut Mary  
    108. Hon. Butime Tom 			Yes
    109. Hon. Nsaba Buturo 			Yes
    110. Hon. Bwino Fred 	
    111. Hon. Byabagambi John  
    112. Hon. Byandala Abraham   
    113. Hon. Byarugaba Alex  
    114. Hon. Byekwaso Flavia  
    115. Hon. Byibesho Sam 
    116. Hon. Centenary Robert 	 	Abstain
    117. Hon. Chekamondo Rukiya    	Yes
    118. Hon. Chekwel Lydia  
    119. Hon. Chelimo Paul   
    120. Hon. Chemutai Everlyn  
    121. Hon. Cheptoris Sam  
    122. Hon. Dhamuzungu Geoffrey  	Yes
    123. Hon. Tayebwa Thomas 	 	Yes 
    124. Hon. Agaba Abbas 		 	Yes 
    125. Hon. Driwaru Zaitun  
    126. Hon. D’Ujanga Simon  
    127. Hon. Dulu Angel Mark  
    128. Hon. Ecweru Musa  
    129. Hon. Egunyu Janepher  
    130. Hon. Eitunganane Kenneth  	Yes
    131. Hon. Elotu Cosmas  
    132. Hon. Etuka Isaac  		 	Yes
    133. Hon. Fungaroo Hassan  
    134. Hon. Gafabusa Richard 
    135. Hon. Galabuzi Ssozi Dennis 
    136. Hon. Gonahasa Francis
    137. Hon. Guma Gumisiriza David 	Yes
    138. Hon. Fungaroo Hassan 		Yes
    139. Hon. Gafabusa Richard 		Yes
    140. Hon. Galabuzi Dennis Ssozi  
    141. Hon. Gonahasa Francis  		Yes
    142. Hon. Gume Fredrick 
    143. Hon. Hashim Sulaiman 		Yes
    144. Hon. Ikojo John Bosco 
    145. Hon. Ilukor Charles  		Yes
    146. Hon. Isala Eragu Veronica  	Yes 
    147. Hon. Musumba Isaac 
    148. Hon. Kaahwa Tophace  
    149. Hon. Kabafunzaki Herbert 
    150. Hon. Kabagyenyi Rose 
    151. Hon. Kabaije Sheila  
    152. Hon. Kabaziguruka Michael 
    153. Hon. Kafeero Robert 		Yes
    154. Hon. Kafuuzi Jackson 
    155. Hon. Kahima Moses 
    156. Hon. Kahunde Helen 
    157. Hon. Kajara Aston 
    158. Hon. Kajungu Rosette 
    159. Hon. Kakooza James 			Yes
    160. Hon. Kakooza Joseph 
    161. Hon. Kalemba Christopher 
    162. Hon. Kaliisa Jovrine 
    163. Hon. Kalule-Ssengo Emmanuel  	Yes
    164. Hon. Kaluya Andrew  		Yes
    165. Hon. Kamara John 
    166. Hon. Kamateeka Jovah 
    167. Hon. Kamugo Pamela 
    168. Hon. Kamuntu Ephraim 
    169. Hon. Kamusiime Caroline 		Yes
    170. Hon. Kamusiime Pentagon 
    171. Hon. Kangwagye Stephen 		Yes
    172. Hon. Karubanga David  		Yes
    173. Hon. Karuhanga Gerald 
    174. Hon. Karungi Elizabeth  
    175. Hon. Kasaija Matia  
    176. Hon. Kasibante Moses  		No
    177. Hon. Kasirivu Atwooki  
    178. Hon. Kasolo Robert  		Yes
    179. Hon. Kasozi Ibrahim 
    180. Hon. Kasozi Joseph 
    181. Hon. Kasule Robert 			Yes
    182. Hon. Kasumba Patrick 		Yes
    183. Hon. Katali Loy 			Yes
    184. Hon. Kato Lubwama 
    185. Hon. Katoto Hatwib  
    186. Hon. Katumba Wamala  
    187. Hon. Katuntu Abdu  
    188. Hon. Katuramu Hood  
    189. Hon. Katusabe Atkins 		Abstain
    190. Hon. Katushabe Ruth  		Yes
    191. Hon. Katwesigye Oliver  		Yes
    192. Hon. Kemirembe Pauline  		Yes
    193. Hon. Kesande  Grace			Yes
    194. Hon. Khainza Justine 
    195. Hon. Kibaaju  Naome 		Yes
    196. Hon. Kibalya  Henry 		Yes
    197. Hon. Kibuule Ronald
    198. Hon. Kiiza Ernest  			Yes
    199. Hon. Kiiza Stella
    200. Hon. Kiiza Winfred
    201. Hon. Kinobere Herbert 		Yes
    202. Hon. Kipterit Christopher
    203. Hon. Kisa Stephen
    204. Hon. Kisembo Noeline 		Yes
    205. Hon. Kitatta Aboud 			Yes	
    206. Hon. Kitutu Mary Goretti 	Yes
    207. Hon. Kiwanda Godfrey
    208. Hon. Kiwanuka Keefa
    209. Hon. Kiyingi Deogratius 
    210. Hon. Kizige Moses 			Yes	
    211. Hon. Koluo Joseph 			Yes			
    212. Hon. Komakech Lyandro 		Yes
    213. Hon. Komuhangi Margaret
    214. Hon. Koreta Ivan
    215. Hon. Kulayigye Felix		
    216. Hon. Kumama George 			Yes
    217. Hon. Kunihira Agnes 		Yes
    218. Hon. Kusasira Peace
    219. Hon. Kuteesa Pecos
    220. Hon. Kutesa Sam 
    221. Hon. Kwiyucwiny Grace 		Yes
    222. Hon. Kyagulanyi Robert
    223. Hon. Kyambadde Amelia
    224. Hon. Kyeyune Haruna
    225. Hon. Lakot Susan
    226. Hon. Lamwaka Catherine 		Yes
    227. Hon. Lamwaka Margaret
    228. Hon. Lanyero Molly
    229. Hon. Lokeris Peter
    230. Hon. Lokeris Samson
    231. Hon. Lokii John Baptist
    232. Hon. Lokii Peter Abrahams
    233. Hon. Lokodo Simon
    234. Hon. Lokoru Albert 			Yes 
    235. Hon. Lokwang Hillary 		Yes
    236. Hon. Moses Ali 			Yes 
    237. Hon. Sam Cheptoris 			Yes 
    238. Hon. Bakkabulindi Charles  	Yes
    239. Hon. Lufafa Nelson  		Yes
    240. Hon. Lubogo Kenneth  		Abstain 
    241. Hon. Katuntu Abdu  			Yes 
    242. Hon. Kisa Stephen  			Yes
    243. Hon. Lugoloobi Amos 
    244. Hon. Lukyamuzi David  		Yes
    245. Hon. Luttamaguzi Paulson  	Yes
    246. Hon. Lyomoki Sam
    247. Hon. Macho Geoffrey
    248. Hon. Mafabi Ishma
    249. Hon. Maganda Julius 
    250. Hon. Magyezi Raphael  		Yes
    251. Hon. Makumbi Henry
    252. Hon. Mandera Amos  			Yes
    253. Hon. Mangusho Lawrence 
    254. Hon. Masika Apollo
    255. Hon. Mawanda Michael  		Yes
    256. Hon. Mayende Stephen
    257. Hon. Mbabaali Muyanja
    258. Hon. Mbabazi Janepher 
    259. Hon. Mbaju Jackson 
    260. Hon. Kibanzanga Christopher  	Yes
    261. Hon. Mbayo Esther  
    262. Hon. Mbeiza Margaret 		Yes 
    263. Hon. Mbogo Kezekia 
    264. Hon. Mbwatekamwa Gaffa
    265. Hon. Migadde Robert  
    266. Hon. Mirembe Lydia  		Yes
    267. Hon. Moriku Joyce  			Yes
    268. Hon. Mpuuga Mathias  		Yes
    269. Hon. Mudukoi Fred  			Yes
    270. Hon. Kahonda Dononzio
    271. Hon. Mugema Peter 
    272. Hon. Mugeni Milly  			Yes
    273. Hon. Mugoya Gaster  		Yes
    274. Hon. Mugume Roland  		Yes
    275. Hon. Muhanga Margaret
    276. Hon. Muheirwe Daniel 
    277. Hon. Muhindo Tonny  		Abstain
    278. Hon. Mukasa Julius 
    279. Hon. Muruli Mukasa Wilson  	Yes
    280. Hon. Mukisa Robina 
    281. Hon. Mukoda Julie  			Yes
    282. Hon. Mukula Francis  		Yes
    283. Hon. Mulindwa Isaac
    284. Hon. Munyagwa Mubarak
    285. Hon. Musana Eric			Yes
    286. Hon. Musasizi Henry
    287. Hon. Musoke Paul			Yes
    288. Hon. Musoke Robert			Yes
    289. Hon. Mutebi Ronnie		
    290. Hon. Mutebi Noah		
    291. Hon. Mutonyi Rose			Yes
    292. Hon. Mutuuzo Peace		
    293. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi	
    294. Hon. Muyanja Johnson		Yes
    295. Hon. Muyingo Chrysostom	
    296. Hon. Mwesige Adolf			
    297. Hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana	
    298. Hon. Mwesigye Fred		
    299. Hon. Mwujukye Francis		Yes
    300. Hon. Mwine Mpaka			Yes
    301. Hon. Mwiru Paul			Yes
    302. Hon. Nabakooba Judith	
    303. Hon. Nabayiga Idah		
    304. Hon. Nabbanja Robinah	
    305. Hon. Nabulindo Jane			Yes
    306. Hon. Naggayi Ssempala	
    307. Hon. Nagwomu Moses		
    308. Hon. Naigaga Mariam
    309. Hon. Najjuma Sarah			Yes
    310. Hon. Nakate Lillian			Yes
    311. Hon. Nakawunde Sarah	
    312. Hon. Nakayenze Connie		Yes
    313. Hon. Nakwang Tubo			
    314. Hon. Nalule Safia			
    315. Hon. Namayanja Florence		Yes	
    316. Hon. Nambeshe John Baptist	Yes
    317. Hon. Namoe Stella		    	Yes 
    318. Hon. Namuganza Persis	
    319. Hon. Namugwanya Benny	
    320. Hon. Namujju Cissy		
    321. Hon. Namukhula Grace	 	
    322. Hon. Namuyangu Jennifer	 	Yes
    323. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi Nathan		
    324. Hon. Nankabirwa Ann Maria 
    325. Hon. Nankabirwa Ruth	
    326. Hon. Nansubuga Rosemary	
    327. Hon. Nantaba Idah 		
    328. Hon. Nanyondo Veronica   
    329. Hon. Nauwat Rosemary		Yes
    330. Hon. Nayebale Sylvia	
    331. Hon. Ndamira Catheline		Yes
    332. Hon. Ndeezi Alex		
    333. Hon. Ngabirano Charles 	
    334. Hon. Ninsiima Boaz		
    335. Hon. Niringiyimana James	
    336. Hon. Niwagaba Wilfred
    337. Hon. Niwagaba Wilfred 	
    338. Hon. Nokrach Wilson  		Yes
    339. Hon. Nsamba Patrick 		Yes 
    340. Hon. Nsereko Muhammad  
    341. Hon. Nsubuga Simeo  
    342. Hon. Ntende Robert 	 		Yes
    343. Hon. Nyakecho Annet  		Yes
    344. Hon. Nyiira Zerubabel  		Yes
    345. Hon. William Nzoghu  		Abstain
    346. Hon. Onek Hilary  
    347. Hon. Obiga Kania  			Yes
    348. Hon. Oboth Jacob  			Yes
    349. Hon. Obua Denis  			Yes
    350. Hon. Baba Diri Margaret  	Yes
    351. Hon. Ocan Patrick 
    352. Hon. Ocen Peter 
    353. Hon. Ochen Julius  
    354. Hon. Odonga Otto  			Yes
    355. Hon. Odongo Jeje  
    356. Hon. Odur Jack  
    357. Hon. Odur Jonathan   
    358. Hon. Ofwono Apollo Yeri  	Yes
    359. Hon. Ogama Ismail  			Yes 
    360. Hon. Ogenga-Latigo Morris  
    361. Hon. Oguzu Lee Dennis  		Yes
    362. Hon. Ogwang Peter  			Yes
    363. Hon. Okabe Patrick  
    364. Hon. Okello Anthony  
    365. Hon. Okello Bonny   
    366. Hon. Okello Charles Engola  
    367. Hon. Okin P.P. Ojara  
    368. Hon. Okori-Moe Janet   		Yes
    369. Hon. Okot Ogong Felix  
    370. Hon. Okot Peter   
    371. Hon. Okumu Ronald Reagan  	Yes 
    372. Hon. Okupa Elijah  			Yes
    373. Hon. Okwir Samuel  
    374. Hon. Olanya Gilbert  		Yes
    375. Hon. Olega Ashraf  			Yes
    376. Hon. Omony Oscar 
    377. Hon. Ongalo-Obote Clement  
    378. Hon. Ongiertho Emmanuel   	Yes
    379. Hon. Onyango Gideon  
    380. Hon. Onzima Godfrey			Yes
    381. Hon. Opolot Patrick			Yes
    382. Hon. Opolot Jacob			Yes
    383. Hon. Orot Ismael					
    384. Hon. Oryem Henry 
    385. Hon. Osegge Angelline		Yes
    386. Hon. Oseku Richard			
    387. Hon. Osoru Mourine			Yes
    388. Hon. Okoth Othieno			Yes
    389. Hon. Otto Edward			Yes

    390. THE SPEAKER: I think Brig. Innocent Oula is unwell. Last week, he had a problem with his knee.

    391. Hon. Ouma George			Yes
    392. Hon. Oyet Simon			
    393. Hon. Ruhunda Alex 
    394. Hon. Rwaburindora Tarsis 
    395. Hon. Rwabushaija Margaret	Yes
    396. Hon. Rwabwogo Sylvia 
    397. Hon. Rwakimari Beatrice 
    398. Hon. Rwakoojo Robinah 
    399. Hon. Rwamirama Bright 
    400. Hon. Rwemulikya Ibanda 
    401. Hon. Sabiiti Denis 
    402. Hon. Sebaggala Abdulatif		Yes
    403. Hon. Seguya Lubyayi			Yes
    404. Hon. Sekindi Aisha			Yes
    405. Hon. Sematimba Peter		Yes 
    406. Hon. Silwany Solomon			
    407. Hon. Sizomu Gershom 
    408. Hon. Soyekwo Kenneth		Yes
    409. Hon. Ssebikaali Yoweeri		Yes
    410. Hon. Ssekabiito Joseph 
    411. H.E. Ssekandi Edward 
    412. Hon. Ssekikubo Theodore		Yes			
    413. Hon. Ssembatya Edward		Yes
    414. Hon. Ssemmuli Anthony 
    415. Hon. Ssempala Emmanuel 
    416. Hon. Ssempijja Vincent 
    417. Hon. Ssemujju Ibrahim		Yes
    418. Hon. Ssentongo Robinah		Yes
    419. Hon. Ssewanyana Allan		No 
    420. Hon. Ssewungu Joseph		Yes
    421. Hon. Kyinyamatama Juliet 
    422. Hon. Wejuli Agnes 
    423. Hon. Taban Idi Amin			Yes	
    424. Hon. Francis Takirwa		Yes

    425. THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tayebwa has already voted.

    426. Hon. Timuzigu Michael			
    427. Hon. Tinkasiimire Barnabas	Yes 
    428. Hon. Turyamuhweza Fred		Yes 
    429. Hon. Tumuramye Genensio  
    430. Hon. Tumusiime Rosemary   	Yes
    431. Hon. Tumwebaze Frank   		Yes 
    432. Hon. Tumwesigye Elioda   
    433. Hon. Tumwine Anne Mary   
    434. Hon. Tumwine Elly  
    435. Hon. Turyahikayo Paula   	Yes 
    436. Hon. Tusiime Michael  
    437. Hon. Twesigye John   		Yes
    438. Hon. Twesigye Itungo Nathan   Yes 
    439. Hon. Twinamasiko Onesimus 
    440. Hon. Wadri Kassiano  
    441. Hon. Waira Kyewalabye   		Yes
    442. Hon. Wakabi Pius  
    443. Hon. Waluswaka James 	 	Yes
    444. Hon. Nambozo Florence   		Yes 
    445. Hon. Walyomu Moses 	 		Yes
    446. Hon. Wamanga-Wamai Jack			
    447. Hon. Wamakuyu Mudimi   		Yes
    448. Hon. Watenga Godfrey  
    449. Hon. Watongola Rehema  
    450. Hon. Wekomba Sarah
    451. Hon. Werikhe Michael    
    452. Hon. Woboya Vicent  
    453. Hon. Yaguma Wilberforce    

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Zaake is not able to attend. Honourable members, I will now take members voting on Zoom.

    454. Hon. Tusiime Micheal 		Yes
    455. Hon. Ayaka Rose 			Yes	
    456. Hon. Nankabirwa Ann Maria 	Yes
    457. Hon. Margaret Lamwaka  		Yes

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those of you who were absent when I called your names, please stand and vote.

Hon. Bbumba Syda  			Yes
Hon. Woboya Vicent  		Yes
Hon. Kamateeka Jovah 		Yes
Hon. Keefa Kiwanuka 		Yes
Hon. Lokodo Simon 			Yes
Hon. Lowila C.D. Oketayot 	Yes
Hon. Muyanja Mbabaali 		Yes
Hon. Lokeris Samson 		Yes
Hon. Ayepa Michael 			Yes
Hon. Rwamulikya Gerald 		Yes
Hon. Hellen Adoa  			Yes
Hon. Mary Karooro Okurut 	Yes
Hon. Jalia Bintu Lukumu 		Yes
Hon. Nsubuga Simeo - Yes
Hon. Baguma Spellanza Muhenda – Yes
Hon. Nayebale Sylivia – Yes
Hon. Chekwel Lydia – Yes
Hon. Achiro Lucy – Yes
Hon. Mangusho Lawrence – Yes
Hon. Makumbi Kamya Henry – Yes
Hon. Driwaru Zaitun – Yes
Hon. Egunyu Janepher Nantume – Yes
Hon. Baryomunsi Chris – Yes
Hon. Nakwang Christine Tubo - Yes
Hon. Watenga Godfrey – Yes
Hon. Anywarach Joshua - Yes
Hon. Kafuuzi Jackson – Yes
Hon. Bagoole John – Yes
Hon. Alum Santa – Yes
Hon. Migadde Robert - Yes
Hon. Wekomba Sarah Nambozo - Yes
Hon. Namuganza Persis - Yes
Hon. Onyango Gideon - Yes
Hon. Kyinyamatama Juliet - Yes
Hon. Musumba Isaac - Yes
Hon. Atim Beatrice Anywar - Yes (Vote on Zoom)
Hon. Orot Ismael – Yes 
Hon. Mutebi Noah – Yes 
Hon. Songa Lawrence – Yes (Voted on Zoom) 
Hon. Mugabe Dononzio – Yes
Hon. Angella Fred – Yes

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Are there any other members who have not voted? Have you failed to get hon. John Baptist Lokii? I thought I saw hon. Jesca Ababiku. Hon. Pecos Kutesa, register and vote. We are voting on Terego. 

Hon. Kuteesa Pecos – Yes  
Hon. Akello Silvia – Yes (Voted by Zoom)
Hon. Komuhangi Margaret – Yes (Voted by Zoom)
Hon. Elotu Cosmas – Yes (Voted by Zoom)
Hon. Byarugaba Alex – Yes
Hon. Lokii John Baptist – Yes (Voted by Zoom)
Hon. Charles Ngabirano – Yes

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will close the vote in five minutes. If there are Members who will not have voted then they will not be able to vote. Gen. Wamala, I have seen you. How do you vote on Terego?
Gen. Katumba Wamala – Yes 
Hon. Stella Atyang – Yes (Voted on Zoom)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is 2.40 p.m. The voting is now closed. Anyone who has not voted will not be able to vote. Clerk, can you give me the tally? 

Honourable members, as per the roll call and Zoom, there were 243 members present during this Sitting. The motion was for the alteration of the boundaries of Arua District to create Terego District.

The results are as follows: Abstentions were 5, the Nos were 2 and the Ayes were 236. The motion for the creation of Terego District is approved. Thank you. (Applause)

(Question put and agreed to.)

2.40
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Madam Speaker, allow me, on behalf of the Ministry of Local Government – and I am sure that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on behalf of Government, will thank you – to thank you for your guidance and patience and for seeing us through this motion. 

Allow me to thank you, honourable colleagues, for supporting the people of Terego to get a district. Congratulations to the people of Arua and Terego. We will do our best to put the instruments in place to make sure that on 1st July this district takes off. Thank you, very much and God bless us. (Applause)

2.41
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Prime Minister and on behalf of the Executive, I would like to say that it is true when they say that there is strength in unity. It is true now and it can be seen here. Terego alone – from West Nile, we are very few and we cannot meet all these votes required. (Applause) Being a cock of West Nile – (Laughter)– I also thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Members, in the morning I had said that when we finish the vote, we shall address a few issues of national concern. It is coming to 3.00 p.m., so, we can only do the six which have been submitted to me and then we will break off. Let us have hon. Abott Ouma, followed by hon. Anyakun.

2.42
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, I come from Bukooli Island in Namayingo District and my constituency is entirely in the waters. The trend of the water levels is really threatening the islands. We have 47 beaches and 23 of these beaches are almost submerged. People’s houses are in the water; they have nowhere to sleep and have nothing to eat. They have now gone to other people’s places.

Madam Speaker, it is very sad that whenever we make submissions – even the distribution of food which is taking place, these hard-to-reach areas are really suffering. I just came from the waters yesterday and when you see the sorry state in which people are – people are crying, the women and the children. Around 23,000 people have been displaced. They have nothing to eat. 

I pray that the Government carries out a serious survey because we do not know what will take place tomorrow. You have seen in Mayuge that one of the islands is already submerged. The Government should actually tell us the causes and the remedies.

My prayer is that the Government should make sure that, one, these people who are now displaced are at least given some materials so that they can construct. Two, they should salvage them by giving them food – they have nowhere to go and nowhere to sleep. Allow my colleague also to say something –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was here last week. We talked about the islands which were being submerged and he said they were going to evacuate people in Mayuge. I want to know whether they actually did that. He said on this Floor that they were going to evacuate them.

MS PACUTO: Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Abott for giving way. We are yet faced with another major problem as a country. On most of the water bodies, including the Albert Nile where most of Pakwach District lies, the water levels have risen. 

I moved to about four landing sites in Pakwach District over the weekend. The women are facing a very big problem. They cannot easily fetch water because the hippopotamus and crocodiles are right at the landing sites where they are supposed to fetch water. Our people are at great risk of being swallowed up by crocodiles. 

There is a big market in one of my sub-counties in Panyimur that was constructed by Iceland. However, when you reach there, the water suds are the ones protecting it. It is broken and we are bound to lose that market that fetches a lot of revenue.

Madam Speaker, the bridge which is a gateway to West Nile is at risk. I talked to the district engineer and he told me that slowly by slowly the iron will wear out and the anchoring support may eventually give way.

We have a problem of security. These suds are everywhere and some wrong people could sit on these suds and keep moving to areas where they may not be needed. Cholera is imminent. When you go to the landing sites all sorts of rubbish is everywhere –

THE SPEAKER: I thought you were giving information.

MS PACUTO: I pray that Government moves to Pakwach very fast to help our people. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Please, close.

MR OUMA: Madam Speaker, there is a colleague – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are now taking over my work. Okay, tell us about Jinja.

MS KATALI: Madam Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. The three islands in Jinja – Kisima One, Kisima Two and Rwabitoke – are going to be swept away soon, especially Rwabitoke; it has almost disappeared. The houses there have been swept away. The gardens have been submerged. People have nowhere to stay. They need immediate relocation from Rwabitoke to another place. They need food and medical supply. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.48
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Saturday, 2 May 2020, there was a downpour in Nakapiripirit District that lasted for over four hours. The rain caused a dam - that is at the foot of Mt Kadam - to burst and there was a very strong flood that caused a lot of havoc and disaster in my district. It happened especially in Namalu Subcounty and part of Loregae Subcounty – these are highly populated sub-counties in the whole of Karamoja. They are also the food baskets for the entire region. 

This flood carried houses, household property and most of the gardens have been swept off. This is the season for planting and crops are germinating. Everything has been swept away, meaning we are going to have famine as a district.

Two bridges - the one of Amaler and the one of Namalu Trading Centre - were all carried off. Fortunately, UNRA yesterday sent a communication to stop the movement between Muyembe and Nakapiripirit. My prayer is for the minister in charge of disaster preparedness to come up with non-food and food items to rescue the people who have been displaced by the water. 

The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should also help us to give feeds to the people of Nakapiripirit, especially Namalu and Loregae sub-counties. UNRA should catch up with the issue of the contractor. I heard that the road has already been given to the contractor for tarmacking. Therefore, we do not know whether these bridges will be constructed as a priority so that business can go on.

Madam Speaker, we have also received a donation. If there was a way, they can also use part of this donation to give to the people who are suffering right now. The donations are for the people of Uganda, not just waiting for people on COVID-19. If items are there, through the goodwill of the people of Uganda, let them give to the people who are suffering with the floods instead of storing these things to wait for COVID-19. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Let me invite hon. Ndamira; her issue is similar. She is not here! I wanted the Prime Minister to address their issues together – the issue of the islands and the issue of the floods. I do not see hon. Ndamira. Maybe you can now respond to those.

THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, it is a pity that because of a lot of rain now, all our water bodies around the country are flooded. For example, over 1,000 people were evacuated from Masauri island to Saditi Island by the help of UPDF marines. 

Government has given them some food, medicine, mosquito nets and all the water bodies - according to a meeting this afternoon chaired by the Prime Minister, all the sites around Lake Victoria are submerged.

Lake Kyoga and Lake Albert are submerged; so, this afternoon, one of the actions taken is that a representative from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was there; the Minister of Water and Environment submitted a report with other three technical teams that met last week.

We formed three teams, one was to discuss the safety of our dams and the livelihood of our people; for instance these people that are being moved, then our people who were affected in the submerged areas.

A budget was submitted and the ministry of finance was directed to give some money to the Ministry of Water and Environment. The Minister of state for Water is moving-(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, I would like to thank my learned friend, Gen. Moses Ali; we were together at Law School. I am rising to seek clarification from the Prime Minister through you, Madam Speaker, on whether this Parliament can know how much money the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness has in cash.

From his submission to this honourable Parliament, it is as if the ministry of Finance was in that meeting to see what they can give. Can you tell this country how much money the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness has got; whether there is a disaster or not so that as a country or as Parliament, we can see what to do other than firefighting. 

Every meeting, you call hon. Bahati, Ministry of Finance. We may even decide to take part of the COVID-19 money from the other department.

GEN. MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, this is a very difficult question. I cannot mention off head how much the budget for the ministry of Water is but this afternoon, the Minister of Water and Environment submitted a budget of Shs 42 billion for the next six months as a short-term basis to handle these problems.

However, the committee said that it was not enough. They asked both the ministers of Water and Finance to go back and discuss and report tomorrow to the Prime Minister; it is for the medium-term and the long-term programme will come later. We are now concerned about money for the short term, which is six months from now.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.56
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Independent, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Since Uganda entered a lockdown, Gulu District in particular has observed and cooperated with all the guidelines but there have been two disturbing things in our sub region.

One is charcoal trade, which continues to attract huge trucks from all over the country moving with more than one or two people, settling in villages and attracting people from Kenya.

In particular, in one of my parishes in Omel, we surrounded about 4 different groups of Kenyans who had arrived and they said that they traveled through the night. We wondered - because there are check points all over; how did these people travel all night? 

One aspect that is disrupting the observance of this procedure is the influx of people who are doing charcoal trade. We do not know what means they use but it is upsetting our community. There seems to be some cooperation with some security agents because when the district raises the issues, they get telephone calls from high level security people, especially the police. There seems to be “big” people in Kampala in the police engaged in this matter; so, even those junior officers do not have the powers to hold these trucks.

Secondly, in that same line, if you remember some few years back, His Excellency the President, ordered all the Balaalo who had invaded the Acholi sub region and northern Uganda to move away. The 4th Division was ordered to evacuate them; they were moved with all their animals out of Gulu with over 400 trucks of animals.

Since we went into lockdown, the worrying element is that these Balaalo are transporting themselves back to Gulu in the night, with their animals. They are visible in places between Palabek and Atyak, they are also in areas of Paibona; those are the places I know of and in Nwoya as well.

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers?

MR OKUMU: Before I make my prayers, the second component of the Balaalo issue is that they have become cattle thieves. Just a week ago, when the trucks take their animals, they also steal the local animals of our people. 

I also lost over 30 animals, a week ago my neighbour’s fence was cut and they loaded his animals onto a truck. Fortunately, we have been able to follow clues and a few Balaalo have been arrested and one was found in Nakasongola. My prayer is that -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This issue of the Balaalo is not only limited to Gulu. I was in Kasilo over the weekend and was shocked to find a group of them driving cows. I do not even know how they crossed with the COVID-19 regulations; I do not know how they managed to move. I found them with over 400 cows trekking and they had already entered Kasilo. 

Yesterday, the LCI and the Secretary for Defence fought because it looked like they had used money to bribe the LCI. As we speak now, Madam Speaker, I do not know whether they are safe. I have informed the RDCs about it.

However, what makes us wonder is how do they move during this time of COVID-19? That is where there could have been connivance with other people or the security organs; how someone can move with over 400 cows all the way to Kasilo. So, it is a big problem. It may not only be limited to Gulu and Teso but may be the whole region. 

I know there could have been challenges because of flooding somewhere but if they are to move, they should move in an organised way. However, at this time where people are locked up because of COVID-19, we have a fear. Tomorrow, if the locals take the law into their hands, it will be dangerous. So, I think this should be restricted and people stopped from moving and disorganising other communities.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought there was a curfew in this country - a countrywide curfew. I do not know but who is exempt from the curfew? I think Government should tell us. Who is exempt? I am indoors by 6.30 p.m. and I am a senior person in this country. So, who are these who are moving at night?

MR OKUMU: My prayer, Madam Speaker – I also saw this matter at one time in Obongi. Let me tell you; almost the whole of Northern Uganda –

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR OKUMU: My prayer is that before the people take the law into their hands - this should not take more than one or two weeks because our people are not going to wait. They will have to defend themselves and chase away these people who do not own land but want to invade our areas.

The Government must act; go down there and give security – the authority the President gave last time – to evict the balaalo within one week or else, I do not see how we will be able to stop the people from getting hold of the Balaalo and all their cattle.

My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that Government acts now and not leave our people in this kind of situation. We want to be safe from the Coronavirus but we also do not want to be invaded at a time of difficulty like this. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can we get a statement from the Government on Thursday; one about who is exempt from the curfew, who has allowed these people to move at night in this country and why they are moving animals to different parts of the country? We want an answer on Thursday.

3.03
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance - concerning the UPDF soldiers who are very busy escorting surveyors who are planting mark stones on people’s land.

The whole of last week, from Monday until Thursday, UPDF soldiers were very busy escorting the surveyors and yet we do not know where they came from. They were planting mark stones on people’s land covering three villages: the villages of Sindi within Amuru Town Council, Lajago village and Letngec village.

They are telling our community to organise and leave that land permanently. That area contains about 500 households. Last Sunday, I was with them. People are really desperate and we do not know why the UPDF soldiers are behaving that way.

Our prayer, Madam Speaker, is that the minister in charge of defence and security should rein in on the 4th Division Commander. The 4th Division Commander based in Gulu should be brought to book on why he is allowing the UPDF soldiers to go and escort the surveyors, whom we do not know where they are coming from.

We are in a lockdown and people are home. I remember the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development gave a directive that no land transaction should take place at this particular time. However, the UPDF soldiers are busy utilising the opportunity.

Finally, I pray that the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should stop any illegal land transactions at this particular time. I pray, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs is directed to take action against the 4th Division Commander for facilitating surveying of land in Kilak South and give us an update this week on Thursday. We are not supposed to be doing other work. The Government offices are closed; I do not know where they got the surveyors from. So, we need urgent action to stop this.

The Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is also directed to take an interest and stop the illegal surveying because we are not supposed to be surveying land at this time. Thank you. We need a report on Thursday; it is urgent.

3.07
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance - regarding COVID-19 and the lockdown food relief in and around Kampala.

Madam Speaker, as we all remember, this Parliament, early last month, committed a tune of about Shs 59 billion to be used to buy food relief for the people around the country who are staying home –

THE SPEAKER: Around the country? No.

MR KASIBANTE: I beg your pardon, Madam Speaker; to be used for relief for the people around Kampala and Wakiso Districts.

As we speak now, it is almost a month since the exercise began. I represent one of the constituencies in Kampala. I can report to you that 99 per cent of the people I represent sleep on empty stomachs. The food relief has not covered even one per cent of the people of Kampala and its environs.

Rubaga Division, where I come from, is estimated to have a population of about one million people. Earlier this week, the COVID-19 taskforce issued statistics of how they have been distributing food. Rubaga Division, with an estimate of about one million people, was shown with about 9,000 beneficiaries so far. That is 0.9 per cent of the people of Rubaga Division - therefore meaning that about 99.1 per cent of the people are sleeping on empty stomachs.

As members of Parliament, we are overwhelmed. Just last week, about three of my voters were arrested by police and detained for two days for coming and knocking at my door, asking for food. I even had to pay money and do whatever would be possible to have them out of the police cell. 

Madam Speaker, there is a saying we cannot understand that this food is going to the so-called vulnerable poor. I would like to, first of all, ask Government to explain the criteria it is using to determine the vulnerable poor.

What is happening down there? Everybody is staying home. People do not have access to where they can get money to buy food. So, the issue of being vulnerable is no longer applicable because no one, for a full month now, can access a place of work where he or she can get some income – (Interjection) – Information? 

THE SPEAKER: No, please. We want to conclude.

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the Member that I live in a place called Mpererwe in Kawempe South. I look very ugly to those hungry people. Every time we pass, they ask for food. As my car passes, even if I had something in my hand, I am not allowed to give them. Even if I had some little money and I say, “Let me buy something and give them,” I am not allowed to do that. Hon. Zaake was beaten for doing that. What should we do in that circumstance? 

On the food distribution in Kampala, I would like to inform the honourable member that very many parts of Kampala are not being reached including the place I live in. Thank you, for giving way.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you. Madam Speaker, what is more touching is that as people stay home and watch TV, they see on TV the national taskforce is receiving donations including milk, eggs and cooking oil – (Interjections) – I want to conclude. 

I can perfectly report to this House that there is no - even among the 0.9 per cent that have benefited from this food distribution - Ugandan in and around Kampala who has ever been given an egg, cooking oil or whichever. 

As I conclude, Madam Speaker, we need to understand from Government how it expects these Ugandans to survive since the lockdown gets extended each and every other day it expires? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the Government owes us an explanation how far they have gone in addressing the 1.5 million people they told us about; the people for whom we allocated the Shs 59 billion. We need an answer as quickly as possible. 

Secondly, honourable members, I just want to urge you, concerning the Shs 20 million, to follow the instructions given to you from this House. There are too many guidelines from here, from there. You are members of Parliament. This is your institution and you account to the Accounting Officer here. Follow the guidelines given to you and address the needs of your people whether it is ambulances, sanitisers or food. Please, go and address them. Thank you. (Applause)

Honourable members, we have done quite a lot for today. I want to adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much. 

(The House rose at 3.13 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 06 May 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)

