




Thursday, 7 May 2020

Parliament met at 2.26 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am having difficulties speaking with this thing on but I welcome you to this afternoon Sitting. We have quite a bit of business; so, we shall try to limit the debates so that we can cover as much of the Order Paper as possible. 

There are four issues of national concern and we should use exactly four minutes. Let us begin with hon. Wanzala – you have two minutes.

2.28
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. All district local governments and other local governments in Uganda have had their sittings suspended, according to the guidelines by the Ministry of Local Government. 

When you look at all the local governments in Uganda – districts, municipalities and sub counties – they are the supreme organs in those areas. The Ministry of Local Government has guided that those councils should not sit to consider their budgets and development plans and others. The Ministry of Local Government has guided that the business committee should look at the district development plan and the budget – and even discuss and approve them. This is a three-year development plan, which needs all district councillors to be available.

I am looking at a scenario where the district COVID-19 taskforce, which is comprised of almost 30 members, sits almost weekly. However, a district council, for example, in Nakasongola, has 25 members. In Lyantonde, they are 22. In Buikwe, the council members are around 30. 

Madam Speaker, why doesn’t the Ministry of Local Government allow these local government councils to sit? In the Local Government Act (Cap. 243), these people are supposed to sit once in two months. Why can’t the districts, municipalities and subcounty councils be allowed to sit – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Wanzala. Of course, the issue of the local councils is an issue of democracy and representation. Therefore, we shall ask the Minister of Local Government to come and tell us what can be done to ensure that, one, we are maintaining the guidelines for COVID-19 but also not suspending democracy in our local governments. The minister should come and update us next week on Wednesday.

2.31
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise on an urgent matter concerning over 16 teachers regarding a microfinance institution called Platinum. Sometime last year, they invited teachers to register with them and they also invited teachers to hand over their national IDs and they photocopied them. At the end of the day, without applications for loans – because they had handed over everything – this microfinance institution proceeded to give these teachers money without prior consent on the amount that they needed. 

On receipt of the money, these teachers immediately withdrew and returned it. However, to the surprise of these teachers, Platinum decided to start deducting these teachers’ salaries every month and they have continued to do so. The teachers went to Court but nothing has been resolved. The teachers are now crying. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports should come on board and give them support because this is direct fraud by Platinum.
My prayer is that the Ministry of Education and Sports should immediately suspend the operations of the microfinance in parts of northern Uganda, especially to teachers, until this matter is resolved. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter is extremely serious. This is, I think, the third time it has come on the Floor of this House – not on this particular microfinance company but there are also two others and they are targeting teachers. We want the Minister of Education and Sports to tell us how this will be resolved. Also, why do people force others to borrow from them? It is a serious issue -

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Indeed, to give you more information on this issue, some of these microfinance companies have even seized ATM cards from teachers. Therefore, when salaries come out, you find somebody at the ATM, drawing all monies from the different teachers’ accounts. They gave them their pin codes so that they get the money. I think hon. Muyingo will bear me witness. We had the same issue in the Committee on Education and Sports. 

Who gives the letters of undertaking that these people should get loans from these people yet they are poor earners? Imagine a situation where a teacher’s ATM card is controlled by a microfinance company! That is unbecoming and indeed unfair. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to examine this issue and give us an update. This is the third time the complaint is coming to the Floor and it is mainly in northern Uganda.

2.35
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am addressing the issue of expectant mothers. Recently, when the President was addressing the nation, he clearly put it that all security agencies and personnel manning checkpoints should leave expectant mothers going to hospitals to move without permits or letters.

On Monday, 4 May 2020, in Kyengera, a lady called Grace Nakomo – the wife of Kassim Male – was going to hospital to deliver. The security personnel manning the checkpoint stopped the lady from going. 

As the gentleman tried to explain to those people that he was taking his madam to hospital, they instead entered a scuffle. They wrestled with the young man. The young man said that they even took money from him. Eventually, they had to go to the side of the road and the lady was delivered on the side of the road. In fact, it was her husband who delivered her. One media station tried to run that story on Monday. 

Madam Speaker, we expect the concerned leaders like the Inspector General of Police (IGP), the Commander-in-Chief and others to do something. Instead, they have kept quiet. Every other day, you see Mr Enanga at the Uganda Media Centre trying to tell us how the nation is moving. The other day, someone said if you distribute food, it is “attempted murder”. 

I wonder whether there is an attempted murder case as serious as that of a security officer who has stopped a lady going to give birth. My prayer is that instead of Mr Enanga always talking, the IGP or the Commander-in-Chief should openly tell the nation what happened and why it happened when the President said expectant mothers are visibly seen and should be allowed to go without letters?

Madam Speaker, we cannot leave the nation to move like this, especially what happened in Kyengera - (Interruption) 

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give to the honourable colleague is that when it comes to expectant mothers, as leaders – Madam Speaker, this kind of situation has happened twice in Kawempe. As a Member of Parliament, I had to write a sort of permission letter - without going to the RDC - that the pregnant mother should be taken to the nearest health centre. I am, therefore, appealing to the members of Parliament that if such situations happen in your constituencies, do not wait for the RDC or anybody else. Otherwise, you are saving lives.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if there is a case of attempted murder, that is one - preventing a mother from going to deliver. That is the person who should be charged with attempted murder.

I would like to know something; when the President makes those guidelines, who actually follows up to inform the lower people?   The President gives those guidelines during a press conference. Minister for Presidency, what happens?


MR KIBALYA: As the minister comes, I would like to say that the people in Kampala could be lucky that such cases can be seen. If the security personnel that are in Kampala, who normally have the privilege to listen to the President and can behave like that, what about those in Bugabula South Constituency? I think the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister in the Office of the President should come out and tell us whether these personnel have their own directives from other officers.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what happens after the press conference and how do you inform the country and the operatives?

2.39
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PRESIDENCY) (Ms Esther Mbayo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. After addressing the nation - there are various committees that were put in place right from the national to the district and later on to the sub-counties and wards.

It is upon those committees that were put in place to follow up on such incidents. However, I am going to take it up. I will liaise with my honourable colleagues concerned, members of the national task force and we shall come back with an informed position.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I want to know: who briefs the operatives; the army, the police and the LDUs on the guidelines? That is what I want to know.

MS MBAYO: Madam Speaker, there are various committees that were put in place. There is a committee in charge of security that is chaired by Gen. Tumwine. There is another committee in charge of health that is chaired by the Minister of Health - (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I have carefully listened to your question. Indeed, one time, I raised a procedural matter on the Floor of Parliament about the Prime Minister. Lately, I have taken keen interest - although I used not to do so - to listen to the President whenever he is addressing the nation.

Madam Speaker, in the 13 speeches that the President has made, he has always stated that on A, B, C, D, the Prime Minister will clarify. To be specific, when he talked about the boda boda issue, he directed Gen. Katumba Wamala, the Minister of Works and Transport but the minister never said anything. It was not until after the President came back to clarify that boda bodas should stop moving at 5.00 p.m. Therefore, is it in order for the honourable minister not to answer your question?

When the President gives guidance and asks the Prime Minister to proceed with his directives under the guidance of the Prime Minister or the Minister of Works and Transport, is it in order for those people not to continue? The Minister in the Office of the President is here telling us about the LCIII or the chiefs who are nowhere in the fight of COVID-19. Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the country needs to know the channel of communication and how effective it is. Otherwise, it is clear that after the press conference, nothing happens. I have never heard the Minister of Information and Communications Technology and National Guidance say anything to the country on these issues. Let us have hon. Ssemujju and hon. Pacuto.

2.41
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Madam Speaker, the President allowed some sectors of the economy to begin operating. The following day, Police was stopping them until the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, hon. Amelia Kyambadde had to address a press conference. This is chaos. Government does not operate in a casual way.

Madam Speaker, the Head of State must be advised. He should write down the directives and send them to the implementing officers. When the minister responsible for the Presidency speaks like that, I pity this country. She said there are committees that are listening - Governments do not operate that way. Government must reduce its instructions in writing and then these instructions are sent to the implementers. This confusion you are causing - (Member timed out.)

2.43
MS JANE PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the Minister, Office of the President. It is not only expectant mothers that need express permission to go to hospital. It is a known thing world over that women are the best caretakers of anybody who is sick including you, men here.

Besides that, there are women who are referred from health centres III or IV. In some few cases, the district task forces have helped them go to a hospital. However, after being delivered and discharged, after two days, they are not able to get back to their respective villages. Madam Speaker, a woman who has gone through Caesarean section or even normal birth, cannot walk tens of kilometres. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have made your point. Please conclude.

MS PACUTO: We need this to be cleared by the Minister, Office of the President. How should these women transport themselves back home?  

The police should not act like robots. They should act as human beings. You see a pregnant woman or a woman with a newborn baby yet you are stopping the husband from taking her home or to the hospital. What kind of service are they offering to Ugandans?

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding -

THE SPEAKER: Is it something different? If it is, then go back.

2.46
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the Floor. I would like to inquire from the Minister for Presidency: out of the money that was allocated for COVID-19 to the districts - the Shs 165 million went to every district through the local Government. There was Shs 55 plus Shs 18 million that was meant for the Resident District Commissioners and District Internal Security Officers at the districts. Unfortunately, it was sent to the rest of districts except about six or nine of the new districts.

I do not know what explanation the minister has that this money has not reached the new districts to be utilised by the Resident District Commissioners’ offices and the others. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: On that one, the minister will answer but I have been told that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development gave different guidelines on that money and the local governments also gave different guidelines on the same money.

2.48
MR DAVID ABALA	(NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am happy that my colleague raised this matter of people who normally get stranded. I am speaking as a Member for Ngora County.

Several my people who were admitted in Kumi Hospital have been stranded. Recently, a child died in a place called Odwarat Parish in Ngora Sub County just because they were not cleared by those in authority. When they called the ambulance people, they asked for money. That forced them to also call the Office of the Resident District Commissioner and it was the same thing.

That is why I would like the minister to be specific here that if the President speaks and now presents a way forward and it is not communicated properly, it is the common man who dies. I would like the minister to be clear to the people of Ngora because we buried the child two weeks ago.

When we ask for who is in charge, nobody is presenting a way forward. My good minister should be able to give us proper answers.

2.49
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative	Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the guidelines, I have just read in the newspapers today that over 3,600 people have been arrested as a result. I would like to know; when someone is arrested, they must face the law. However, under what law are they going to be charged?

We have been told that about 30 per cent of the food distributed is bad and has some toxicants, which cause cancer. In the circumstances that people get sick because of that food, who is to take charge because it is already known that when the food is contaminated, the people likely to be affected; somebody must take responsibility. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in regard to the guidelines especially on the curfew, I would like to know whether anybody in Government has explained, in our local languages, what curfew means. Sometimes people who are caught in the curfew probably do not know what it is. 

Has anyone explained, in our languages, the meaning of the word “curfew” and its implications because I see disabled people, old women caught up on the road?

2.51
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Kibalya raised a very pertinent issue, who follows up on His Excellency the President’s directives and guidelines? We have not received a satisfactory answer and yet in those excellent briefings and guidelines given by His Excellency, I see security chiefs seated there. 

The Chief of Defence Forces, the Inspector General of Police, the ministers responsible for security are always present. Are they there just to warm chairs or follow through the instructions of the President? People are suffering at these checkpoints because the policemen and security personnel do not have clear instructions to follow. These are people who follow orders and so, if they do not get the right orders, they are bound to make mistakes.

We are generally concerned - our pregnant women are suffering. People going to work are suffering and yet there are clear guidelines given by the President.

Lastly, who also guides the President in giving these directives? His Excellency can guide that let the carpentry workshops, garages open yet the connected agencies like the spare parts dealers cannot go to their workshops because they do not have permits to allow them go to their work places. How will they move? The directives should be clear because all the relevant sectors that deal with that particular business are supposed to operate together. 

2.53
MR SILAS AOGON	(Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, there are so many challenges but I think the biggest of all these is the fact that we did not push Government to declare a state of emergency, formally. If we had done that, it would have been easy to do things properly.

I also think that we needed a serious Bill; we could even name it the “The Coronavirus pandemic management Bill” and then process it into an Act to help us secure a legal framework within which we would have been able to manage these challenges.

Come to Kumi and see what is happening. Go to Soroti - hon. Abala talked about somebody who died in some village because it is difficult to transport patients. All this is happening because we did not prepare the country well for this pandemic.

Madam Speaker, I have so many people who are stranded in Kampala here; they need to be evacuated to places where they originate from. Nobody knows them here; they need food and water but they have no one to offer those to them. 

If you came and stayed at a guesthouse and got stuck there because of the lockdown and nobody is rescuing you, what will you do? Hon. Ssemujju, there are six in your constituency; you should take care of them for now. They called me this morning; they are stuck and cannot do anything. They do not have food. I am sending them to you because you are responsible. If you have any in my constituency, I will also try what I can.

Madam Speaker, there is a problem; in Kamwokya there is a girl who is stranded with a sick child. They want to go to Kumi but they cannot be evacuated. The situation is so overwhelming. When we said that we needed some money, people thought Shs 20 million was enough; it is not.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in regard to what hon. Aogon has said, yesterday I received information that there are students from a number of universities who had expected to go home in April. They are stuck in Kampala and cannot go back to their homes; they also do not have food.

The money they paid to the hostel owners has expired and the landlords want to chase them but there is no one to take charge. All these are the things Government needs to pay attention to.

2.56
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to ask the minister; the President put in place a national taskforce to receive donations and a committee for distribution. We have seen Ugandans and others donate materials, especially medical supplies.

We would think that because we are handling an emergency, as soon as these supplies come in, they would be distributed quickly to the districts, hospitals and health centres. Unfortunately, our health centres do not have these materials; they do not have face masks, gloves, soap and all these protective materials.

Therefore, we wonder where these materials that are being donated are and what we are keeping them for, when the districts and health units should get them and use them during this time of emergency. I beg to submit.

2.57
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In line with transport, especially for pregnant mothers, recently in my constituency, in a parish called Bamusuuta, a pregnant lady was being carried on a boda boda to attend antenatal at Naggalama Hospital. The boda boda was stopped, the rider was arrested and the lady was caned by a policeman. 

Madam Speaker, as the minister goes for clarification regarding some of these guidelines, we should consider allowing mothers, in places where there are no vehicles or even instant ambulances, to use boda bodas to go and attend antenatal and other issues. 

I remember the President guided that they should make a programme for ambulances to reach out to them but some people do not have access to such facilities. We should allow them to at least be carried on boda bodas. A pregnant person is pregnant so there is no need for arguing. They can be allowed to go and be attended to in hospitals, instead of being harassed.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, I think if our committee was looking ahead, there should have been special stickers for those boda bodas to carry the sick people. Honourable minister, please answer. We need to move.

2.59
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Ms Esther Mbayo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank honourable colleagues for the concerns raised about who should follow up on the guidelines made by the President. I would like to make it clear that there is no confusion in the follow up of the guidelines after His Excellency has made the address.

Madam Speaker, the issue of COVID-19 is multi-sectoral; it touches almost all the sectors. When the President makes an address, the responsible minister in each sector follows up on how the guidelines should be followed.

There is a national taskforce on COVID-19 committee that is chaired by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Below that, there are various committees. As I alluded, we have a committee on donations that is chaired by hon. Mary Karooro Okurut. There is a committee on security that is chaired by Gen. Tumwine. There is a committee on trade and transport that is chaired by hon. Amelia Kyambadde. There is a committee on relief that is chaired – (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: I would like to thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Under our rules, ministers and MPs must be relevant. The questions that have been posed are very specific. You have the IGP and the CDF and they sit when the President is addressing the nation. The following day, the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, hon. Amelia Kyambadde, is restraining police because they are implementing a different order.

In fact, in other countries, a minister for the Presidency is usually a very serious person. (Laughter) The minister, instead of answering who communicates these measures and who follows up, is outlining the existence of committees.

The procedural issue I am raising, Madam Speaker, is whether if a minister is irrelevant, she should be allowed to waste Parliament’s time listening to what we already know; that these committees exist but the confusion goes on.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think we are aware that there are committees. However, from what the Members have said, the instructions are not translated to the implementers. That is why pregnant women are stopped and that is why people are caned. That is what we are talking about; it is a serious issue.

I think you should undertake to improve the communication. I do not even see where the Minister of ICT and National Guidance is involved in that taskforce. Who actually communicates? That is what we are asking. 

MS MBAYO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity. I would like to tell this House that we shall follow up on all the issues that have been raised by the honourable colleagues. Thank you.

3.03
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent importance regarding yet another disaster that has happened this morning in Bundibugyo. River Lamia that separates Uganda and DR Congo burst its banks this morning and ravaged four sub-counties of Kagugu, Busunga Town Council, Bundingoma and Kisuba. It destroyed gardens and homesteads. The entire Busunga Town Council is destroyed. 

An hour ago, we retrieved two bodies, including that of a UPDF soldier who was on duty at the border. as I speak, over 2000 people are homeless. They have no food and nowhere to sleep. I pray that Government responds immediately - first of all, to make sure that people do not starve out of hunger but also provide shelter for these people. 

Madam Speaker, I was here last week pleading with the Office of the Prime Minister that the people who were displaced by floods in Bundibugyo in December are still homeless. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister and a committee for the Presidency went and witnessed all this. These people are staying with relatives and friends. Government has not come to support them to resettle.

I use this opportunity also to plead again and appeal to Government to come to the rescue of these people. We are under lockdown. Imagine under the lockdown, your home and gardens are washed away. It means your livelihood is gone. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of Bundibugyo is really a pity because before the last devastation, the Member had come to the House to give notice and raise an alarm that something was about to happen in Bundibugyo. Afterwards, boulders came down and ravaged the homes and now it has happened again.

We want to know from the Prime Minister why after his visit – Was it last year or this year? When did the Prime Minister go to Bundibugyo? We would like to know why after his visit, nothing has been done for the people of Bundibugyo. 

Now that it has happened again, can we again ask the Minister, Office of the Prime Minister (Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees) and the entire Government to support the people of Buwamba to resettle and recover from this disaster? However, we want a report from the Government by Thursday next week. 

3.07
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the Namutumba-Budumba-Busolwe-Butaleja Road. It is true we are amidst the COVID-19 calamity but Government should also give an ear to the other areas especially transport. 

Recently, I went to Butaleja District to deliver food to the people but I almost failed to make it there because of the sorry state in which my road is – (Interjections) – Madam Speaker, may I be protected from the honourable members? 

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. 

MS MUGENI: Madam Speaker, those questions will be asked later. When I reached Namutumba, where I branch off to my district, I could not make it to Budumba Bridge. There is a spot called Kizuba – I am sure you know that area very well – which is impassable. You cannot cross from there to Budumba Bridge. 

Three days ago, a woman called me to report that she was waylaid as she walked from Namutumba to Butaleja. There are thugs who wait for people especially in the late hours of the day to beat and rob them of their property. At Budumba Bridge, we used to have security, which is no longer there. The shelters that had been put for the police officers were all damaged by robbers. As I speak, even the bridge that we had been using safely has been damaged by unscrupulous people and some of the equipment that had been put there was also vandalised. 

My prayer to the Ministry of Works and Transport is that they should come to our rescue because the road to Butaleja is no longer passable at all. It has been a shortcut for those who travel from Mbale and Tororo via Namutumba to Kampala. 

Madam Speaker, I pray through your office – we have waited for this road and the President has always said at functions that the road will be tarmacked anytime. However, it is not even shown anywhere in the programme. I request the Minister of Works and Transport to come to our rescue so that we can use our roads safely. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can the Minister of Works and Transport come and update this House next Thursday when he intends to rehabilitate the Namutumba-Budumba-Busolwe-Butaleja Road so that our people can travel safely. 

Honourable members, when we had the locusts’ situation, we used to get a weekly report but since the COVID-19 pandemic, we have not had any report from the Government. I want to direct that the Prime Minister or his representative should come every week and give us an update on the situation so that we know what is going on. 

Let us go to Item III.

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It has been a fortnight now that I have been going through the worst time of my life on planet earth. This specifically delves into the unfortunate attack on your person and by extension, the attack on this Parliament. 

A name is everything. You lose a name, you have lost everything. We can recover lost money, a lost investment but we cannot recover a name. 

Madam Speaker, you are the head of this great institution. You worked so hard for your name. Every young woman in this country looks up to you. You were the first female lawyer, the first female to open a law chamber, the first female Speaker and the first President of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. (Applause) The list is long. 

It grieves my spirit that somebody somewhere sits on a national television and scandalises your name – a name that you have worked so hard to build, not only in our country but globally. Personally, I do not take that lightly. 

It is the worst nightmare to be called a criminal or morally reprehensible. This means that somebody is being put in a cluster of criminals. 

Madam Speaker, an attack on one of us is an attack on all of us. What now defines and describes members of Parliament, both here and abroad is pigs, dogs and thieves. We cannot take this anymore. We need to restore the dignity of Parliament first. We need to bring back the honour that this House deserves before we can do anything else. 

I do not want to take a lot of your time. I was expecting that the whole House, grieved, wounded and bleeding as we are, would stand in unison with you, Madam Speaker and say that we demand nothing but an apology from somebody who sat somewhere and said, “Parliamentarians are morally reprehensible criminals; come on. 

Madam Speaker, the BBC and CNN run the same. Thank God that we are under an international lockdown but the moment you make a trip from here, all they will be seeing is not a Speaker of Parliament nor a Member of Parliament from Kampala but what we have been branded as.

As I take my seat, I ask colleagues that you will the urgency and need to have this addressed as soon as immediately. You might be aware of what we are seeing on television that there are some of us without even your clearance, honour, respect and dignity for this House that are already saying that members of Parliament should be given Shs 50 billion.

As I conclude, Madam Speaker, we are not ready to be scandalised for another time -(Interruption)

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Member is raising an important matter which concerns all of us as Members of Parliament and this House. However, he is shy to mention those particular individual(s) he is talking about.

Is he in order, Madam Speaker, for him to continue shying around without mentioning names of those people so that the entire country may know that such and such a person is belittling the third arm of Government? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe he can explain who those people are. (Laughter)

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Nsamba, my brother. Simple, the person in reference is my good friend and elder brother, the President of this country. And I would like to stop at that; I do not want to be distracted. My point is very clear.

Now, with Shs 20 million, we were branded as small scale thieves. There is something in the kitchen again called “Shs 50 billion.” And I wonder how many of us here are ready to be called large scale thieves.

Madam Speaker, the Head of State, during his campaign asked, “Do you want another rap” and I do not know what the people said. Maybe they said yes. Now, the question that is clear before us is “Do you want another trap, not another rap but a trap”.

Madam Speaker, the reason I stood here is to disassociate myself with that; I have had enough misfortune; my conscious has been wounded emotionally, crippled psychologically and I am not ready to be scandalised again. I would like to encourage this House that it is within our means to restore the dignity and honour of this great House. And there will never be anything we can do in exchange. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Katusabe. What I can say is that the issue of the Shs 50 billion has not come to me; I do not know about it. If it does come, we should handle it here officially.

MOTION WITHOUT NOTICE

3.21
MR IBRAHIM SEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I am moving a motion under our rule 58(m) and this motion deals with motions that can be moved without notice. And (m) specifically, touches on the question of privilege of members of Parliament.

The motion I am moving is for this Parliament to collectively express displeasure at the statements and disparaging remarks that the President made against this Parliament, the Speaker of Parliament and the members of Parliament. That is the first part of this motion.

The second part is that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Prime Minister must explain to Parliament why they kept silence yet they are members of the Parliamentary Commission and they participate in the decisions of the Commission. They must immediately explain why they kept quiet when Parliament was being bashed yet they were part of the decision that was made.

The third and final part of this motion is for Parliament to express its displeasure against all the actions that have been taken since this presidential address; Parliament being belittled by - I saw yesterday the Vice-President misbehaving and conducting himself like a cartoon - 

The two prayers in this motion are that;
    1) This Parliament collectively expresses displeasure at the disparaging remarks made by the head of state and 
    2) The Prime Minister and Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development explain to Parliament why they have kept quiet when a decision in which they participated was attacked by the Head of State.

Madam Speaker, I beg move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded by several members. 

(Motion seconded.)
THE SPEAKER: Let him justify.


MR SEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, one of the responsibilities of this Parliament is appropriation and this responsibility is constitutional and nobody can take it away. However, even when someone has a complaint or when the chief executive who presents here Bills for appropriation every year through his ministers is displeased, there is a channel of communication between Parliament and the Head of State.

I have seen this Parliament sending Bills to the President and he says, “I do not agree with this one…” and he writes back to you. I have not seen him go to the radio or television to begin attacking Parliament and the Speaker for passing Bills that he does not agree with.

I have also not seen the President portraying members of Parliament like a bunch of greedy people who are not doing anything but appropriating money for their own use.

Madam Speaker, like I said last week, the Head of State is the only one in this country that has a residence that is funded – in fact on television he said he does not even know the price of toilet paper. How could he have known? He is the only one who has a residence that is funded by taxpayers. 

This financial year, which we are about to conclude, we appropriated Shs 400 billion for his residence and Shs 170 billion for his office. I do not have to repeat because you are all familiar with these figures.

By attacking Parliament, the Head of State created an impression that this Parliament, first of all, does not understand its functions; secondly, members of Parliament are just a bunch of greedy people who are looking for money to go on self-aggrandisement. 

The purpose of this motion is to advise the President that he must use the official channels of communication the next time he would like to communicate to Parliament.

Secondly, Parliament cannot work on the orders of the Executive because our Constitution guarantees separation of powers.

Thirdly, members of Parliament are filling gaps because his Government has failed to do even some of the basic things. During this pandemic, I do not know how many people I have fed. I have become a Non-Governmental Organisation (NGO). Every day, I meet people at my gate and I receive phone calls to transport others to hospital. 

There are about 400 ambulances in this country. More than half have been contributed by Members of Parliament. Even when the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development through the Permanent Secretary wrote to us requesting for ambulances to go and help during the COVID-19 pandemic and we surrendered them, the ambulances are not serviced or fuelled and the drivers are not paid. 

I called ministers one after another, including the one in charge of Kampala, to at least provide me with protective gears for the two boys who are running the ambulance. Up to now, they have not got back to me.

Therefore, the purpose of this motion is to express displeasure at the disparaging remarks made about this institution of the state. It is also to advise the President that if he has a disagreement with Parliament, it serves him better to officially express himself by writing to the head of the institution instead of joining a mob of those who are throwing Members of Parliament in the mud. We do not expect a head of state to behave that way.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

The Speaker: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question – 

Mr Kibalya: Madam Speaker, I have an amendment.

The Speaker: Do it quickly, hon. Kibalya.

3.29
Mr henry kibalya (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, I second the motion with just two amendments. 
The first amendment is to equally register the disappointment from the NRM Parliamentary Caucus in the chairperson of the National Resistance Movement (NRM) Caucus. Whenever there is an issue the chairperson, who is the head of state, will invite the NRM Parliamentary Caucus to sit and resolve it in-house. 

However, this time, instead of inviting the NRM Parliamentary Caucus, he decided to go to the media and hammer us, including the colleagues that he has been moving along with in circumstances of need. 

(Text expunged)

3.31
Mr SAMUEL odonga otto (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, I wish to second the motion. I have been in this Parliament since 2001. I have not worked anywhere else. This is the only place and it might be my last address as well. I am now unemployable.

Since 2001 when I joined this institution, first, the Parliamentary Commissioners were elected by members of Parliament. I think that over the years when multi-partyism came into play, we made a big mistake to start allowing parties to designate those who should be members of the Parliamentary Commission.

Now, we have a situation where there is only one voice speaking for the institution and that is the Rt Hon. Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga – (Applause) – elected by Members. However, the Commissioners are now going for other meetings informally and then they say they should form another COVID-19 Constituency Taskforce. There is already one in the village.

I would like to associate myself with the motion and assure the President that he is not the only elected leader in this country. We all live on people’s votes. Our business is that of making votes and using people’s votes to give the very reasons people promise.

An attempt to undermine the institution of Parliament is an attempt to undermine even some of us. I returned the money, not because it was a bribe but because I do not want extra baggage. I can talk with authority. Members of Parliament should choose the path which they want.

Madam Speaker, this fight is bigger. I am always accused of being frank. You can continue accusing me until I meet my God. The fear is that the Speaker has the potential of being the President of this country - (Applause) - that is where the problem started.

I can assure you; if you have a problem, you can block your ears. The Rt Hon. Speaker has full potential of being the President of this country. They are attempts, by whatever means possible, to undermine her achievements. They are throwing Members of Parliament together with the Speaker.

Therefore, as I sit in support of the motion, I would like to also move that we amend our Rules of Procedure and provide for election of Parliamentary Commissioners; it should be added in that motion.

Secondly, the three arms of Government are not agreeing. The President is playing full-time politics. The court has amended their order and added only two words; the order remains there. 

When I was leaving the law school with Gen. Moses Ali some years back, we were told the procedure of challenging a valid court order.

Madam Speaker, I am worried. You are the head of this institution and personally, I respect you very much but there is an existing court order, which cannot be challenged by a letter or word of mouth. The fact remains there is an existing court order. 

I heard many Members of Parliament saying they were not represented in court. The Attorney-General must be represented in all suits against Government and in this case, the Parliamentary Commission was represented by the Attorney-General. 

Therefore, I am worried that we are going to see a situation where the court order remains valid; refuse to honour it at your own risk. The only person who managed not to honour a court order and got away with it, is Joseph Kony because they failed to get him. (Laughter) 

Other than supporting the Speaker, which I do, we have to be advised by the Parliamentary Commissioners on what steps our legal department is taking to overturn that court order. Otherwise, I support the motion and I fully support the Speaker with all my mind and soul. I can even choose to nominate her for a bigger office. What are you talking about? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish we could concentrate on the motion and not go into other things. However, what I can say is that the court order has been amended by the Secretary to the Treasury on two occasions. He has issued guidelines about that issue. He has also issued other guidelines in relation to the same issue. 

Therefore, for the first time, we have a subject where the three arms of Government have made an order on the same issue; the Parliament, the Executive and the Judiciary. This should be a case study in jurisprudence. 

3.37
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Indeed, I am a student of law but I will not take that side.   

Whenever members see me wearing my rosary, they love me so much and they continue calling me, “Omukatuliki”, which gives me a lot of pleasure. 

However, as I stand to support the motion, members, I remember when we came back for my second term, I was among members who were on that taskforce that strongly campaigned for the Rt Hon. Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga. I said a lot of words but my God was speaking to me that such things could come in future, where we would have Government and only one person responding to the President; that is Rebecca Kadaga, the Speaker seated in front of us.

I would like to put this on record - we are getting information - Parliament appropriates. Even under the Public Finance Management Act, where one goes for a virement, they still have to seek authority from those people concerned. 
However, the information we are getting is that you must have annoyed the Fountain of Honour, the President of this country. He got annoyed because he had been told that Parliament wanted to reduce on the amount appropriated for Defence and Veterans Affairs by some percentage and take it to the Ministry of Health. 

I worked in the Army for 10 years. Go to the military police and find out my record. You will see that I taught there. I slept at the Court Martial; those uniports you see there and what I can say is that some soldiers are not so happy with their payments. There is classified expenditure but some soldiers are not given money. They are working but are not paid well. The policemen are also complaining. Even when I am leaving home and I meet some, they keep saying the same. 

In educational psychology, there is what we call “suppressed aggression”. Honourable members, a husband and wife can have a quarrel at night. The man might even beat his wife in their bedroom but the children will never get any information about the fight. Then, when a young boy of three years is found taking milk from his mother’s cup and the mother kicks the boy and ask him why he is drinking from his cup - as the child is seeing the milk pouring, the cat comes in and takes the milk because it has poured on the floor – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude. 
MR SSEWUNGU: The mother then gets annoyed with the cat at home which has started taking the milk on the floor and kicks it. The cat then ends up scratching the children; the anger from the mother, the child and the milk the cat takes all the anger to the tree. 

We have a situation here where people are getting annoyed with the work of Parliament and they bring all their suppressed aggression onto Members of Parliament against their political divides. We should not support this. Let us fight this kind of situation. 

I was so surprised, while listening to a talk show on some radio station, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Matia Kasaija, denied knowledge of what took place in Parliament. When he was asked if he took the Shs 20 million, he said, “yes.” When asked what he did with it, he said he had bought posho with it for his voters because he wants to win next term. 

It is because of such contradictory statements that I support hon. Ssemujju’s motion. Honourable members, mostly those on the NRM side, there is a ploy to ensure you do not come back here. It takes place at this particular time. We saw it in the Ninth Parliament and we are seeing it now. Please, go and work for your people, as the Speaker told us. I am among those people working for the people. Go and concentrate in your constituencies and do not allow Parliament to be belittled by the Fountain of Honour. 

I am a member of the Appointments Committee and I know what ministers say when they come there. We cannot reveal it here but it is so disappointing that after they have taken over offices, they start frustrating the works of the Speaker and Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, I am going to pray for you. In Masaka, we have a person called Ngobya and in my area we have a sister who is going to be declared a saint. We are going to pray for you to continue answering issues that are against Government, that promote Parliament and the views of the people of Uganda. We shall support you. Nobody should intimidate you because – (Member timed out.) 

3.42
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (Jeema, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): I stand to support the motion by hon. Ssemujju, Madam Speaker. I was in the House when this matter came to the Floor of the House; the Appropriation Bill and this entire supplementary budget. Hon. Isaac Musumba, who is here, even proposed that the budget be passed without debate and he is a minister. His proposal received a lot of support on that day; he is a member of Cabinet. 

Ironically, some Cabinet members were on CCTV distancing themselves from this money and motion. That is part of the confusion. 

Madam Speaker, when we talk about separation of powers, we need to be very clear. The President presides over the Executive, the Chief Justice presides over the Judiciary and you, Madam Speaker, preside over Parliament. (Applause) At no time shall we surrender our authority to the Executive; at no time should the Executive direct Parliament on what to do, how to do it and when to do it. 

Therefore, it is important for the three arms of Government to respect their constitutional spaces. If the President wants to take advantage of the situation, he is free to do so. 

Chinua Achebe says, “If the house has fallen, you do not ask whether the ceiling fell with it…” Madam Speaker, we will have fallen. That is why it is important for us to stand behind you. I am glad that finally this motion has come through. We have nowhere to go. We have no choice but to stand with you. Anybody denigrating the Speaker, and by extension, denigrating Parliament and we follow that person – we are making a very big mistake. 

Finally, it is also good for the President to explain to the country how appropriation Bills come before this House because the impression being created is that this Bill emanated from the House, which is not true. This Appropriation Bill – the supplementary budget - was a creature of the Executive. If there was money in that supplementary budget for Parliament, then, Mr Museveni should explain to the country that, that was the responsibility of the Executive instead of portraying Parliament as being greedy. 

Madam Speaker, I returned the money, as directed by God and you, because you gave us guidelines and God gave us guidelines too. There were options. I don’t think that there is any Member of Parliament who has eaten that money. I am very sure that every Member of Parliament here has spent more than Shs 20 million. Therefore, the impression being created by Mr Museveni that we are greedy is morally reprehensible and is actually not correct. Let him go to our constituencies and find out what we have done; it is far beyond the Shs 20 million. 

Therefore, I think that it was unfair for the President to make statements that brought disrepute to the image of this Parliament. I am aware that this Parliament has supported the President; 95 per cent of the Bills that the Executive brings before this honourable House are passed without question. In very few instances does the President return Bills with reservations on certain provisions. Even when there are reservations, they are always considered. I don’t know why, this time round, he is so unhappy and he does not regard Parliament as an essential service. 

I remember, Madam Speaker, you directed the Prime Minister to give Members of Parliament stickers but they were not given. Each time the President addresses the nation, he talks about essential services and you are not mentioned. Therefore, as far as this COVID-19 fight is concerned, you are like a missed call on a public pay phone; just irrelevant, which I think is not right. This is the time for Parliament to assert itself and redeem our image, for our own good. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this non-essential service is the one which has, despite everything, sat here to process the Budget for the Republic of Uganda. We, the non-essential service, have done that despite all the problems. 

3.47
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to vividly support a motion by hon. Ssemujju. The timing of this attack in this House - Members, you need to be very cautious. We are soon entering into an election period and we need to be very careful when we are treading through these issues.

Madam Speaker, an attack on you is an attack on us and the House and we shall not tolerate it. We are going to speak whatever we can to make sure that we defend you. We have to stand with you and, Madam Speaker, I guarantee you this. 

Generally, the members are not happy with what has happened. However, this House should not be used for fighting personal wars. I think the people who are advising the President are not giving him good information and if they are using it to destroy you, your image is very clear and it speaks for itself. I am proud because I know you are one of the architects who are making this country to stand strong. Your achievements cut across and nobody doubts that.

Madam Speaker, we know that you and the House at large are going through a very difficult time but I would like to pray with the members that please, our cardinal role is clearly spelt out in the Constitution. Our role is to appropriate and there is nobody who can do that; it is only this House that has the authority. If people begin questioning how we appropriate - First of all, this Bill was brought with the consent of the minister and the Prime Minister is a member of the Commission. The President signed this Bill and if he was not happy, he should not have signed it. 

In any case, Madam Speaker, if you had dialogue with him, I think that was good enough to harmonise the position but the way the President came out was not good. Even after what you had discussed with him came out clearly in the public, how dare he call us reprehensive? It is totally uncalled for, for a head of state to discredit this House to this level. It is a very strong damage that he has caused us and we have to clean ourselves. 

Therefore members, we need to do this together and we need to be very careful. Even what we have appropriated and what has gone to the districts is not creating an impact. We are already getting reports that there are problems in the districts. Some districts in the north are not even spending this money. So you ask yourself, how is the intervention creating an impact? These are all issues that we need to discuss squarely and across the board. 

Madam Speaker, we really need to step up our game and continue doing what the Constitution mandates us to do. We should continue to do that without fear or favour because we know that we are doing the right thing. There is nobody who is going to intimidate us to back down because that is our role. Whether the public is getting incited against us or not, we shall have time to explain this but the truth will come out. 

Members, especially those of NRM, we know we are going into an election. Let us tread carefully and make sure that we defend the rights and freedoms of this House. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.51
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I stand here to support hon. Ssemujju’s motion and I would like to observe a few things as we debate this motion.

Madam Speaker, when I heard His Excellency lambasting honourable members of Parliament on all the national television stations, I was not shocked; I expected it. I think he only delayed because he was trying to measure the public reaction and see how he can position himself; whether to go with the public or to go with his legitimately elected Members of Parliament. 

However, I would like to say this; as we debate this motion, we should also begin to reflect carefully on our parliamentary system. I would have preferred a system like the one of South Africa where we can interface with President Museveni in Parliament because that is where we can exchange ideas. It is not in the caucus where debate does not ensue like in the Parliament. 

Regarding a lot of the statements he has made out there, we are not able to counter him. He needed to be taken head-on, based on the issues he raised. Unfortunately, he is far away from us. We often vent our anger on people like the Rt Hon. Prime Minister when indeed the person we should be challenging, through debate, is His Excellency the President. We should have challenged the issues he raised out there in the House. This is where I feel more comfortable challenging him regarding his ideas. 

Secondly, as other colleagues have stated, we should respect the separation of powers. Madam Speaker, you have done a very fantastic and wonderful job, as far as my four and a half year tenure as a Member of Parliament is concerned. I have no doubt in your ability to defend this institution, even in a very shaky democracy, in my opinion. We have witnessed a lot of interference in respect to the work of Parliament by the Executive and occasionally by the Judiciary. If we do not respect each other, it is going to be a little bit difficult for us to move forward. 

Therefore, as a member had alluded earlier - I don’t know why the President did not prefer the caucus to air his anger or disagreement. He decided to go open and he has indeed painted us black, as Members of Parliament. He has really got tonnes and tonnes of black paint and he has painted us black; that is what President Museveni has done to our reputation. 

However, we cannot say we have lost everything in respect to what the President did. One, I feel that some of his directives are not backed by law. For me to take money and just hand it over to an RDC as if I am a bullion van is very unacceptable. Bullion vans are owned by Bank of Uganda. A Member of Parliament is not a bullion van, just to take money and hand it over to an RDC. To me, it is not right. Therefore, I will return the money to the Parliamentary Commission and that is what I think is right, as I protect my integrity.

Finally, we all know that corruption is almost defeating the Government – if it has not defeated it – because we continue to lament that public money is lost. I am humbly requesting the President to focus his energy where he really knows that money is being stolen. I thank you.

3.56
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are all aware that our Government never wanted this House to continue when they started making COVID-19 declarations. We would like to thank you that you stood your ground that we have work to do as Parliament. So far, we have shown this Government that we are not only sitting here but we sit here to transact business mandated to us by the Constitution. 

I would like to support hon. Ssemujju’s motion because it is very unfortunate for a head of state to sit in one of his talk shows and start lambasting Parliament. Really! He even mentioned: “I met the honourable Speaker.” If you met the Speaker – whatever you discussed – handle it at that level. You go in the public and start doing politics – this is very unfortunate and it was very unfortunate of a head of state.

Madam Speaker, we are aware that the district taskforces that were established are election taskforces of the President. The RDCs and DISOs are the people who command things in our districts – not even the district chairperson is considered. It is President Museveni’s campaign taskforce: RDCs, DISO and GISO. That is the group that is there handling COVID-19 and they were appointed, not based on knowledge of how to handle matters, but because of friendship with the President.

Madam Speaker, the only money that has reached Kassanda, for the people of Kassanda, is the Shs 20 million that was appropriated here. People are suffering. We have taxi drivers who were supposed to be working and they were the first victims. The boda boda riders are there in Kassanda. The women who were selling food in the evening are there and they have nothing to eat. 

Out of the Shs 60 billion, they even failed to reach Kampala. Even people in Kampala are crying. We spent an entire week, as Members of Parliament, asking this Government that let us prioritise food for the rest of the country but this Government was adamant. The President had no moral authority to talk about Members of Parliament who are trying to feed their people in Kassanda.

Madam Speaker, I support the motion by hon. Ssemujju by saying the President was very wrong. We must protect this House. Thank you.

4.00
MR MOSES NAGWOMU (NRM, Bunyole East County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our mandate of appropriation is drawn from Article 155(4). What has disturbed my mind is the Shs 50 billion which has been mentioned here, for the Members of Parliament. We have our own here, whom we have lived with and we have encountered: the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Any expenditure of public money must pass through this House. Through you, Madam Speaker, can the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development clarify on that money? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I don’t know whether we should talk about that money. I do not know about it. I have no official information about it.

4.02
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, I also join my friends in the same sentiment that has been expressed. Just as colleagues have said, this House needs a lot of respect. 

I was also concerned and I think it should also be made clear – the motion that has been brought – that even some members within this House have gone outside to say that we were given this money as a bribe. While His Excellency will also tell us why he threw our names in the public odium, a member of this very House, hon. Robert Kyagulanyi, who has also gone in the media and said that we were bribed, must also explain. I was not bribed at all. That is my concern. He should also come out clearly and tell us why he said that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House adopts the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)
(Motion adopted)

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER ON AN ISSUE RAISED ON INCOMPLETE CONSTRUCTION WORKS AND DESTROYED CLASSROOM ROOFS AT SIGULU SEED SECONDARY SCHOOL

4.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, this is a statement on the incomplete construction works and destroyed classroom roofs at Sigulu Seed Secondary School.

Madam Speaker, this august House requested the Ministry of Education and Sports to respond to concerns over incomplete construction works as well as on infrastructural damages at Sigulu Seed Secondary School. 

Under the World Bank supported APLI Project, Sigulu Seed Secondary School was earmarked to receive infrastructure that included 10 classrooms, a library block, a science laboratory block and three blocks of five stance lined (Very Important Person) VIP latrines. The contract for these works was awarded to M/s Hebron Investment Ltd at a sum of Shs 5921,262,000.

The project guidelines required that funds amounting to the contract sum, for the project, be disbursed to a given school in two equal instalments for better financial management. A school would account for the first half of the funds released before the second would be effected. For Sigulu Seed Secondary School, the second instalment of funds had not been released by the time of project closure because the earlier disbursement had not been fully absorbed and accounted for.

Whereas, the contract for works at this school required works to be completed by 7 June 20l3, the contractor was not able to deliver within this time. Extensions were granted, but eventually 31 July 2014, was set as the date, by which all project implementation activities nationwide under this project were to be concluded regardless of status. Consequently, a number of schools, including Sigulu Seed Secondary School, were left with incomplete structures. It was also resolved that unspent monies would be remitted to the Consolidated Fund, and Government would be responsible for completion of all pending works.

Sigulu Seed Secondary School attempted to roof the incomplete classroom blocks and put them to use. Unfortunately, these roofs were blown off under heavy rains towards the end of last year.

Madam Speaker, under the Development of Secondary Education Program, the Ministry of Education and Sports is undertaking phased completion of these works, starting in Financial Year 2019/2020. We intend to undertake a comprehensive intervention at Sigulu Seed Secondary School under the program. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Does hon. Abbot have a supplementary question? Honourable minister, the Financial Year 2019/2020 is about to end. It is just two months to its closure. Would you have done something before the end of the two months?

4.08
MR GEORGE OUMA ABBOT (NRM, Bukooli Island, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, I thank the minister for that explanation. However, I would like to advise that when M/s Hebron, the company that was contacted to construct the school came to the Island - the agreement was that they do construction. There was another company that was supposed to come and give a certificate of how the works were continuing.

This company that was contracted by the Government to come and do so, took time to come to the Islands and M/s Hebron had nothing to do. Now that the minister is saying that they are going to complete it - the Island is a hard-to-reach and hard-to-serve. I request that should be done.

Madam Speaker, sometimes promises are made before the Floor of Parliament but years come and go. The Island is in need. All these classrooms should be completed so that they are put to use. Thank you very much.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER ON AN ISSUE RAISED ON THE NEED FOR AN AFFIRMATIVE ACTION QUOTA ON THE HIGHER EDUCATION STUDENTS’ FINANCING SCHEME TO SPECIFICALLY ACCOMMODATE APPLICANTS FROM NORTHERN UGANDA WHOSE EDUCATION WAS DISRUPTED BY DECADES OF INSURGENCY AND YET THE CURRENT FINANCING SCHEME EXCLUDES APPLICANTS ABOVE THE AGE OF 28

4.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, this is a statement on the need for an affirmative action quota on the Higher Education Students’ Financing Scheme to specifically accommodate applicants from Northern Uganda, whose education was disrupted by decades of insurgency and yet the current financing scheme excludes applicants above the age of 28 raised by hon. Jonathan Odur.

The Higher Education Students’ Financing Board was established in February 2014, by an Act of Parliament with the mandate to provide loans among others to disadvantaged Ugandan students to pursue higher education.

In awarding loans, the board takes into consideration the aspect of regional balance. For the current academic year, 100 slots were given specifically to northern districts of Uganda, bringing the total number of successful applicants to 225 out of 465 that applied from Northern Uganda. Through this effort, the northern region achieved a 48.4 per cent success rate, which was the highest as compared to central 43 per cent, eastern 42 per cent and western at 33 per cent.

Madam Speaker, the scheme does not discriminate against applicants based on age, gender, religion and any other demographic factors. Regarding the age limit, it is not true that the scheme excludes applicants above the age of 28. The programme is open to all Ugandans who have been admitted for an accredited course in a charted higher institution of learning. I beg to submit. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see hon. Odur Jonathan. Let us go to item 3(III). Hon. Abala, do you have a supplementary question? Okay.

4.12
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for the statement. All universities in this country are registered and supervised by the Government of Uganda, through the National Council of Higher Education. I would like to know: Why are we discriminating other universities from benefiting from this programme. I would like to request the minister to tell me why charted ones only and not others, yet all of them are registered by the Government of Uganda. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister. Only one supplementary question.

MR DENIS OBUA: Madam Speaker, to respond to hon. Abala, a charted institutional university is what would ordinarily be called a legally recognised one. As a long as the university operating in Uganda is legally recognised, all students are beneficiaries. The word “Charted” stands for “legally recognised”.

MR AGABA: Thank you, honourable minister. In Uganda, a university goes through three stages before it becomes a fully-fledged accredited university.

You have university projects which last about three years when you apply to the national council intending to start a university. They give you a provisional licence on which you run for another three years. The council comes and assesses you to see whether you are able to be a fully-fledged university. When you satisfy the quality assurance standards of the National Council for Higher Education, then they accredit you to be a fully-fledged university - that is when you are chartered. To be “chartered” means you are an accredited, fully-fledged university and the charter is given by the President. 

It is only fair that Government money is given to fully accredited and chartered universities. The other universities are still going through a process of standing on their own.

By our own Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, a university has capacity to create and procreate knowledge and therefore they have academic freedom so the National Council for Higher Education assesses them until they are fully grown, they are chartered and fully accredited. Thank you.




RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER ON AN ISSUE RAISED ON THE ALLEGED UNWARRANTED INTIMIDATION AND HARASSMENT OF A HEALTH WORKER AT EDIOFE HEALTH 
CENTRE III ARUA DISTRICT

4.17
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PRESIDENCY) (Ms Esther Mbayo): Madam Speaker, at the 34th Sitting of the 3rd Meeting of the Fourth Session of the 10th Parliament of Uganda, held on Tuesday, 14 April 2020, hon. Atiku Benard raised concern over alleged unwarranted harassment of a health worker at Ediofe Health Centre III by the Deputy Resident District Commissioner of Arua.

The health worker on the 9 April 2020 wheeled a patient to Arua Hospital after failing to secure an ambulance from Arua District Taskforce on COVID-19.

It is for this reason that I stand to present a response to this august House touching the introduction, detailed explanation and the conclusion.

Article 203 of the 1995 Constitution of Uganda (as amended) provides for the Resident District Commissioner who shall, among others: 
    1) Monitor the implementation of Government services at the district.
    2) Advise the district chairperson on matters of national nature that may affect the district. All its plans and programmes and particularly in relation between the district and the Government.

In addition to the above constitutional duties, His Excellency the President directed the Resident District Commissioners to chair and coordinate the COVID-19 response taskforces in their respective districts. 

Any RDC who effectively and efficiently performs his or her coordination role in combating COVID-19 pandemic is an agent for better service delivery.

Our experience has shown that many of our field officers, despite the logistical challenges, are doing a great job. They are, therefore, directly contributing to the attainment of the constitutional duty bestowed upon them by H.E. the President, under Article 99 of the Constitution which enjoins the President, among others, to promote the welfare of the citizens.

A detailed explanation of the alleged unwarranted harassment of the health worker of Ediofe Heath Centre III by the Deputy Resident District Commissioner, Arua:

Although hon. Atiku Benard did not provide specific details of the Deputy Resident District Commissioner’s alleged unwarranted harassment of the health worker, we have since undertaken the following:

On the 22 April, 2020, I personally undertook a fact-finding mission to Arua; it involved detailed interaction with the Deputy Resident District Commissioner, Madam Alice Akello, as well as the management of Ediofe Health Centre III.

My interrogation of the Deputy Resident District Commissioner revealed that on the 12 April 2020, while attending a district taskforce COVID-19 response meeting, a matter of social media story in which the nurse had wheeled a patient from Ediofe Health Centre III to Arua Referral Hospital was brought up.

As a matter of concern, the Deputy Resident District Commissioner and Deputy District Internal Security Officer went to meet the in charge at Ediofe Health Centre III and the nurse in question but both were off-duty.

Accordingly, another nurse who was on duty then offered to take the Deputy Resident District Commissioner and the Deputy District Internal Security Officer to the nurses’ staff quarters. During the casual interaction with the nurse, the Deputy RDC learnt that the incident had happened on the 9 April 2020 where the nurse -Okudinia Doris - wheeled a patient to Arua Referral Hospital.

She indicated two scenarios that made her volunteer to wheel the patient to Arua Referral Hospital which is about two kilometres from Ediofe Health Centre III.

She was put on pressure by the caretakers of the patient - Mr Yuda Alio, who is now the deceased - to take him out of Ediofe Health Centre III to the referral hospital for further medical attention.

The in charge of Ediofe Health Centre III was not around and Doris wanted to save life in addition to coming back with the wheel chair.

In light of the discussion above, the Deputy Resident District Commissioner posed the following questions: (i) Why couldn’t the nurse wait for the ambulance? (ii) What if the patient had died in the hands of the nurse, before reaching Arua Hospital? (iii) What was the motive behind permitting photos to be taken with the patient at the gate of Ediofe Health Centre III? (iv) Who took the photos?

It was later established that photos were taken by Nyakuni Alfred, a presenter at Radio Pacis in Ediofe owned by Arua Catholic Diocese. 

The Deputy Resident District Commissioner informed the staff on duty that the photos had gone viral on social media; she requested that the nurse, Okudinia Doris, come with the in charge of Ediofe Health Centre III to clear the misinformation pertaining to the picture and the story which were then trending on social media.

However, the following day, allegations of the Deputy Resident District Commissioner harassing a nurse started to circulate on social media.

Madam Speaker, on 23 April 2020, after interrogating the Deputy RDC, I visited Ediofe Health Center III, where I held a lengthy discussion with the in-charge of Ediofe, Sr Laurence Limio and the Clinical Officer, Mr Jibalu Scola and the courageous nurse, Ms Doris Okudinia.

Ms Doris Okudinia proposed that the clinical officer, a one Mr Jibalu Scola, first narrated how the patient was received. Jibalu then took to the floor and informed me that at around 8.30 a.m., on Thursday, 9 April 2020 at Ediofe Health Centre III, a patient was received. That patient called Yuda Alio, is now deceased. He was very ill at that time. 

After an hour of investigation into the nature of the ailment and the cost implications, the clinical officer at Ediofe decided to refer the patient to Arua Regional Referral Hospital.

Initial attempts to persuade the nearby proprietor of a passenger tri-cycle - normally called Tuk-Tuk - to take the patient to Arua Referral Hospital fell on deaf ears since the rider feared to violate the presidential directives.

It was not until mid-day, that contact was made with the district health officer, who promised that an ambulance would be sent shortly. Despite the assurances from the district health officer, the health workers waited up to 2.00 p.m. with no ambulance showing up.

At that time, the wife of the patient had become impatient and was complaining loudly. Out of empathy, the nurse offered to roll the patient to Arua Referral Hospital using the facility wheelchair through the Catholic Church ground.

After rolling the patient for about quarter an hour, almost approaching Ediofe Bridge, the patient requested to rest under a tree shade to shelter from the scorching afternoon sunshine and he was offered a drink.

While resting under the tree shade, the ambulance presumed to have been discharged by the DHO to Ediofe Health Centre III to take the patient passed them without knowing that they had already left Ediofe Health Centre III on a wheelchair.

Out of her own intuition, the nurse convinced the patient to allow they hit the road, thinking that the ambulance, upon reaching Ediofe, would be advised to return through the same route and pick them, which never was. 

The nurse further alleged that two other ambulances passed them. However, we have since established that these had not been dispatched by Dr Drileba Bishop, the DHO of Arua. Arua District has several refugee settlements and non-government organisations that own ambulances. The other two could have been dispatched to attend to other emergencies within the same area.

Regrettably, upon reaching Ediofe Health Centre III, the ambulance driver sent by the DHO was informed by the gate keeper that the patient had been taken to Arua Referral Hospital in a wheelchair, rolled by a nurse. The driver immediately left in pursuit but failed to trace both the nurse and the patient. 

The nurse meanwhile, continued with her patient until they made it to the Out-Patient Department of Arua Referral Hospital. She left the patient under the care of the medical officers and returned to Ediofe Health Centre III. 

In the evening of 12 April 2020, the Deputy RDC, together with the DISO, visited Ediofe Health Centre III, seeking to meet the in-charge and the nurse, being the one who had rolled the patient to Arua Referral Hospital. They did not find her at the facility; she was off duty.

Upon return, Doris received information from her colleagues that the DISO and Deputy RDC had wanted to clarify a few issues with her in respect to the matter trending on social media, regarding her wheeling a patient to Arua Referral Hospital.

Madam Speaker, naturally, this visit created some anxiety for both Doris and her colleagues, with some suggesting that the health worker could have landed herself into trouble with the COVID-19 Taskforce.

It is this anxiety that was fuelled by social media postings of allegations in which the Deputy Resident District Commissioner was reportedly harassing a health worker for wheeling a patient to Arua Referral Hospital. Consequently, the RDC of Arua, on 14 April 2020, visited Ediofe Health Centre III to calm the situation.

Conclusion
Madam Speaker, from the fact-finding mission conducted by my office, as summarised in the presentation above, we have since established that the intention of the nurse, Okudinia Doris to wheel the late Yuda Alio from Ediofe Health Centre III was a personal initiative to save life, considering the amount of pressure she had received from the patient’s caretakers.

The action of the health worker was well-intentioned and driven by a noble cause. At an appropriate time, we intend to request the district authorities for her citation to be submitted to the Presidential Awards Committee for consideration to being awarded a medal.

The actions of the Deputy Resident District Commissioner were in line with carrying out her duties, regarding the COVID-19 district response geared towards protecting the image of the Government. The discussions at Ediofe Health Centre III staff quarters were not meant to threaten the nurse.

The whole matter was blown out of proportion by social media. Even Arua diocese came to learn about the incident through social media and apologised for the inconveniences caused to the district taskforce. The diocese, therefore, pledges to improve its communication and collaboration with the district taskforce on COVID-19.

Madam Speaker, I learnt this afternoon that this courageous nurse, Okudinia Doris has been awarded a scholarship to pursue a Diploma in Nursing at Uganda Christian University (School of Nursing and Midwifery) – (Applause) - in Lira by Ministry of Health. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, minister. I do not know where hon. Atiku is. This was hon. Atiku’s issue but I do not see him. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the elaborate statement she has given. However, I see the minister defending RDCs but let me give you information. In Bukedea, hon. Anita Among informed me that she offered two ambulances to the RDC, Mr Walugembe, but he rejected them. The people in Bukedea are suffering and yet the Member of Parliament offered the RDC those vehicles. 

Honourable minister, can you take interest in finding out why the RDC of Bukedea rejected the vehicles given to him by a Member of Parliament from the same area to help the people? There is a bit of sugar-coating regarding the RDCs. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Can I also inform the Minister for the Presidency that the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Health wrote to me and the Clerk to request for the ambulances.

4.35
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for that statement but I would also like to express my disappointment in her trying to cover up. The whole issue is about the taskforce for COVID-19, which is supposed to have done its work, and where the District Health Officer (DHO) is a member.

Madam Speaker, the issue of patients and mothers, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic, has been presented and discussed here. I would like to give you a short scenario –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are addressing the statement made by the minister. The supplementary should arise from what she has said, please. 

MS KAWOOYA: That is where I am going, Madam Speaker. I am going to where she said that the DHO did not send the ambulance in time. There are so many ambulances since the Members of Parliament also contributed theirs; for example, I contributed two ambulances to Sembabule District.

The district taskforce for COVID-19 of Sembabule was aware of an incident where a mother gave birth to three babies in Sembabule Health Centre IV. They could not transport this mother and her three children back home and she had to pay for six days’ accommodation in the hospital. The matter went onto social media but the minister said it was blown out of context. 

Most of the Members of Parliament called me and I had to come in with my second personal ambulance to take her back home. What if the mother had collapsed or passed away post-natal? Therefore, the minister’s statement falls short in mentioning the truth that the taskforce is not delivering health services to our people. Thank you.

4.37
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for being honest. In the first case, she admits that the nurse was harassed. That being the case, I seek clarification from the minister regarding her assertion on the responsibilities of the district COVID-19 taskforces. 

This afternoon, we have been grappling with their roles but the minister is here saying that the district taskforces are supposed to protect the Government’s image. Madam Speaker, I would like to find out from the minister - were these taskforces set up purely to cover up the inadequacy of Government so as to save the image of Government or were they set up to save the lives of Ugandans who are suffering? I need clarification because it appears that the interest of the Government is just to save its image, to cover up the shortcomings that we are experiencing in our health care system. That is why this nurse was initially being harassed by Government functionaries.

The minister is coming here –

THE SPEAKER: Thank you; you have made your point. 

4.38
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought because hon. Atiku is not around, I will at least make a comment. 

I have followed the minister’s statement and the narrative, to some extent, is logical and accurate, but it misses some facts. She did not mention, for example, that the biological father of the nurse ended up in the RDC’s office. The nurse was not the only person intimidated; her father was equally intimidated.

We all know that the work of RDCs is to defend and portray the image of Government in a positive manner, but where there are shortfalls, we need to acknowledge them. This nurse did what was expected of her to save a life. She was, however, intimidated by the office of the Deputy RDC. The line minister should correct those mistakes. More importantly, this should be a lesson to all of us that we need to put the resources of this country where they are needed most. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is there any comment? Please, conclude. 

MS MBAYO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. It is true that there are challenges that the district taskforces for COVID-19 are facing, given the fact that there has been suspension of public and private transport.

I agree with hon. Ssewungu; it is true that in the beginning, the RDC of Bukedea had rejected hon. Among’s ambulances but after I liaised with the Member and talked to the RDC, things were put right. We are putting in place continuous improvement in addressing the issue of COVID-19.

Madam Speaker, RDCs have constitutional duties. However, the issue of COVID-19 has suppressed their other responsibilities. The fact that they are coordinating and chairing the district taskforces for COVID-19 does not stop them from carrying out their daily duties. Therefore, when I said that she did it in the interest of the Government, much as she went overboard - and I accept that she went overboard – my going to Arua was to harmonise the situation. I submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Was it the Government that gave her a scholarship?

MS MBAYO: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform this House that this afternoon, the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Health announced that the nurse has been awarded a scholarship to go for her diploma. 

THE SPEAKER: We congratulate Doris upon that achievement. I look forward to seeing her on the presidential awards list at the next awards. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE CENSUS OF FM RADIO STATIONS IN THE COUNTRY

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance is not there. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ARREST AND BRUTAL TORTURE OF HON. ZAAKE FRANCIS, MP MITYANA MUNICIPALITY, BY SECURITY OPERATIVES AND THE SPECIFIC ACTIONS TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT AGAINST THE PERPETRATORS

4.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, we made this statement this afternoon. I do hope Members have it on their iPads. Thank you. 

Secondly, I would like to correct something at the end. The statement has 13 pages and the date there should read as 7 May 2020. We apologise for that error.

Madam Speaker, on 5 May 2020, you directed my ministry to make a statement on the alleged assault of hon. Francis Zaake by security officers and this statement is made in response thereto. It is a bit detailed and I will indulge Members - I want to go through it so that we understand the gist of events and possibly why we are where we are.

On the 19 April 2020 at around 3.00p.m., the Regional Police Commander (RPC) of that area, Kagarura Bob, received information that hon. Zaake was distributing food items. After also seeing photos on social media platforms, he sent the District Police Commander (DPC) Mityana, SP Mwine Mukono, to check in the village of Buswabulongo where it is alleged the food items were being distributed contrary to the presidential directive. The DPC did not find any food being distributed then, at 3.00 p.m., and he reported his findings to the RPC.

At around 5.30p.m., the DPC received instructions from the RPC to mobilize manpower and proceed to the residence of hon. Zaake Francis. The DPC mobilized manpower and proceeded to the residence of hon. Zaake. He was later joined by the RPC and six Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) personnel from the office of the Resident District Commissioner (RDC). The team arrested hon. Zaake for undermining presidential directives on food distribution and he was escorted by the RPC to Mityana Police Station. He was later transferred to the Special Investigations Division (SID) of the Police at Kireka. The case was investigated and charges of disobedience of lawful orders and negligent acts likely to spread infectious diseases were preferred against him.

Hon. Zaake was, however, admitted in the Iran Uganda Hospital Naguru on allegations that he was tortured during and after arrest. Later, he was taken to Mityana court for plea on the sanctioned charges but the magistrate advised that the state should first treat hon. Zaake before he could take a plea. 

When this matter came to our attention, we asked the Criminal Investigations Department (CID) to investigate the matter and these are the findings on which I have based my report to Parliament.

The investigations were -
1. To establish the circumstances that led to the arrest of hon. Zaake Francis.

2. To establish whether hon. Zaake was tortured during and after the arrest.

3. To find out who tortured hon. Zaake and from where.

4. To have the suspects identified and charged in the various courts, either in the disciplinary courts or in the criminal courts.

The investigators used the following methods:
1. They established a general inquiry into the allegations.

2. They obtained a statement from hon. Zaake in the presence of his wife, Ms Namirembe Bridget; his lawyer, David Lewis; and Mr Joel Ssenyonyi, the People Power spokesperson.

3. The investigators interviewed and obtained statements from the RPC Wamala Region, SSP Kagarura Bob; the DPC Mityana, SP Mwine Mukono; and from all the police officers that participated in the arrest.

4. They obtained statements from suspects who were in the police cells at the time hon. Zaake was detained at Mityana Police Station.

5. They obtained statements from the Field Force Unit (FFU) police officers who escorted hon. Zaake from Mityana Police Station to the Special Investigations Division in Kireka.

6. They obtained statements from Detective Inspector of Police Twesigye Hamdan who was the investigating officer at the Special Investigations Division.

7. They obtained a statement from Detective Assistant Superintendent of Police Walugembe Musa, who received and authorized for the detention of hon. Zaake at Kireka.

8. They obtained a statement from the Deputy Director of CID at the Special Investigations Division. 
9. They obtained statements from other police officers who were present at the Special Investigations Division who interfaced with hon. Zaake while in detention.

10. They retrieved and analysed a photocopy of the Mityana file in which hon. Zaake was charged with disobedience of lawful orders.

11. They analysed CCTV footage of the police vehicles that were sent from Kampala to Mityana to pick hon. Zaake and analysed their movement to and from Mityana to Kampala.

12. They interviewed and recorded a statement from Dr Kato Edward, a Medical Superintendent at Iran-Uganda Hospital Naguru, who treated hon. Zaake and retrieved a medical report and a referral letter to Nsambya Police Hospital - grade IV.

13. They retrieved Police Form 24 - this is P4, which normally requests for medical examination of suspects - where hon. Zaake was examined and the form was filled by Dr Nuwamanya.

14. They analysed the Station Diary Register for the Special Investigations Division in Kireka to determine the time when hon. Zaake was received at the station.
15. They retrieved and analysed the station diary and lockup registers of Mityana Police Station to find out the time hon. Zaake was detained and when he was booked out of Mityana to Kampala.

16. They requested the Forensic Services Directorate to retrieve and analyse the Facebook page of hon. Zaake and retrieve pictures, video clips and texts on food distribution.

17. They requested the Executive Director of Mulago National Referral Hospital to subject hon. Zaake to a medical examination to determine his health status.

Hon. Zaake’s statement - this is what he has to say – was obtained on 4 May 2020. He gave a detailed description of the circumstances that led to his arrest -

1. He accepted that he bought food items that included rice, matooke and posho, which he distributed to his village mates on l8 and 19 April 2020. He states that he used boda bodas in food distribution and requested them to take pictures and send them to his Facebook page for accountability purposes.

2. On the 19 April 2020, he says that at around 5.00 p.m. while he was in the bathroom, he was informed that a group of police officers and army men had invaded his home and were looking for him.

3. He claims that the RPC and the DPC) found him in the bedroom and arrested him after breaking his bedroom door. He was carried by his trousers and taken to the waiting police motor vehicles.

4. He also says that the police, headed by the RPC, searched his house and during the search they stole Shs 15,000,000 from his bedroom and the mobile phone of his maid.

5. He states that during the arrest, police were filming the whole event using a cameraman he did not know, and he encouraged police to continue filming since he was innocent.

6. He further alleges that he was put in a police double cabin pickup car, and the RPC and another police officer in civilian clothes made him sit between them. He was then taken to the police station while he was being punched and slapped by the two officers.

7. He states that he was taken to Mityana Police Station to the office of DPC, and that these officers were joined by army officers and they continued beating him using sticks, kicking and punching him.

8. He says that after 30 minutes of torture, he was taken to the cells. He was surprised to find a woman inside the male cell, with a group of about 20 men.

9. He states that when the suspects who were in the cell saw him, they became very happy and began narrating their problems to him but he did not tell them about the torture he had received from the DPC's office.

10. According to hon. Zaake, after about 30 minutes while he was still in the cell, he heard another motor vehicle outside the station. He was called by the DPC and told that he was being taken to Kampala. He and the suspects in the cell protested.

11. Hon. Zaake says that the DPC called army men who came and used two pepper sprays; one was sprayed into his eyes while the other on the suspects in the cell. According to him, he lost sight due to the pepper spray. 

12. He says that he was brought to the counter, which is outside the cell. At the counter, he found other soldiers but specifically he remembers one called Mulungi Haruna Nsamba. He heard the RPC telling those soldiers in Runyankole that “make sure he does not see”, implying that they wanted to spoil his eyes. One of the police officers then came and sprayed two tins of chemicals in his eyes and also tore his shirt.

13. He claims that two pairs of handcuffs and a rope were used on both his hands and legs. 

14. He said that his torn shirt was used to tie his hands.

15. He was then taken to a police pick-up car, his hands were tied on one side of the pick-up and legs on the other behind the crew seats, and he was suspended in space. The motor vehicles were then driven to an unknown destination while he was being beaten and punched by the people in the pick-up truck.

16. After sometime, the motor vehicles reached a certain place, which he thought was a police station.

17. He was untied and he begged for mercy from the people who were untying him. At that time, he was being beaten by many officers and one of them told him that he would see more.

18. He was taken to a huge building - he knew it was a big building because of the echo – and he was given so many strokes on his buttocks and the back.

19. Afterwards, a stick that had something, which was piercing, was put on his forehead, chest and legs.

20. After that, he was taken into cells where he learnt from the inmates he found in the cells that the place he was in was the Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence (CMI), Mbuya. Shortly, he was removed from cells after another round of torture.

21. He claims the officer who interviewed him brought an instrument and pierced his testicles very hard.

22. He was put on a pick-up, suspended again upside down, and the motor vehicle drove to another destination.

23. At a place, which he later came to know as the Special Investigations Division, Kireka, something very cold was poured on him which made his body itchy.

24. On 20 April 2020, he claims a male doctor came and requested to examine him. He refused but he was forcefully injected with substances he did not know.

25. He also claims that he was tortured by Detective Inspector of Police Twesigye Hamdan by subjecting him to 30 minutes of torture and six hours of rest. At an interval of six hours, they would bring him, torture him for 30 minutes and then take him back.

26. He said that he was forced to talk to somebody, who appeared to be the President of the Republic of Uganda, who warned him to go slow. This was through Detective Inspector of Police Twesigye Hamdan's phone.

27. On 23 April 2020, he was again taken to Iran-Uganda Hospital where he was examined on PF 24 and treated for his injuries.

28. On 27 April 2020, he was taken to court. However, he claims that while in the ambulance, he was being tortured and harassed by the police officers.

29. Hon. Francis Zaake was given police bond on 29 April 2020 at Kiruddu Hospital, where he had been taken by police for treatment after he had appeared in court.

30. According to him, he is in Lubaga Hospital being treated for the injuries inflicted on him by the police.

The investigators come up with have the following findings:

1. On 19 April between 5.00 p.m. and 6.00 p.m., hon. Zaake Francis was arrested by a combined Police Force led by the RPC Wamala Region and the DPC Mityana from his residence in Mityana Municipality in Mityana District. He was arrested on allegations of unlawful orders and negligent acts likely to spread an infectious disease. This is what he had said and it is correct. The findings say it is true; he was arrested. 

The other police officers who participated in the arrest included the following: ASP Lumago Sam; the OC Station, Mityana, ASP Magulu Amir; Deputy OC CID, Wabwire John Eric; junior ranking officers and detectives from the Flying Squad, all totalling to about 17 in number and six army personnel who were part of the COVID-19 defiance enforcement group. 

Hon. Zaake states that on 17 and 19 April 2020, it is true he distributed food, and this was found to be true by the CIDs. The items distributed included sugar, soap, rice, matooke and maize flour, among others. He took pictures. This incident has been confirmed by some of the beneficiaries like Kiiza Mike, Nakiboneka Agnes, Otadi Vicent and others. 

On the 19 April 2020, the RPC of Wamala Region obtained intelligence that hon. Zaake was distributing food items, as we have already stated. Since you have the documents, I can skip this part and we go to the others. They were later joined by the RPC and the soldiers, like we have said. 

According to hon. Zaake, while he was in the bedroom, a one Dan, his brother, came and informed him that he was needed by the police. The RPC broke into his bedroom and pulled him out of his bedroom. Therefore, there is need to investigate whether the bedroom was actually broken into. The RPC, however, states that he met hon. Zaake from the sitting room and informed him that he was under arrest for disobedience of lawful orders and negligent acts likely to spread an infectious disease by distributing food to the community against the presidential orders.

A search was carried out in the house and compound of hon. Zaake. It is true, like he said, that there was a search carried out. What was found was a tarpaulin with rice droppings, which was suspected to have been used during the packaging process, and some kilogrammes of rice that were still found in the house. 

A neighbour, who had seen the police surrounding the house of hon. Zaake, alerted Matovu Enock, a journalist with NTV, who came and began filming the whole incident. According to the police, the person who was filming the whole incident was not with the police but he was a journalist alerted by the neighbours to say that there was a story developing there. 

As hon. Zaake was being led to the waiting police car, he was filmed by Matovu. Hon. Zaake was laughing and saying that it was not an offence to give his people food. This picture is being sought and will be obtained to corroborate what happened. 

Hon. Zaake was transported in the RPC's vehicle, UP 4799, and he was seated between the RPC and his deputy, Wabwire, as he had said. At that time, hon. Zaake was dressed in a maroon polo neck T-shirt, a pair of jeans and slippers, since he had come from the bathroom. 

According to Ssemujju Augustine, Kiiza Mustapher and Wamala Sperito, - suspects who were with hon. Zaake in the cells - hon. Zaake was in a jovial mood and did not have any signs of injuries nor did he tell them that he had been tortured by the police. He only asked them what their problems were and after their narrations, he promised to solve their problems since he was now in the cell with them. Thereafter, they began to sing People Power songs. 

Hon. Zaake claims that he had been beaten by the RPC, the DPC and other police officers on the way to the station and in the office of the DPC before his detention, something the suspects he found in the cells did not mention to the investigators. He also claims that he found a female suspect detained in the same cell together with men who were about 23 in number. This is not true. The records at the police station clearly show that all the 23 persons in the cell were male. 

After hon. Zaake's arrest and detention, there was information that his supporters were planning to come and rescue him from cells. The RPC requested the Director of Operations of the Police Force for the transfer of hon. Zaake to the Special Investigations Division, Kireka. The RPC was later informed by the Commandant 999, SSP Bamuzibire, that he had sent three patrol cars to escort hon. Zaake to Kampala. He did not specify the place where hon. Zaake was to be taken. 

At around 8.00 p.m., a team of FFU officers led by AIP Masaba arrived and informed the DPC that they were sent to take hon. Zaake to Kampala. After briefing, the DPC and AIP Masaba proceeded to the cells and informed hon. Zaake to move out because he was to be transferred to Kampala. Hon. Zaake, together with the suspects in the cells, protested and hon. Zaake refused to move out. AIP Masaba called some of his personnel to help him remove hon. Zaake forcefully from the cells. 

According to the suspects who were in cells, hon. Zaake held the metal doors of the cells and also placed his leg, on one side, in between the metal bars so that it would be difficult for the police to pull him out. The FFU personnel pulled out hon. Zaake by force from the metallic bars that he had held onto for support. He was taken to the counter and handcuffed but while resisting, hon. Zaake claims that at the time of his removal from cells, his eyes were sprayed with pepper which affected his eyesight and tear gas was thrown to the inmates. None of the inmates left in the cells confirmed this and none of them had any evidence of having been sprayed with pepper spray.

According to SP Mwine, hon. Zaake resisted being handcuffed and reasonable force was used to handcuff him. In the process, his T-shirt got torn. After the police succeeded in putting the handcuff on one hand, he overpowered them, leaving the handcuff dangling in one hand. This prompted them to grab the second hand and fix it. Hon. Zaake was, therefore, handcuffed with two handcuffs but one was only on one hand, leaving the other part dangling. 

According to Cpl Lomokol, hon. Zaake was transferred in the 999 vehicle, number 23, which he commanded. It was driven by SPC Kafeero and the crew members were John Okolis, Julius Okiror, Michael Ongewun and PC Nelson Omagol. He further stated that hon. Zaake was shouting and hitting the metallic seats of the 999 vehicle using his arms and legs. 

According to the DPC, hon. Zaake could not be transported in the RPC’s double cabin vehicles because of the violent behaviour he had exhibited while boarding the vehicle. 

Hon. Zaake alleged that he was tied, - both his arms and legs - suspended behind the seats of the 999 vehicle, facing upwards, and the RPC ordered that he be resprayed in the eyes and that he was transported to Kampala dangling.

However, according to the DPC, hon. Zaake was transported to Kampala in a convoy of four police vehicles - three 999 Patrol cars and another police car, registration No. UP 4799. The team delivered hon. Zaake to the Special Investigations Division at 0011hrs.

According to the DPC, hon. Zaake was received at the CID at 0011 hours and he had two handcuffs, bruises and a bare chest. The D/SCP Elly Womanya was briefed by the DPC. He directed Ms Luky Ocan, the head of the clinic, to have him checked and administer treatment, which was done but against the will of hon. Zaake as he says. – (Interjections) - The police have said when he was delivered, he had bruises and therefore, he had to be treated.  

On 21 April 2020, Detective/Senior Commissioner of Police Elly Womanya assigned – (Interjections) - Madam Speaker, I am reading a statement and I would like to request you to protect me from the Members. If they do not want me to read the statement, I can leave it. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are the ones who asked for this statement. 

MR OBIGA KANIA: On 21 April 2020, Senior Commissioner of Police Womanya assigned Detective/Inspector of Police Twesigye Hamdan to record a statement from hon. Zaake. Hon. Zaake was taken to the boardroom and when Twesigye requested to obtain his statement, he refused, saying that he was feeling a lot of pain and could not record a statement without his lawyers.

On 22 April 2020, hon. Zaake was examined by Dr Emmanuel Nuwamanya, the Deputy Director Police Health Services and later, he was escorted by Twesigye to Iran-Uganda Hospital on the instructions of Isaac Oketcho and Twesigye. 

According to Dr Nuwamanya at Iran-Uganda Hospital, it was established that hon. Zaake had blunt injuries. They were on the forehead, earlobes, right and left of the chest, right side flank, right upper arm, right wrist, lower lip, left leg and left leg shin. It was also established from hon. Zaake that the examination was conducted by three doctors: Dr Kato of Iran-Uganda Hospital; Dr Ssekitoleko, the personal doctor to hon. Zaake; and a police surgeon, in the presence of hon. Zaake’s personal lawyer, hon. Sseggona. 

Hon. Zaake complained of chest pain, a broken back and injuries. The Iran-Uganda Hospital suggested that they should carry out an X-ray and scan, but hon. Zaake refused. 

On 27 April 2020, the charges under the Mityana reference CRB 268/2020 had been sanctioned. The police officers, who included D/ACP Isaac Oketcho and Hamdan Twesigye, went to Iran-Uganda Hospital to take hon. Zaake to court in Mityana. At the time, hon. Zaake was putting on a vest and a boxer. According to Zaake, he was dressed like that because he was feeling hot. When hon. Zaake learnt that he was being taken to court, he wanted to proceed in that way, yet his wife had carried decent clothes in the vehicle.

At the same time, according to Dr Edward Kato, the hospital had also discharged hon. Zaake to see an eye specialist. According to Dr Kato, hon. Zaake was referred to Police Health Centre IV, Nsambya, as I have said, for a check-up because throughout his admission he had been complaining of eye sensitivity to light.

Hon. Zaake was led in a double cabin pick-up vehicle, which he rejected. A police ambulance was brought and he also rejected it until he was forced to sit in it. According to the nurse who had accompanied him, Ms Tatura Ndagire, hon. Zaake used the metallic hook in the ambulance to injure himself. 

Hon. Zaake was transported in the company of his wife and a nurse and D/IP Twesigye, while exhibiting violence. He kept hitting himself on the metals in the ambulance, hence injuring himself on the arms. He later on requested for painkillers, which were given to him. He was kept on painkillers throughout the trip.

At Mityana Court, according to Twesigye, he instructed hon. Zaake to dress up for court but he again refused. This was confirmed by the nurse who was in the same vehicle together with his wife. Twesigye instructed him to move to court but he refused. This prompted Twesigye to mobilise personnel to carry him to the courtroom.

In the court, His Worship Erias Kakooza ordered the state to first treat hon. Zaake before returning him back for plea. He was later transported in an ambulance provided by his father back to the Special Investigations Division headquarters at Kireka.

On 28 April 2020, hon. Zaake was taken to Kiruddu Hospital by Special Investigations Division officers for treatment as court had ordered. On 29 April 2020, the Director Criminal Investigations made a request to the Executive Director of the National Referral Hospital, Mulago, to carry out a medical examination on hon. Zaake to determine his health status. 

In a letter, which was dated 30 April 2020, Ref ADM.104/01, the Executive Director informed the Director Criminal Investigations that a team of five specialists was constituted comprising of an eye specialist, a trauma surgeon, a neurosurgeon, a cardiothoracic surgeon and one senior physician to examine hon. Zaake in the presence of Dr Andrew Ssekitoleko, his personal doctor. Hon. Zaake declined to consent to the examination. This examination has not been done to date.

On 30 April 2020, according to Twesigye, hon. Mwiru requested for a police bond for hon. Zaake. Police granted hon. Zaake a bond after he accepted to sign on the police bond. He was later transferred from Kiruddu to Rubaga Hospital where his statement was obtained from him on 4 May 2020.

While his statement was being recorded, hon. Zaake had a cervical collar on his neck. It is yet to be determined whether he has a neck problem or not because he never claimed that he had a neck problem while at Iran-Uganda Hospital and elsewhere.

When these findings were analysed by the CID, these were the observations: 
1. It is true that hon. Zaake had injuries and bruises by the time he was received at SID Kireka on 20 April 2020 at 0011hrs. These injuries could be attributed to:
i) A scuffle when hon. Zaake was being removed from the cell in Mityana to Kampala.
ii) There was a scuffle between the police and hon. Zaake when he was being handcuffed at the counter.

Hon. Zaake alleges that he was tied behind the pickup car while dangling. The CCTV footage of the four police motor vehicles, which were in the convoy from Mityana to SID, do not show any object dangling outside the pick-up.

Allegations that hon. Zaake was tortured at CMI - this is the analysis:
i) The time of departure from Mityana Police Station and the time of arrival at SID Kireka give a duration of travel of one hour and 20 minutes, according to what I have read. If hon. Zaake was taken to CMI and tortured for one hour, as he alleges, the time of arrival at SID Kireka would have been past 1.20 a.m.

The CCTV time stamps from Bulenga to SID Kireka are consistent with the statement of the DPC on the route they followed. From the analysis of the CCTV footage, the vehicles are seen at Bulenga at 23:41:55hrs, at Mulago roundabout at 23:48hrs, at Kololo at 23:49:53hrs, at Jinja Road near Jinja Road Police Station at 23:51hrs, at Nakawa traffic lights at 23:53:02hrs, near the Vatican Embassy at 23:55:40hrs and the vehicles are seen entering SID Kireka at 23:58:50 hours. 

This means that from Bulenga to Mulago they used seven minutes, from Mulago to Kololo they used 53 seconds, from Kololo to Jinja Road traffic lights they used two minutes, from Jinja Road to Nakawa traffic lights they used two minutes and two seconds, from Nakawa traffic lights to Vatican Embassy they used two minutes and 38 seconds, from Vatican Embassy to SID Kireka they used five minutes and 48 seconds. The allegation, therefore, of torture at CMI for 60 minutes does not appear within this time stamp. It could be there but it does not appear within this timeframe.

Allegation of torture marks all over his body
The Police Form (PF) 24 indicates bruises on the front part of his body from the head to the legs. It does not show similar bruises on the back part of the body yet hon. Zaake alleges he was tortured on the whole body and beaten on the back and bottom.

The presence of torture marks on the front part of the body and the absence of 60 minutes that hon. Zaake claims he spent at CMI, bearing in mind that hon. Zaake had a dangling handcuff on his arm, it is probable that hon. Zaake could have been inflicted in the process of the travel.

According to the statement of the car commander, hon. Zaake kept on knocking himself on the metals of the pick-up. It is probable therefore that these injuries were as a result of the knockings.

On hon. Zaake’s indecent appearance in court, even though he refused to dress decently, Twesigye ought not to have carried him to court indecently dressed. This was wrong. The magistrate did the right thing to refuse to take a statement of plea from hon. Zaake and this has been referred to the Police Standards Unit for necessary action.

The outstanding inquiries, which need to be done, are the following:

1. There is need to record a substantive statement from Zaake’s wife on the allegations of theft of Shs 15 million by the police.

2. There is need to record a statement from Zaake’s maid on allegations that her phone was taken by the police.
3. There is need to cross check with CMI and other evidence with a view of establishing whether hon. Zaake was taken there on the night of 19 April 2020 as he alleges. So far, what has only been found is the statement of hon. Zaake.

4. There is need to retrieve phone printouts with a view of establishing the person who talked to Twesigye, whom hon. Zaake claims to have been His Excellency the President who wanted to talk to Zaake at one time.

5. There is need to retrieve the admission medical report of hon. Zaake from Rubaga Hospital because throughout, there was no injury of the neck but when he was admitted in Rubaga, there was a neck injury.

6. There is need to visit the residence of hon. Zaake to determine if the bedroom was indeed broken into.

7. Finally, according to these people, there is need to have Zaake subjected to an independent medical examination by a team of doctors with his own doctors at the same place to determine the overall health status of hon. Zaake. 

Thank you for listening to me.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, the statement is very long and it is 5.30p.m.; so, we shall need to find time for us to make comments. However, I wanted the minister to demonstrate to me just one thing. Under paragraph 5.16, you said that hon. Zaake - who was handcuffed - was using his arms and legs to hit the metallic seats. If you can demonstrate how someone who is handcuffed can use both his legs and arms, as you claim under paragraph 5.16 -

MR OBIGA KANIA: Madam Speaker, can I get the number?

THE SPEAKER: Paragraph 5.16, on page 9.

MR OBIGA KANIA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I am reading a statement of the CID.

THE SPEAKER: That is why I am asking you to demonstrate how someone who is handcuffed can use those handcuffed arms and legs to beat metallic doors. It is here in you statement. 

MR OBIGA KANIA: Madam Speaker, the whole of this statement is reporting what investigations were so far done. Madam Speaker, in your instructions to us on Monday, you asked what Government has done. We also asked the investigating officers to investigate. Since I had to make a statement, I am reporting what they said. At the end, I have said there is need to do further investigations on these matters. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall debate this statement on Tuesday. However, the Government will have to account for the 10 days, from 19th to 29th of April, when hon. Zaake was in their custody. House adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House at 5.34 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 12 May 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)


