Wednesday, 4 May 2005

Parliament met at 2.19 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, you are welcome. I must start by appreciating the manner in which you conducted business yesterday; many people have been impressed. That is the way we should continue doing things. As I said, not behaving the way you behaved yesterday does not bring any good results; so please, continue. Thank you very much. (Applause)

I must also acknowledge the efforts of our member, hon. Kabushenga from Kanungu, in what he is doing. I wish to acknowledge with gratitude the generosity of the Three Wheelchair Mission of Long Beach, California, who have donated 600 wheelchairs to Uganda through hon. Kabushenga; it is a non-governmental organization. (Applause) Of the 600 wheelchairs, 150 have been donated through some of our constituencies, and the rest through Churches. These will ease the challenges of those who have unfortunately been rendered disabled by various circumstances. Let us pray that more will come to benefit those who do not get them this time. And remember I have introduced many guests here who are carrying out development projects in his constituency. So, it seems that he has established very good contacts for the good of his people. Please, carry on. (Applause)

For the Budget Committee, you realise time is against us. Because of that, the committee meetings will start at 9.00 a.m. tomorrow, that is Thursday, and on Friday it will start at 10.00 a.m. The Budget Committee and ex-officio members are invited for a meeting with the IMF visiting delegation on Friday at 10.00 a.m. Thank you.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA NATIONAL HEALTH RESEARCH ORGANISATION BILL, 2005

2.24
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Maj. Gen. Jim Muhwezi): Mr Speaker, I wish to move that a Bill entitled “The Uganda National Health Research Organization Bill, 2005”, be read for the first time. I also wish to lay on the Table the Certification of Financial Implications for the Bill.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament for consideration.

RECONSIDERATION OF A MOTION MOVED ON 21ST APRIL 2005 UNDER ARTICLE 74(1)(a) OF THE CONSTITUTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT REQUESTING THE HOLDING OF A REFERENDUM FOR CHANGE OF A POLITICAL SYSTEM

(Debate continued.)

2.26
MS GRACE AKELLO (Woman Representative, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for recognizing me –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, we are maintaining five minutes for each contribution, no more than that.

MS AKELLO: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for recognising me and giving me an opportunity to contribute to this very important debate. I have four points, which I would like to raise. 

Having listened to my colleagues yesterday contribute to this debate, one of the things, which struck me is that there are some of my colleagues here who really do believe that instead of consulting our people, which is what we are doing under this exercise, we are using them. I am from peasant stock and I have grown all my life in struggle, until I got here. I hate to think that I would be one of the people contributing towards using the people of Uganda. Therefore, I want to point out that the exercise that we are trying to carry out, what we want to achieve by this referendum or opening up to consult our people, is actually consulting them; asking the rightful stakeholders in the future of this country.

I was a member of the Constituent Assembly and I was very pleased when we passed most of the Articles in this Constitution, especially those that were referring to the power of the people. Mr Speaker, I want to call the honourable members’ attention to the preamble of the Constitution, paragraph No. 4 in that preamble. It says that those of us who were in the Constituent Assembly, on behalf of Ugandans, were committed to building a better future by establishing a socio-economic and political order through a popular and durable national Constitution based on the principles of unity. I believe that if we consult our people in the spirit of this search for democracy in this country, then we will unite all our people because all the decisions that will be taken will have been taken by the country. So, we will fulfill that. 

We will get equality. We will respect the equality of our people because we will expect them to contribute to the decisions of how this country should be run.

I want to refute categorically and to tell my brothers and sisters who may believe that we are out to use the people that we are not out to use the people. It is constitutional. Even Articles 1 to 4 of the Constitution clearly spell out that all power belongs to the people. And Article 1 spells out how the people should be consulted and why they should be consulted. We had a heated debate on this in the Constituent Assembly, and I am not of the persuasion that we are out to use our people.

An issue has also been raised that democracy is too expensive for a poor, donor-dependent country like Uganda. Mr Speaker, which is more expensive? Is democracy more expensive than chaos? When we were here chaos is much more expensive, and I think all of us who are mature in this House will recall the time when chaos reigned in Uganda, when our people’s right to say how they wanted to be governed, to say where they wanted to sleep, when they wanted to sleep, when all these rights had been denied to them and we had chaos. 

The economy was destroyed, which we are just trying to build; we destroyed Uganda as a country and Uganda had no respect anywhere. So, democracy may be expensive, yes, but Uganda and the interests of Uganda are much more expensive. Therefore, everybody in the country should be consulted on the future of this country.

I have heard that some people arguing that the money, which is to be spent on the referendum - this is their argument - they are saying, “Why bother about the referendum anyway?  Why not give this money to the Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) and to Northern Uganda”? Mr Speaker, these are very distinguished people in this House. I have here figures, which show how much money the Government of Uganda has been sending on Northern Uganda. 

I do not want to read all of these figures, but it does show that the Government of Uganda, without anybody prompting them, without this Parliament or anybody else prompting them, has taken interest in Northern Uganda very much, as the core of the management of this country. If we are to look under the Ministry of Local Government for example, in the last eight months alone the Ministry of Local Government has spent Shs 77 billion on Northern Uganda. That is from July last year to February this year - that is without anybody saying anything. 

If you look at the way we are responding to the emergency crisis in the IDP camps together with some of our development partners, the European Union alone, working with the Government of Uganda, has put at the disposal of Government, through different non-governmental organizations, Shs 47 billion for the IDPs to be used just in this year alone. 

Mr Speaker, the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF) has put into the IDPs Shs 10 billion for their use. The Acholi Programme has put up Shs 10 billion for the IDPs in Northern Uganda. Therefore, we have spent about Shs 100 billion responding to the crisis in the IDP camps in the country. So, nobody should come here and say that we should think of spending resources on the IDPs and Northern Uganda. I have not even –(Interjection)- I urge the members to listen because it is probably the money, which is exciting them. 

I would like to conclude because I know my time is up. I would like to conclude with a puzzle. I do not understand this. For a long time the majority of the people - the arguments that I have heard on the Floor from the side, which says that we should not debate this and we should not talk about the referendum, many of them have been telling us to open up political space. For a long time they had been saying this. They had been urging the Government of Uganda to consult widely. Now we are proposing a way of opening up political space, we are proposing a way of consulting the people so that the decision, which is made by the people, is made by the majority for Uganda. So I am puzzled! It seems as if it is the people who were urging the Government of Uganda to open up for multi-parties are the same people who, when we are now opening up and wanting this consultation, are saying, “Close up”. Where are they taking Uganda? Mr Speaker, thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Before I get another contribution, I want to inform you that in the distinguished strangers’ gallery is Mr Abbey Walusimbi, President of the United African Federation in America. You are most welcome. (Applause)

2.33
MR AVITUS TIBARIMBASA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to contribute to this motion. I also want to join you in thanking all those who contributed yesterday in a very cool atmosphere. However, a few members contributed and tried to frighten the House that after passing this motion to enable our people go through the referendum we shall be jeopardizing the peace that has been created in this country, which I strongly disagree with.  

The basis for those who have stood on the Floor of this House opposing this motion has been mainly the fact that the Government could save some money, which is likely to amount to Shs 30 billion. I would like to inform these colleagues that this money was already budgeted for. It is in this budget because the Government was aware that this exercise was going to be carried out. 

As the Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs said, if we went to the people in the year 2000, I do not see how we can now afford not to go back to them to open up the political space. We consulted them in 2000 and they accepted to vote for the Movement System of governance that has been followed while carrying out the affairs of this nation.  

There is one member who contributed yesterday; this member was in the Constituent Assembly, and when I read the motion as it was tabled, they are quoting all Articles that this member was part of when the Constitution, which was promulgated in 1995, was being debated. For example, the motion is moved under Article 74(1)(a), and this one specifically is giving guidance that according to what was put in the Constitution, for the political system to change we had to evoke this Article.

The motion also quotes Article 1(4) of the Constitution, where it is said specifically that power belongs to the people. The moment you do not carry out a referendum, the people opposing this motion will be the same people who will go to the masses and convince them that the Movement governance had become dictatorial. So to avoid that, we must make sure that a referendum takes place. 

Also the motion quotes Article 69(1) of the Constitution, which says that the people have the right to choose a political system of their choice. So if the people are not consulted at this stage, it is going to jeopardize all that the Government has done in the last 19/20 years. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.38
MRS JUSTINE LUMUMBA (Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I support the motion for the reason that our Constitution spells out that we should consult the people either through the councils or through the people themselves to choose which way they should be governed. 

However, what I want to say now is that as leaders of this country we must be very cautious. We must be very careful in whatever we are doing and whatever steps we want to take. I say this because some leaders have come to the level of thinking that when you have the majority then you are right. Lani Guinier who is a lawyer and a writer in America, in the book, The Tyranny of the Majority, writes and says, “The fact that the majority supports a policy is no evidence of its wisdom, might and right.” This should be an eye opener to us that when you have the majority, it does not mean that what they support should always be the right thing.

I am saying this because I remember that day people really wanted to vote not knowing what will come of the results and not knowing that when they force it – because the intention to some of those who were saying, “We vote”, was that other people should not be given a chance to talk. And we have come to a time when some people think that when they do certain things that is when they will be recognized as strong Movement supporters. Such a thing has for example cost us all this time; this is national time, which has been eaten up. 

So I want to caution my colleagues that before you move be very careful. You should even know the law under which you are moving a motion because this issue has put the integrity of Members of Parliament in question. Why do we change what was lost? But because of the issue of democracy in the interest of democracy of this country, I beg to support, Mr Speaker.

2.41
LT GEN. DAVID TINYEFUZA (Army Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am happy to be back on the Floor of this august House after a long lull at the Senior Command and Staff College. I am happy to be back –(Interjection)– yes, by July I will come to stay for good and join the battle, so do not worry. 

Of course I had anticipated that many colleagues would be happy to see us here, but to the contrary the other day I heard hon. Katuntu regretting my presence and that of other generals. He was calling us “voting machines” - that is the term he used - it was unfortunate. I want to assure the hon. Member for Bugweri that soldiers join battles at any phase. You can join it at the advance, you can join it during attack, and even within withdrawal. So, at any phase I will join the battle. You should have no doubt about that. It is also not uncommon; after all we left schools and colleges to fight fascists and we shall not hesitate to leave schools again to fight neo-fascists. There is no question about that. That is what the situation will be.

Going back to this motion, which is very important, in 1986, about 20 years ago, our people took power in this country. By so doing they made a profound political statement that henceforth it is the people who will manage their own destiny and he who will stand in their way will be consumed by their power. That is the statement the people of Uganda made and I hope many people who try to delay some of these unstoppable processes of people’s emancipation will know that there was a change ushered in, a change for real, which is unstoppable. 

Those people who do not appreciate this change remind me of the legendary Rip Van Winkle, a fellow whom we read of in the Soviet Revolution, who slept for 20 years. He woke up after 20 years and he thought there was no revolution. The revolution had been fought, won and actually lost but for him he bubbled out “You the wretched of the earth!” He did not know things had moved on. People should know that things moved and the people are in charge. That is the basic message and we cannot reverse it.

I have been listening to many colleagues and it does not bother me that people hold different opinions on such important debates, because why not? You can be faced with the same facts but come to different conclusions. What matters most is that it is done in good faith. Therefore, it does not make me feel bad as long as people express themselves honestly. 

However, what disturbs me a bit is that people have double standards when considering some of these important issues. Why am I saying that? When I was listening to my colleagues, especially from the legal profession, they were talking about heaven being about to fall, about rules and so on. “We should not waste money going to a referendum”, and so on. These lawyers are some of the fellows who insist on consistency and predictability. “Be predictable, be consistent”. 

When you hear case law, when you hear the law of precedence, all they are talking about is doing things in a predictable manner. Forget about the jurisprudential value of it, but the basis is - for instance, if a court were to determine the case of the same facts under the same law, then another court tomorrow does that –(Member timed out)- Mr Speaker, I ask for some more time because I am going to communicate. We have been away for a long time. I hope members want to listen to the Army. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

Immediately you do not have that principle of consistency and become predictable in the conduct of public affairs, you undermine your credibility. The day we went to the referendum in 2000 we sent a signal to the people of Uganda that this is the system we shall pass through. Now you want to short change them and go to local council Vs, this is not predictable. It will confuse our people. It is inconsistent and inconsistency is bad in any system. I do not support inconsistency in public affairs; I think it is dangerous.  

I also heard my colleagues talking about autonomy and going on about rules of Parliament, autonomy and so on. I do appreciate that autonomy. These bodies are very autonomous but autonomy must be within the bigger framework of a people’s revolutionary tenets. Immediately these rules depart from the revolutionary vision of the people, then the autonomy will lose legitimacy. Autonomy without legitimacy is called alienation. It is no longer autonomy, therefore, be careful not to be alienated from your people. Immediately you undercut the people, we shall be alienated.

The other point, which I want to make is that my colleagues who oppose this motion, I do not know why they do not see that this is a high stake enterprise game. This is a business, which is full of risks. I do not know why they do not know that all the people of Uganda, including the political elite, including some Members of Parliament here, are not convinced that going back to multi-parties is the correct thing to do. Not everybody is convinced. However, because the times are what they are, we think it is high time we opened up. 

If we do not go to ask the people to commit themselves on this important fact, suppose we bring back the parties and they do exactly what they were doing at the gates of the High Court the other day; what shall we tell our people? You bring back parties without informing them - using local council Vs - then tomorrow there is anarchy, how do you go back and face the same people? Therefore, I think it goes without saying that in cases of high stakes like this, there can be no shortcut other than going back to the people so that they commit themselves. There is no short cut.

In conclusion, this is the way the Army looks at it really. The rest are details but for the Army we consider ourselves mainly bound by principles. The principle is the most important. The principle is this: involve the people in their own governance, consult them intensively and extensively to avoid conflict and wars. Once that is done, then God will bless this country. I support the motion. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause).

2.50
MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I stand here to support the motion because of historical facts. In 1980 when we had elections under a multi-party political system and the government at that time decided to block the people of West Nile from participating in that election, the whole country knows what happened in West Nile after that. There was a rebellion, the Uganda National Rescue Front went into the bush because they were not happy with the elections that were carried out in the rest of the country and in which the people of West Nile were denied participation. And because the elections were also rigged massively, there was the National Resistance Army rebellion. 

As a result of the war in West Nile, dissatisfaction and because the Government then was not sure of its stay, it massacred a number of people in West Nile. You heard about the Obaci massacre, we have mass graves in Kureku in Adjumani District, we have a mass grave in Openzinzi, and we have a mass grave in Unna. So many people suffered in 1981, nearly half of Adjumani was wiped out, all buildings were destroyed and people went into exile.  

One very unfortunate thing, which I want this country to remember, is that in 1983 when there was a United Nations Conference, the President of this country was in that conference asked when he would bring back the refugees from West Nile who had taken refuge in Sudan. That President told the United Nations Conference that there were no Ugandans in Sudan: “Those people who went back to Sudan were the Anyanyas and they were Sudanese and they had gone back to their country”. The Head of state denied us our rights as Ugandans! That was dictatorship of the highest order. Mr Speaker, because of the history of this country, my people want to make a decision in every important political process in this country.

Our people have sent their representatives to the National Executive Committee (NEC), and in 2001 the National Executive Committee of the Movement discussed the future of this country and appointed an adhoc committee, which gave resolutions to the NEC and National Conference of 2003. A number of important decisions were made after that. Right now my people are convinced that they are going to make a decision in the very important process of changing the political system. There are people who want to change the political system but there are those who may not also want to change the political system. Therefore, we cannot deny any Ugandan the right to choose what to do.  

Many Ugandans have also expressed their wish for democracy in this country through debates on radio, and television, through demonstrations and through speeches at public functions. In my opinion, if we must respect the Constitution’s Article 1, especially clauses (2) and (4), the only solution to suppress any uprising in this country is to have a referendum so that people can choose what kind of system they can be governed under without being indirectly represented by Members of Parliament here, and the district councilors. 

I want to insist on this because we cannot even be sure that the district councils can pass resolutions in order for Parliament to change the political system. The people they represent in those district councils can intimidate them. Therefore, this has to go back to the people and the people should choose. It is not a must for the district councils to pass the resolution to change the political system. It is not a must and, Mr Speaker, it is clear –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, with a lot of humility I am standing on a point of order. With reference to Article 74(1)(a), along with the rest of the provisions given under Article 74, the point of order I am raising is constitutional. If the people of Uganda invoke Article 74(2), there is no indication constitutionally to show that that choice is anti-people. Any option consequential to Article 74(1)(a) is equally legitimate and is not necessarily anti-people. Is the honorable member in order to confuse people constitutionally?

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to proceed?

MS ERIYO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I think hon. Lukyamuzi has expressed his ignorance about the practicability of Article 74(2). As of now I have not seen any district council resolution that is requesting for a change of the political system as far as Article 74(2) is concerned. I thank you very much, and I support the motion.

2.58
PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank you for giving me the opportunity to contribute. I am going to cover three points to support my assertion that the option of a referendum is an option that we can ill-afford.

A lot of arguments have been advanced as to why we need a referendum, but we need to start from the beginning. What is the decision all about? It is about a choice between options available to us. We have a choice to go for a referendum, a choice to go to the districts, or a choice to go to the people to ask them whether we should even have a referendum. These three choices are there. I hear a lot of people saying the people must decide. 

Mr Speaker, which people of Uganda decided that they want a resolution on a referendum? None. The responsibility of advancing a request, either for a referendum, or for a resolution of district councils, lies entirely with the Government. Somebody must initiate this and we appreciate the fact that the Government of Uganda initiated a resolution to change the political system. The onus now is on us to determine whether the choice that they made is the right one. 

I accept the desire that we change the political system because we need it, but is the referendum the right one? I say no. I say no for one simple reason that it is too costly. It is too costly for this country. But more importantly, there are people who have said that the people must decide. 

I would like to remind this House and to remind the country that during the Constituent Assembly, under its Rules of Procedure, it was provided that where there are contentious issues, those issues should be taken to the people to be decided upon through a referendum. Not a single referendum was held during the Constituent Assembly. The people who were there did not think that the people could decide and the same people are now saying, “Let us go to the people”. My brother, Lt Gen. Tinyefuza, talked of consistency, but consistency must be from the beginning to the end.

Secondly, the argument being advanced that because the political system was chosen through a referendum we must change it through a referendum, as hon. Ken Lukyamuzi Ken said, this is really fallacious because the Constitution has provided us with options. Whether yesterday we used district councils, it is incumbent upon us to choose and rationalize our choice. Those rationalizations cannot lie in how the people of Adjumani suffered. 

I could stand here and say how Amin killed us, the minister yesterday talked how people died in Luweero, but they do not rationalize the choice between Parliament’s resolution and the district councils or any of this and the other. They do not. It is important for Ugandans, and it is important for us as Parliament to rationalize.  

When we come to rationalization, yesterday the Rt hon. Prime Minister advanced the case for using the Shs 30 billion and he said that there are 11 million voters. In his arithmetic he said that on average it would cost Shs 2,000 to get those 11 million voters to vote. My arithmetic tells me that that is about 33 or 45 percent less than the actual estimate. But on the other hand the people of Uganda could use the same effort and rationalisation and say that for a Bachelor of Arts student in Makerere University, two semesters on average cost Shs 1 million. Therefore, Shs 30 billion could pay for 1,000 Ugandans for three years to do a Bachelor of Arts course. If we put that money up to train 1,000 teachers, because of democracy we could advance development in this country more than if we spent this money in a referendum. This is rationalisation. Therefore, my dear colleagues, you may support the referendum but Ugandans are watching us and asking whether we are being rational about it or not.
I would like to make an appeal. I know that in the circumstances that we are in, a choice of referendum will be made within the provisions of our procedure and within the laws. Those are legitimate choices, we will have to live with it. But more importantly, it is not just choosing, it is how we shall conduct that referendum, which is most critical. Mr speaker, the Electoral Commission, even before a choice of a referendum was made, went ahead to update voters register, the population did not appreciate why they had to update. That register has not been fully updated.  My appeal is that if we pass the referendum, then the process of updating voters registers should start afresh because the voters know why they want their names to get in.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, Members are saying, “Let us go to the people, let the people decide” - I wrote about this some time back, and it is now becoming increasingly obvious. People want to go under the cover of the peasants to say they have refused to change the Movement System. I want Ugandans to know that with or without a choice, there is already a choice.  The reason why they described the Movement system as all-inclusive is because of the fact that people who will be in it are people who belong to other systems. Therefore, this referendum should not be the beginning of oppressing parties because when you do this, my brother, Lt. Gen. Tinyefuza, the tyrants that you chased away would have come back in a different form, the same tyrants suppressing Ugandans. I thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ECONOMIC MONITORING (Mr Omwony Ojwok): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving the voice of two counties in Kotido District to express an opinion on this matter.  Mr Speaker, the motion we are discussion now calls for us to ask for a referendum in order to deal with the political system - I underlined the words “political system”.  

Political system is a question of governance, but what is the ideal form of governance that not just Ugandans, but anybody else, would desire? It is that form of governance that would involve every individual in discussion, in debate and decision, virtually on everything. But in practice that is not possible, that is why the electoral method was invented in order, through the people who have been elected, to be able to decide on important matters.  But it is a question of degree of importance; not every decision is as important as the other. 

When we talk of political system we are actually talking of the very grain, the very process by which the people must be governed. Therefore, I would like to use the historical argument and really concentrate on this because some historical references have been made, but it appears to me it is necessary to go into some detail on this.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to remind you, the Members of Parliament and our people of two aspects of the preamble to our Constitution. The first one recalls our history, which has been characterized by political and constitutional instability, and it recognizes that our people have fought against the forces of tyranny, oppression and exploitation. The question is, why? - Because our history has been characterized by attempts to exclude the majority of the population from making decisions on the most critical issues that affect us. That has been the grain of our history, and I would like to illustrate concretely.  

Mr Speaker, you will remember that in 1894 Kabaka Mwanga was overthrown. That was the first military coup that had ever occurred in the history of Uganda. A civil war ensued between Kabaka Mwanga on one side together with Kabalega and the British colonial regime. The British, through this process of a military coup and the war that ensued, had excluded our people. The result was the 1900 Agreement. 

Read that agreement very carefully; you will see that the supremacy of the colonial regime was established and our people were not given a chance to decide. As a result of this, Mr Speaker, I would like to remind you of the struggles of our people in 1927, 1938, 1942, 1955, 1958 with, if you remember Kamya and his group. As a result of these struggles, the British colonial regime was forced to accept that we must rule ourselves; we must reclaim our right to decide our own future.  

Unfortunately, Mr Speaker, this reclaiming of our sovereignty was only partial because only a few people were flown to Lancaster House in London and there they discussed critical matters of our country outside Uganda and without the participation of the vast majority of Ugandans.  They nevertheless achieved something, and the best example of this is when the then Katikiro of Buganda comes back and at the Airport he says, “Ebintu byaffe, tubifunye,” you remember that?  Where did we get those things from? - From London, not from Uganda. 

Immediately after independence quarrels began between the elite, again excluding the people, Obote versus Kakonge, 1964; Obote versus Ibingira and Kabaka Mutesa II, 1966; the Pigeonhole Constitution, which you remember very well; the whole process continued. Mr Speaker, what I am bringing out here is that even the Moshi Conference in which I participated, did not give complete voice of the people, it was outside Uganda and by only 22 organisations. To cut the story short, it was with the rigging of the 1980 elections and the armed struggle, which took our fighters to the villages, to the peasants, to the rural areas that our people began the process of reclaiming what they had lost. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, the process of reclaiming this right was enshrined in the 1995 Constitution and I would like to remind you the specific articles, which actually enshrined this process. These are articles 1(4), where the supremacy of the people was actually declared. The declaration did not take place in 1995; it was in the bushes, and it was across the rivers, the mountains, where our people shed blood, that is where the process occurred.  

At this stage, therefore, I appeal to our colleagues who have not been on our side on this matter to let our people have their right to determine, let them have even the right to make a mistake - Yes, the people should have a right to make a mistake, it is only through that mistake that they would learn. But if a few of us sit here and decide, and it turns out to be a mistake, what will be the cost to the people who did not participate? That is the issue. So the question of getting our people to participate in a referendum is a matter of principle; it is also a matter of our history and we should not compromise on it. I thank you. (Applause)

3.16
MRS FLORENCE NAYIGA SEKABIRA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I stand here as a Woman Member of Parliament for People with Disabilities in Uganda. People with disabilities in this country treasure involvement in decision-making much more than any other Ugandan in this country. 

For many years, people with disabilities in this country had no opportunity to make any decision from the family level, at community level and even at political level, even on cultural matters. We had no opportunity at all until the Movement Government ushered in this opportunity to us. We                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          cannot afford to sell off our right to make an important decision for the management of this country, especially this decision that is leading to the changing of the political system of this country.  People with disabilities in this country stand firm to say they must be involved directly; we do not want to go through our representatives this time. Let us have the opportunity to make the decision on individual basis.

Mr Speaker, I want to call upon other Members of this august House to appreciate the 10 percent of their constituency’s decisions because we make 2.4 million people in this country and our decision, our involvement should be taken seriously. We must be involved; there is no other opportunity better than this one for us to make a decision that concerns the change of a political system. Many people with disabilities feel that people who have no disabilities at times make decisions, which affect them negatively. They need to make a decision and own the decision.  

So, Mr Speaker, I call upon my colleagues to support this motion. I support it fully with the mandate of my constituency that we must go for the referendum and we should do it so that each and every other individual of voting age makes a contribution in determining the future of this nation. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

3.19
CAPT. MIKE MUKULA (Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I wish to express the views of the people of Soroti Municipality and I wish to start by saying that I support the motion.  

Mr Speaker, I want to reflect on this motion by going back to the terms of reference that were given to the Ssempebwa Commission. If I may read to refresh honourable colleagues, the terms of reference were to examine the consistency and the compatibility of the constitutional provisions relating to the sovereignty of the people of Uganda, political systems, democracy and good governance, and to make recommendations as to how best to ensure that the country is governed in accordance with the will of the people at all times. Mr Speaker, that is precisely why it is important that the people of Uganda under Article (1) must be consulted before we change the political system of this country.

Again in the Ssempebwa Commission, a number of memoranda were presented and 12,560 public hearings were carried out 9,101 of which were in favour of the Movement political system and 3,459 were for the multiparty system, meaning that over 75 percent of the people of Uganda, support and continue to support the Movement political system.  How do you go and usurp the power of the people of Uganda, who are the majority, when making a major political decision in this country without consulting them?    

Mr Speaker, a few arguments have been made, and I want to say that consistency is a very important matter when it comes to good governance; we should not shift goal posts. Article 74 has been very clearly developed by those who originated the Constitution. Some people have said that changing the political system can be done by Parliament or District Councils.  

Mr Speaker, I want to put it on record that arguments are being put across that a referendum is too expensive; that we are going to spend a lot of money part of which could be spent on supporting other areas of our society. 

I want to reflect on the times former President Idi Amin was in power; he never held any single election in this country. What value in terms of development did he add to this country? Former President Obote I did not carry out any single election; Obote II did not carry out any single election. This Government has always maintained a sustained approach in making sure that when it comes to good governance, the people of Uganda must be consulted.  

The process of good governance in this country has always been by consensus, it has always been by consultations. After the National Executive Committee (NEC) meeting, after the National Conference, Mr Speaker, when you talk about consensus, which consensus are we talking about?  We have held consultations under the Kiyonga Committee and we have the so-called G7 or G12, some of our colleagues refused to go for these consultations. In building national consensus, what other avenue would we have been expected to utilize as a nation? Article 74 is very clear. It says by resolution of Parliament, a referendum shall be held, it does not say, “may be held”.  

I also want to touch on the issue of numbers. I have heard colleagues talking about numbers, and saying that we in Parliament are exercising the authority of numbers to prevail on the minority. Even the process of going through this particular Article has always been by discussion and persuasion. I think this approach, which some colleagues have taken, that every matter that Government puts across must be rejected, whether it is good or bad, should be rejected. I think we must learn to be sincere to our nation and to our people.  

I want to state very clearly that my people in Soroti Municipality would like to be consulted and my specific instructions, having held the due consultations, are to put to you, Mr Speaker, that a referendum be held and the people of Soroti Municipality wish to participate in the decision-making in the change of political system in this country.  Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Before we proceed, I want to introduce some visitors in the Distinguished Visitors Gallery. They are: Mr Robert Sebunya, who was a member of the National Consultative Council, a Parliament, which came after the liberation war, and Mr Israel Mayengo, also who was a Member of the National Resistance Council. You are welcome.

Honourable members, another point I want to make is in regard to the number of letters I have received from you. Over the weekend in these talk shows, where one of you was participating, they alleged that I had been sent notes from one group to direct me as to how to conduct the proceedings, and unfortunately, one of the said Members had sent me a letter, which I am keeping. 

I want to make it clear that I am not directed by anybody as to how to conduct this business. And for information of the public, these letters are appeals from Members who think that they have been standing many times without catching my eye; there is no any other matter that you can find in these letters. I thought I should make this clear.  

3.30
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Bakoko Bakoru): Mr Speaker, honourable members of Parliament, I rise to support the motion for the following reasons. Mr Speaker, as leaders and Members of Parliament, we must be guided by our conscience and by principle. Uganda as a country has been travelling on a very rough road. Uganda in the East African Community has had nine Presidents unlike our sister countries and I would imagine that, that was due to lack of harmony and participation of the population on how they should be governed. I think that is a fact, which we cannot dispute in this Parliament and in this country.

We are also aware that the Movement Government has been here for over 18 years. It has carried the people and therefore the people have carried it because it has built a culture of consulting the population in governing themselves. It has also built a culture of inclusiveness even when we have diverse political beliefs. That is why many of us here can speak so freely and openly on matters of governance.  So, for me to stand here as the Member of Parliament for Ayivu constituency and endorse that a referendum must not be held, I would be doing a disservice to the people who elected me to this Parliament. 

My people of Ayivu must participate in deciding their destiny and in deciding how they will be governed. I am saying this because in 1980 the people of Ayivu suffered a lot; we have a mass grave in Ombaci, we have another in front of my father’s house. Our people were thrown into a house and burnt, and we are not going back to that. Those days are gone, Mr Speaker, whether we like it or not we will never go back to those days and the people will decide for their future.  

People are talking about the cost of the referendum. In the Sixth Parliament, some Members of Parliament raised the issue of a cost-benefit analysis of the Army being deployed in Congo when this money could have been spent on education, health, or agriculture in this country. I stood up and said, if the rebels were left in Congo to come and disorganize the people of West Nile and they were not able to access education, health care, and they could not even engage in production, how much money was the Central Government sending to that region compared to how much was being paid for keeping these soldiers in Congo, who managed to divert those rebels from coming into West Nile?  

Mr Speaker, the political and social cost of not holding this referendum and consulting the people is much more than Uganda Shs 30 billion. Therefore the people – (Interruption)

MR AGGREY AWORI: Mr Speaker, my honourable colleague is aware of the fact that only yesterday a senior Minister in this Government came back from the Hague to defend Uganda Government on a matter of this Government having sent people to loot the Democratic Republic of Congo. Is she in order not only to be totally oblivious of that fact of aggression, but also to mislead the august House that what we did was justifiable?  

Last but not least, is she also in order to bring a matter on the Floor, which is sub judice at the Hague? 

THE SPEAKER: First of all, you are out of order to bring a matter, which is in court in the Hague. (Laughter) 

On the other issue, when you take a matter to court, it does not mean that you are right, you may be speculating. So we do not know the outcome, especially if the case has not been decided.  

MRS BAKOKO BAKORU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your very wise ruling. 

Mr Speaker, I know that in this country decisions were traditionally made by a segment of people, and very few people. The change, which the Movement Government has brought is yet to filter to some of these people who traditionally thought that the public must not be consulted when they are being governed, and I believe my colleague, hon. Awori Aggrey, is one of them.  

So, Mr Speaker, today as we want to reverse a decision, which was taken in 2000 through a referendum where over 75 percent of the people of Ugnad decided that they must be governed by the Movement, we have to go back and consult them and ask them to take that decision. It would be very unfair on our part as leaders to take this decision without consulting the people of this country who must decide their destiny. I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members.

3.38
MAJ. JOHN KAZOORA (Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Mr Speaker, I was energized by the contribution on my senior brother and my Old Boy (OB), the hon. Lt. Gen. Tinyefuza, in his resolve to fight fascists, using his words, in the past and in the future. I want to assure him that I will always be on his side in fighting fascists wherever they come from, whatever colour, even if they were yesterday’s liberators. If they turn into fascists, I will always be with him, and I want to welcome him to the House.

Mr Speaker, the first and foremost characteristic of legislature is its intrinsic link to the citizens of a nation or a state representation. Mr Speaker, as John Stewart Mill wrote in 1862, that in a representative democracy the legislature acts as the eyes, ears and the voice of the people, the proper office of a representative assembly is to watch and control Government, to throat the light of publicity on its acts and to compel a full exposition and justification of all of them, which anyone considers questionable to censure them if found condemnable.

Mr Speaker, we are here as representatives of the people. When we talk of resources, and the people being in charge, why don’t we involve them when we are allocating resources, because they may be considering infrastructure, for instance! But because - and I am glad one of my former lecturers is here – because of the iron law of oligarchy we are given that authority. 

Yesterday, Mr Speaker, I was saddened to hear one of the senior leaders of this country argue that he consulted the Electoral Commission and was told that there are only 11 million voters, and therefore Uganda Shs 23 billion would be Shs 2000 each. I do not want to use certain words, but for sure, Mr Speaker, these people are not going to share that money. Look at it in a lump sum. If this money was put for instance in use of ARV drugs, what impact would it have to the population? So, I think let us not use the people when we feel it is in our convenience.  

I will give you an example, Mr Speaker. I went to attend the NRM/O promoters meeting in the Conference Centre. If it was not a matter of editing out, I would be there, but when the name was brought, NRM/O, Mzee Chango Macho said, “Why are we changing the name, why are we moving rather to parties without consulting the people?” That meeting was chaired by the Head of State, the Chairman of NRM/O now. He said, “Some of these things are so intricate to the peasants, we shall explain to them.” That is what was said, it is on record, Mr Speaker. Why are we changing goalposts today?  

Mr Speaker, yesterday I did not understand a certain Member who was debating and saying, “why are we using District Councils?” That Member came to this House through electoral colleges, as if now she was saying she is a lesser Member of Parliament than the rest of us who didn’t come through the method that brought her here.  

Mr Speaker, some scholars have observed that in Uganda the Executive has too much power and it is undesirable that Parliament should allow itself to dance or to be seen to be dancing to the whims of the Executive. When this motion was being moved by the hon. Minister of State, he said, “Government is desirous”; he did not say the people are desirous in that motion. So, where are we moving in all this? Are we therefore looking for further facilitation as we got for the White Paper, so that we go to educate the people about the referendum and then use the name of the people? 

Members have talked of facilitation -(Interruption)

MRS JANAT MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and my honourable colleague. I cannot accept it to be part of the record that the Shs 30 billion is going to facilitate me to educate when hon. Kazoora participated in making and passing the Referendum law giving the Electoral Commission two months to educate the people about the referendum. Part of the Shs 30 billion is going to be used by the Electoral Commission for that exercise. Is he in order to impute that we are here to debate the Shs 30 billion to facilitate us, Mr Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Is it hon. Kazoora’s position that the Shs 30 billion mentioned is to be shared by the honourable members? Is that what you said?

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, I was wondering, I did not state it as a fact. But let me say that I promise hon. Janat Mukwaya that because of the distance we walked together, I will just leave it at that. My words were clear that I am wondering if part of this money will be facilitating Members in civic education or about a referendum. With those few comments, Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me chance. 

MR JOHN ERESU: Mr Speaker, I have been listening to the debate and I seek guidance -(Interjections)- I seek protection, Mr Speaker, from hon. Ogenga Latigo. What I need guidance for is, as the debate progresses, I have been making reference time and again to Article 74(1) and (2). Article 74(2) says: 

“The political system may also be changed by elected representatives of the people in Parliament and district councils by resolution of Parliament supported by not less than two thirds of all Members of Parliament upon a petition to it supported by not less than two thirds majority of the total membership of each of at least half of all district councils”.  

I thought Article 74(2) would only be a subject of debate if we had a petition from the district councils, which at this point in time, Mr Speaker, is not here.  

On the other hand, Article 74(1) reads: 
“A referendum will be held for purposes of changing the political system –
(a) if requested by a resolution supported by more than half of all the Members of Parliament,” which resolution has been brought to Parliament and we are to give support to it by half. The guidance I am seeking is, Mr Speaker, what are we debating about?

THE SPEAKER: What I can say is that I stand by the guidance I gave yesterday on the same issue; I think it was raised by the hon. Minister for Foreign Affairs. I said in debating this motion, which is for a resolution, a Member is free in his contribution to suggest a better method of changing the political system. This is exactly what they are doing, but the motion we have is for a resolution of a referendum. These are their arguments; they should not worry you one way or the other. You can support them, you can listen to them, but it does not make any change on the motion, which we have before us. 

3.48
THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATION (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to contribute on this important motion for our country.  

Mr Speaker, I rise to support this motion for a resolution of Parliament to request the Electoral Commission to hold a referendum on changing the political system under Article 74(1)(a). But first I wish to thank the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, and indeed this House, for having put in Rule 53(3), which has helped this House to erase a serious political error that would have remained on the map of this Parliament that was done on 21st of last month. So I thank hon. Ben Wacha and his committee for having made that rule, and Parliament for having approved it.

Secondly, listening to my Friend, hon. Prof. Ogenga Latigo, I heard him saying that we are now moving this process correctly and the referendum will be held. I want to thank him for that. But his worry was whether that referendum will be free and fair. If I have to believe the newspapers, I saw it in newspapers that him and FDC were going to take this Parliament to court for the decisions we made last week. I want to congratulate him for having withdrawn from that direction.  

Mr Speaker, I was in the Constituent Assembly - I think we have to be careful as we move - I was in Constituent Assembly and through such debates about our constitutional process, about how the country should move, we reached a point where some of our colleagues walked out of the Constituent Assembly. They refused to sign the very Constitution we have here.  

I have watched over these years that we have been using this Constitution for the last ten years and they are the very people who have been taking this Constitution to court to defend a case using the very Constitution they have never appended their signatures on.  I think we have to be careful and listen carefully to what people say.

First there is this argument that we need Article 74 to save money for the very many needs of our people.  The people I represent in Kazo have needs.  The budget has never been enough.  The question should be, is this money going to be worth spent for a good cause or not?  

I was looking through our budget; we spend almost Ugshs 10 billion on travel inland and abroad every year.  Definitely there are other needs; we need hospitals, we need ARVs, but we need to travel to do Government business both inland and abroad. You cannot say let the whole Government not travel because we need money somewhere else and save the Ugshs 10 billion.  

This important function that we are going to do with our people through a referendum should not be taken lightly.  It is taking another mark in the history of our political and economic development for our people. 

Mr Speaker, I cannot help, except note that while I was speaking I thought the cheers were for me –(Laughter)- only to realise that hon. Wandira Kazibwe Speciosa had entered the Chamber and the temperatures had gone up.  Let me use this opportunity to welcome her back to the House.

Mr Speaker, this debate of arguing that even Article 74(2) will save costs is very misleading. I will tell you why it is misleading. I do not know whether those who argue mean what they say.  Article 74(2) depends on petitions from councils, and my colleagues have said it.  

In other words, Parliament will sit here and wait for petitions to come from councils.  How many petitions, Mr Speaker?  I want to read, “Upon petitions to it,” that is the Parliament, “supported by not less than two thirds majority of the total membership of each of at least half of the districts.”  

So here we are, Members of Parliament, waiting for these petitions to come from the districts. Article 74(3) goes on to say that this process should be completed in the fourth year of Parliament.  That process ends by the 2 July 2005, and here is the mighty Parliament of Uganda waiting for the districts to make that decision.  

You have not asked, suppose these petitions do not come by the 2 July 2005, what will be the cost?  I wonder - Mr Speaker, inform honourable members that the only way to change the political system is through Article 74.   For those who have been pushing for us to change the political system, the very people who boycotted the referendum of 2000 are the same people who want us to sit here and hope that the districts will bring the petitions, and if they do not come, we are back to 2000, the Movement system remains. Surely, honourable members, you the champions of multipartism cannot be the same people who are trying to put us in their norm.  

Because of shortage of time, I just want to touch on two points.  One, people think that our people are just going to wake up one day to vote for “yes” or “no” and that is what the referendum is all about.  

Mr Speaker, a referendum is about educating our people; is about involving our people in the debate about our country.  Our people will be more enlightened after the referendum than they are now.  We must take this debate to them and educate them.  

It is not just one day that they are going to vote; they will be more politically and constitutionally enlightened at the end of this referendum.  So we need this referendum, take the whole population, our voting people, even those who are not yet of age to vote, to understand the development of a political process and this is the opportunity to do it. Mr Speaker, I support this referendum; cost is not an issue.  

Finally, let me touch on the issue of numbers.  Everybody here who happens and is coming from minority has been condemning this issue of numbers.  

Mr Speaker, all of us are here because of numbers; if we did not get higher numbers, we would not be here.  We are called honourable because of numbers.  Numbers are honourable; to respect numbers is honourable.  

I have heard some arguments on FM radios, “They have the numbers and we have the brains.”  This is total insult to us. We have the numbers and have the brains as well.  Since I mentioned your name I will give you –(Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, honourable Minister.  Honourable Minister maybe you were misinformed about the argument about numbers.  We all came because of numbers, and in the 6th Parliament the Parliament was full because of numbers but at the end of the 6th of Parliament half of that Parliament because of numbers did not come back. This was because the people whom they elected did not do the work that they were elected to do and they were replaced. 

 Can I inform the honourable Minister that our argument is that, yes, the numbers are there but also let us convince the country of what we want to do. That is our point.  We did not come here because of numbers; we cannot win if it is just numbers.  But we believe that when we talk to you, when we talk to the country, our positions are also appreciated.

MR NASASIRA: Can I finalise before I give an opportunity to members?  Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, very briefly, my honourable colleague is saying among other things that we are all here because of numbers.  Is he in order to mislead the august House that we are all here because of numbers when I know hon. Kiwanuka and the Prime Minister did not come here on votes? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Certainly it is true there are some members who did not come here because of numbers. He was meaning those who are going to vote. 

MR NASASIRA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I know hon. Awori Aggrey understands numbers very well.  He tried them nationally, when they were not adequate he went back to Busia South and got the right numbers and that is why he is here.  

So, Mr Speaker, hon. Ogenga Latigo is saying- yes, we have the numbers but we respect and listen to the minority. This is why we have been here patiently listening. At the beginning of this debate when the minority was virtually violating the Rules of Procedure and making the Speaker’s work almost difficult we were quiet, not because we do not respect small numbers. we were quiet because we also respect discipline and procedure. 

Finally, we should not fear to go to the people for any reason. Since 1989 when the Chairman LC 1 was elected when the President goes for a rally, we call the Chairman LC 1 to declare the meeting open.  Things in Uganda changed, the issue of the elite thinking they will come here and decide for the population ended.  

I want to apply to the remnants of that thought to join us because you cannot belong to an idea that you are very democratic and you believe in democracy when you fear the people, and you think you can join the club of those who believe in democracy.  

What changed, I can associate it with a mushroom. When a mushroom gets out of the soil you cannot push it back.  Things changed, the people of Uganda matter. Let us go back to the people and they own this process so that we can go to the next stage of our country.  Thank you very much.

4.05
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO  (Bunyole County Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  About 10 years ago I had an opportunity to undergo a chakamchaka training in which a lot of information was given.  One of the very controversial lessons in the political training in chakamchaka was as to who is responsible for the turmoil that has bedevilled Uganda in the past.  

Mr Speaker, at that time the trainers of the day did tell us that the political parties are so bad, they have brought turmoil and they should never be allowed to the country.  At that time I did inquire from my honourable friends then who were lecturing. 

I wondered whether actually it is the political parties or the bad leaders that were responsible for the turmoil that we had had in the country. I know the foundation of our political parties could have been bad, but I know the situation was made worse when we had short sighted leaders who could not coalesce the population together for a common objective.  

Mr Speaker, I did ask then when I was in Kyankwanzi, I had been invited as a Guild President of Makerere University to talk to the students who were in Kyankwanzi, that when you say parties are bad and then you say they would come in future what message are we sending to the people?  Are we not sending a mixed signal?  

I concluded by requesting them that why don’t we change the message that we are giving our people?  We would rather tell them that parties if well organized can be good, but even the Movement System if it gets a bad leader it can also be bad.  I did not know that sooner than later that there would be a change in attitude about the need to return political parties to the country.

Mr Speaker, for these 18 or so years the people of Uganda through mass media, chakamchaka and politicisation, have been given the message that political parties are bad.  

Mr Speaker, no wonder that the information that we got through the Ssempebwa Commission, more than 70 per cent of the people of Uganda still prefer a Movement System.  Now, if there must be a shift in thinking that we need political competition within the politics of Uganda, Mr Speaker, it becomes imperative on us and the people who have been telling the people that parties are bad, to go back to the people and tell them that actually the situation has changed.

Mr Speaker, if for any reason that I would have loved myself, the process of changing the political system - quite often I have been asking whether the country was committed, the Executive has resources to ensure that we have enhanced civic education to our people, to make sure that we psychologically prepare them for the type of change that we are about to enter and also bring them on board.  

One time the Late Julius Nyerere was giving an address and in some of his writings he said, “If you are a leader do not make too many corners before the people you are leading catch up with you because you can turn so many corners out of sight”.  

I would rather suggest that the people of Uganda, and especially the leadership, we do not make so many corners that we may get out of sight of the people we are leading, because they may get lost and we may also look behind and we have none. 

Mr Speaker, I wish to conclude by requesting that the people who have all along educated our people that parties are bad, since now they have appreciated that actually parties can be good, they need to go to the people and educate them, prepare them and they can best do this through a referendum.  Mr Speaker, I support the motion. I thank you. (Applause)

4.09
MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula County South, Kamuli):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me space to make a contribution to this motion -(Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from hon. Salaamu Musumba.

MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Sir -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity and I thank my colleagues for allowing me to speak –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I said hon. Dombo to be followed by hon. Kawanga, but since you have started you can proceed. 

MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, hon. Kawanga.  Mr Speaker, I want to begin by making a correction on the motion before us.  There is a mistake that I would like to correct because, Mr Speaker, if we do not correct the mistake right now it maybe mistaken in the future.  

Mr Speaker Article 1(4) of the Constitution reads: “The people shall express their will and consent on who shall govern them and how they should be governed, through regular free and fair elections of their representatives or through referenda.”  

What is contained in the motion is a big misdirection on the last sentence because the Minister and Attorney General have stated that, “through regular free and fair elections of their representatives and through referenda.”  So, I would like to make a correction that instead of “and” it is “or”, that is what the Constitution says, the copy that I have and of course in English that makes a major change in meaning.

Mr Speaker, we have been at the debate for quite a long time and what bothers me is the naked laziness, the naked laziness of the Ministers that are moving this motion.  We have had the second motion being moved, they did not even have opportunity to change the diskette or the words, they brought it back as it were from the beginning.  So, I would like to save this House from further waste and now I want to support the motion. (Applause) 

I am supporting the motion from the point of curiosity, Mr Speaker, because at this time in the history of our country the leadership is under test. We the leaders of this country are under test because I would like to see how consistent we are.  

I would like to know whether the Kyankwanzi resolution was a serious one, and I would like to hear what the leaders of the Movement have to tell the people of Uganda.  It is still a curious situation for me.  Mr Speaker, I am still curious because the roadmap, none of us can trace which step we are at. So I am curious to see what step this will be in the history of our country.

I would also like to save many people and many offices that no longer run because we must finish the business of the referendum in this House.  

I would like to save the sick people who must be gotten from their beds to come and vote.  I would like to save them by supporting this motion. 

I would like to save the Ministers who sit uncomfortably with all their trips being frozen and they would like to travel -(Laughter)- I would like to save them so that they can go globetrotting on behalf of the peasant.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to save the school-goers who have had to “cut” class to come and vote. so I would like to save that group as well.  Mr Speaker, the students must be given ample time to go back to school and study and get all those qualifications that this economy would be happy to use.  

Mr Speaker, I think that the debate we are indulging in has its own consequences and its own effects on society. I would like to cut it short that is why I am supporting this motion. 

Mr Speaker, out there, there is a feeling of a failure of class formation.  The more we debate, go back on our words, go back on all the things that we stand for, for purposes of winning this debate, the many rules that we must bend in order to succeed. It reflects so badly in the rest of society. So I support this motion for purposes of saving the integrity of the individual members of the institution and of class formation because people think we are the class forming into a middle class.  But the way they see us debate and the way they see us the way we talk, they really believe we are no good. So I would like to save us from further embarrassment, and so I support the motion.  

Mr Speaker, I want further to support this motion because I really do not know what my people of Bugabula South would say because for them they must now sell one bag of maize so that they are able to mill a tin of maize for their food, for their lunch, for their supper.  

The people of Bugabula South cannot afford paraffin, they cannot afford the basics of life, but I am told from the collective wisdom of this House that it does not matter.  So now that it does not matter that they go hungry to the majority of you, let me join you in supporting the referendum.  Mr Speaker, I thank you.

4.18
MR JOHN KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  In my faith there is something they call original sin, which follows us up to today.  In the politics of this country there is an original error, which was created by the Constituent Assembly, and that original error was the creation of a concept of political systems in our Constitution.  We created political systems in our Constitution because we wanted the National Resistance Movement to continue in Government at that time.  But because we are talking about a multiparty system and a one-party system, and the National Resistance Movement system was not fitting into the system then, we created the so-called Movement Political system and we introduced it in the Constitution.  So many people have read Constitutions, I do not know of any other Constitution myself where political systems are included in the Constitution, but we did.  

Having made that mistake, we are continuing to suffer from that mistake up to today because we failed - I asked them in the Constituent Assembly to define what a Movement Political System is and it defied definition.  In fact in the Constitution it is not defined, it is described; it is very clear, it is all-inclusive, it is what not and that kind of thing.  

Now, because we made that mistake, we tied ourselves to a referendum after every five years to change from one political system to the other.  Since that time this Parliament itself has attempted to define the Movement Political system and it has failed.  

It tried under the Movement Act and tried under the Political Parties Act, and when that was done it was challenged. I think I can quote what the Judges have to say about this.  

I am quoting from the Constitutional Petition No.5 of 2002 of the Constitutional Court of Uganda. It was also established that the Movement is a political organization with all the attributes of a political organization.  It has a symbol of the yellow bus, it intends to acquire property and set up headquarters, it vies for power and it urges or sponsors candidates openly to stand for elections. 

This is more amplified by the circular dated 10 May 2001 on guidance on Parliamentary Elections from the Movement Chairman. When the Movement loyalists were being urged to select one strong candidate and rally behind him for elections against multipartists, it is able to traverse the country down to the grassroots advocating political views.  

Even when the Political Parties Act came, this kind of interpretation came in.  Now if Parliament can fail to define a Movement Political System- if I ask Members of Parliament, they will say they belong to a political Movement System - some members say so - so it appears even people higher up do not understand what the Movement Political System is.  Now we are moving ahead to go out into the population to ask them –(Interruption)

DR WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Thank you, hon. Kawanga, for giving way.  Mr Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Kawanga on the Floor that actually definitions in the social sciences change over time, so there is no pure definition of a political system.  

The National Resistance Movement never created a political system.  If he goes back and reads books on social science and the history of political science, you will find that the word political system is embedded therein.  So, the Movement was borrowing from history. It was borrowing from what has been done over many years to fit the situation of our people at this current time.
 
Mr Speaker, if he can allow me to inform him even further to say that the role of those in leadership according to social science and political science is that as a leader when you are in power or you have the opportunity to lead or you are elected to lead by your people, you take that opportunity to capture that moment socially, economically and politically to organize them for development. 

I would like to refer you to Armatya Sen’s who said that development comes from freedom and freedom is to give people the opportunity to choose the life they value.  That is what the Movement is doing now, to give Ugandans at the grassroots the opportunity to choose the life they value by choosing how they are governed and through what political system they are governed.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KAWANGA: Mr Speaker, I think hon. Wandira Kazibwe is demonstrating that she is doing very well where she is currently.  But what I can say is that for the purposes of this country our Constitutional Court and the Supreme Court interpret the Constitution and that is where I want to limit myself. If, for example, your Constitutional Court can say that we held that the Movement set up by the Movement Act was a political organization as defined by the impugned Act despite disclaimer –(Interruption)

MR ADOLF MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, yesterday you rightly guided the House that when we are alluding to interpretations on court, the best court to quote is the Supreme Court, and hon. Amama Mbabazi laboured yesterday to quote from the decision of the Supreme Court on the question of the existence of the Movement Political System.  

I would like to repeat what the Supreme Court decided.  The actual conduct of the referendum and the results thereof were not challenged or inquired into to determine if it was or not free and fair.  As a consequence of the referendum of 2000, the Movement Political System was retained in place and the affairs of the state have been conducted on that basis for over four years.  

To declare the referendum a nullity would have far reaching consequences.  In view of the Judges, these were compelling circumstances in respect of which the Constitutional court, which my colleague is quoting, ought to have exercised its discretion to decline granting the declaration that the Movement Political System was not adopted.  

Mr Speaker, the Supreme Court has settled the question of whether the Movement Political System exists, so this issue should not arise again, especially where my colleague is quoting lower courts than the Supreme Court.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I just want to inform the House that this debate on whether the Movement is a system or not known in modern social sciences or political science seems also to be accepted even by colleagues in the Movement System. 

In the proposed amendment of the Constitution we are moving away from systems to democracy, that is why you call it Movement type of democracy and multiparty type of democracy.  Look at it in your amendment, if it is true that these are systems you should have.  You refer to yourselves as being consistent, you should have continued to be consistent and allowed it to be there.  But you want to remove it in the amendment of the Constitution; look at the amendment in the Constitution, you want to remove it.

MR KIKUNGWE: Mr Speaker, hon. Kawanga should stand firm for one reason.  I have heard the honourable Minister read what the Supreme Court ruled on; it is perfect.  But the issue is, what hon. Kawanga was trying to tell you is simply one thing, 29 June 2000 the people of Uganda adopted the Movement System.  But the issue is, was the adopted system in practice?  That is the issue, not anything.  The system was adopted, but what the Constitution talks about in Article 70 is not what is contained in the Movement Act and therefore not what is in practice.  Thank you.

MR KAWANGA: I thank hon. Kikungwe for having put it clear for the members.  What the courts are telling you, that what is supposed to be the system is not what is actually in practice; and as a consequence the population, including leaders, confuse systems with organizations; they confuse systems with political parties.  When you go to the villages and people say I belong to the Movement, he means he belongs to organization.  When you formed the National Resistance Movement you made it National Resistance Movement/O –(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, I am using a procedure to refrain using the rules that you should not be heard because I have that opportunity, I can invoke the rules.  But what I am trying to say, Mr Speaker, procedurally if you have been reminded that the Chair ruled on a matter you should respect the – unless you challenge the Speaker’s ruling by 50 members standing. I would advise my senior learned colleague that you refrain; otherwise you will force us to use other methods to stop you.

MR KAWANGA: Mr Speaker, I think that was not a point of procedure.  But I want to make this point clear that we the leaders have misled the population on this issue, and we ought to confess publicly when we go out there; and as a consequence in the last referendum, people keep talking about the percentage of people who voted for the referendum. I want to be told how many voted in the first place.  

At least I know in my own constituency less than 20 per cent turned out to vote for the referendum, and it is an urban constituency.  Now you want to go out again to the population. You ought to erase this deception, which has been spread all over the country, and be able to tell them that we do not have a Movement Political System.  In fact the reason I am opposing this motion is because I think the whole chapter on political systems should be deleted from our Constitution –(Interruption)

DR KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: I am sorry I did not want to interrupt hon. Kawanga, but I stand up on a matter of historical record because I see he is about to conclude and something is remaining on the record, which will go down badly for Parliament.  

Hon. Kawanga begun by invoking the doctrine of original sin, and in the process he indicated that the Constituent Assembly committed an original sin by introducing the concept of political system, and that this a fundamental mistake.  

Mr Speaker, is hon. Kawanga in order to put this on the record of Parliament so that it is recorded in the Hansard of the Seventh Parliament that the Constituent Assembly committed an original political sin by introducing the concept of political system in the Constitution? 

Mr Speaker, how are we to know that this is the only sin committed by the Constituent Assembly? Is hon. Kawanga in order to proceed on the basis of original sin reasoning, as part of this Constitution, and to condemn the Constituent Assembly that it committed an original political sin by introducing the concept of political system when this Constitution has been operated and hon. Kawanga himself was elected on the basis of this Constitution? Am I to understand him as part of this process of political sin? Mr Speaker, is hon. Kawanga in order?

THE SPEAKER: This is a very difficult question for me to decide one way or the other, because as you know, I have got my chaplains here namely; hon. Matembe and hon. Kiyingi Kyama, but they are not here. I have to consult maybe hon. Kabushenga. But the thrust of hon. Kawanga’s debate is really to say, he is dissatisfied with some provisions of the Constitution, that is all; and is dissatisfied with this one, and I think a Member is free to criticize the Constitution when we are dealing with a resolution dealing with the Constitution. There is no problem.

MR KAWANGA: I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to say that even in the Constituency Assembly, I expressed my dissatisfaction with these proposals.  But I want us to realize that by humming on this thing, we have created a situation in the population where they think a political system is the same as a political organization or as a political party, and that members can belong, and that it is high time we ceased doing it and –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, is your argument that Article 74 is relevant or has no effect because so long as it stands, what do we do with it?  That is how you are to address it.

MR KAWANGA: In fact, my view is that the whole section on political systems should have been deleted from our Constitution, and that I was pleased that there was an amendment originally to handle this matter. I do not know whether it still exists, it looks like it has been changed. But my view is that it should have been deleted. (Interruptions).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, order! I am still addressing hon. Kawanga. What I am saying is that, if you think you are dissatisfied with the existence of this Article and there is a process of amending the Constitution, you go to the committee and propose an amendment and then we shall address it. But as of now, it is part of our Constitution and we have to comply until such a time it is deleted. I think that is what you should appreciate.

4.38
THE VICE PRESIDENT (Prof. Gilbert Bukenya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion for the following reason. Democracy is a very complex thing. For the last one-hour and a half, we have been discussing democracy, and democracy has many forms. Last week I was talking to friends of mine from Europe and I said, what form of democracy shall we undertake in Uganda?  One of them said, what the people prefer is the democracy that you should take in your country.  Therefore, we need a democracy that sits on a decision made by many stakeholders, including ourselves here in Parliament. But also such a hard decision, which must be sustained, needs many people some of whom we call peasants.  

I want to say, Mr Speaker, that we are all leaders here, and a leader must be followed. And as leaders, if you want to be followed, you must walk steadily but not so fast because if you move very fast you might turn on the right and the rest of those people who follow you turn on the left and there will be confusion. Therefore, on a matter of this nature, which wants us to make a decision on whether we move on multiparty type of democracy vis-à-vis the Movement type of democracy, we need the decision of the people, the decision of the people must be.  

I get frightened when people say that we can decide for those peasants. We the elite say we can decide for the peasants, why do we not go through the shortcuts? But I want to remind ourselves, Mr Speaker, that those people we call peasants are very powerful and very intelligent. (Applause) If I give the scenario of my mother with very little education, she made the best choices for me in all the schools, including paying the schools fees. Her capacity is very important and, therefore, I think we cannot move fast and lose our people, we must go with the people, and Uganda will be at a democracy that will be sustainable.  

So, I want to move, and appeal to all those who have been opposing this referendum to come together and we vote overwhelmingly, including those who have been debating against, so that we go to these people we make a decision with the people and then we move Uganda in a single manner rather than in a double digit manner. Mr Speaker, I want to appeal that we all vote uniformly. Thank you very much.

MR MIKE SEBALU: Motion, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe before we hear these motions, it should be appreciated that this is not the first time to contribute on this motion. Even on 21 April 2005, you contributed to the motion; even when the motion for under Rule 53(3) came you dealt with this issue though it could have been a different approach. Today, over 15 people have so far contributed.The trend of your debate has been those supporting the motion as it is, others supporting alternatives, but all of you agreeing that there is a need for operationalising the provisions of Article 74. Do you not think the case has been put for the two sides?  

4.45
MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro County East, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, I am moving under Rule 61(1), and like you have rightly observed, this motion has received the longest time of debate in this Parliament. We have generated the minimum consensus that we need to use to apply and –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: He is on the Floor now, honourable members, let us hear him.

MR SEBALU: Mr Speaker, like I was saying, I am moving under Rule 61(1) and like you have rightly observed, this motion was moved on the 21 April 2005 and sufficient debate was made, even on the 29 April 2005; and it was started yesterday and quite a number of people made contributions, and consensus has emerged upon which we can make a decision from a point of information. I would like, therefore, to move that the question be put.  

THE SPEAKER: Let us dispose of this motion first by hon. Sebalu Mike.   

(The Members voted by a show of hands).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the position on the motion by hon. Sebalu Mike is as follows: Abstention – 1, against – 11, for - 218. 

(Question agreed to.)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, I beg to move an important amendment to this resolution, and the amendment reads as follows - the preamble and everything remains: 

“Now, therefore, be it resolved by Parliament as follows: 
That in accordance with Article 74(1)(a) and Article 61(b) of the Constitution, Parliament requests the Electoral Commission to hold a referendum for the purpose of enabling the people of Uganda to decide on the change of political system -” and this is where the amendment comes in, “without violating Article 29(1)(e) of the Constitution.”  Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as to how the Electoral Commission is going to handle, this will be a different matter, and of course we expect the Electoral Commission to comply with the law and the Constitution. We need not remind the Electoral Commission that in carrying out its work, it has to comply with the Constitution. 

I listened to this amendment, but already the question had been put that I put the question on the motion as it is.  Should there be a need that we make a further resolution guiding the Electoral Commission, though it is an independent commission, we shall make it. And I may say, if you want to pursue at this resolution, I can take this as a notice and next time you write it down, we shall consider it. 

So, I put the question on the motion seeking a resolution of this Parliament under Article 74(1)(a).  

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the position is as follows: Abstaining –3, against – 18, for - 221. (Applause)

(Question agreed to.)

MR MWONDHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Now that this august House has voted to request the Electoral Commission to hold a referendum for the people to decide on a political system, can I be guided because yesterday the Chairman of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, clearly said that the Referendum and Other Provisions Act requires that there are two sides to a referendum; which now will be these two sides to this referendum? 

THE SPEAKER: What we can say, honourable members, once we pass this resolution, the management of a referendum process is entirely in the hands of the Electoral Commission, and we cannot sit here and say, “You must hold a referendum on this day” that will be violating the rights of the Electoral Commission. It is the Electoral Commission to decide when it can appropriately conduct the referendum. 

This notice will have to be sent to the Electoral Commission not more than seven days from the date it has passed, it will be gazetted and therefore people will know that there is a referendum for this one, and then after knowing, I think people will start forming their groups to support one side or the other. It should be clear that for us in passing this resolution we have not stated the question, it is not our mandate to set the question. Nobody is saying that the question will be moving from Movement to multiparty, the question will be agreed on by the sides. So, let us leave this but, as honourable members said, there are reservations about the registers and so forth; this can be followed by the Electoral Commission. Is it okay?

MR MWONDHA: In determining the question, the Electoral Commission is supposed to consult both sides. Which sides will be consulted?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know because now our work stops here, the Clerk will be sending the resolution as required by the Act. Our role on this issue will end here, and then it is up to you to decide which side you will be on and then you negotiate with the Electoral Commission. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, we have taken your advice, but I need further clarification. It is quite true that the matter is going to the Electoral Commission. It is also true that the Electoral Commission is not directly represented here; all matters associated to the Electoral Commission are answered by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. In light of that, now that the Movement has lost the symbol of a bus because it has been taken up by NRM/O, and the political parties, which participated in 2000 have lost the dove symbol, what is the new development?

THE SPEAKER: You see, although the minister is answerable, he can only answer if the Electoral Commission has taken a decision. Since this thing has just been completed now, do you expect the Electoral Commission to know, has it taken the decision? Let us wait for the process then the minister will only answer for the decision. The minister should not make a decision for the Electoral Commission.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I honour so much the decision this Parliament has taken to hold a referendum to decide which direction we are going. Mine was a question of precedence. At what point in time, does Rule 53(3) cease to apply, because if the doctrine of less judicature does not apply, then tomorrow you might find a motion for rescission of that decision? So, I really wanted your guidance so that where possible we would even go ahead to amend Rule 53(3) and say such decisions will not be brought to Parliament more than three times. Otherwise, we might spend the rest of the year doing the same thing.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it was the first time that the provisions of Rule 53(3) were invoked last week. But on 15th of February, I told you of the existence of this Rule 53(3) because I know that the rule exists. It is up to you if you have a case to invoke the provisions of Rule 53 even on this one. 

But you remember, when we were going to make a decision on this one, I think something, which is glaringly lacking with that rule is that we should give a number of people who should be capable to rescind a decision that has been taken. Because a decision might have been taken by 160, you have a quorum of 100, you come here and rescind the decision of 160. It may not be fair! That is why, when we were going to make a decision last time, I asked you that we must have an agreement that the number must exceed the required number, it must exceed 150. And I suggest you propose to the Rules and Privileges Committee to study this issue so that a condition of a number that rescinds a decision is put. 

I must say, it is not a pleasant thing to chair where somebody is saying rescind, especially within a very short time. But since the rule is there, and the man moves a motion, the Speaker has no way of stopping that motion, it is up to the person moving it to justify the case and we proceed.

With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow.

(The House rose at 5.05 p.m. and adjourned to Thursday, 5 May 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)

