Tuesday, 9 May 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Vice Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.

The Council was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, it is with regret that I have to officially inform you that our Colleague hon. Amin Widriff Abdulai, Council Member for Jonam County, Nebbi District has passed away. Hon. Amin passed this morning at Nsambya Hospital after a long illness of acute stroke.  We shall miss his services and company in the Council.  Can we stand up and observe one minute’s silence in his memory?

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

Clause 13:

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, you remember last time we stopped on Clause 13.  Hon. Kanyomozi had move an Amendment, but according to our Rules of Procedure, that Amendment conflicts with the Minister’s Amendment which we had just passed and therefore, it is not carried.  The Amendment which was moved by hon. Kanyomozi, it conflicts with the Minister’s Amendment and therefore, if it is not carried we cannot go ahead with it.

Clause 13:

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr S. Kavuma): Mr Chairman, after that ruling, which you have made and the guidance you have offered to this Council, i have further Amendments to move on Clause 13 and this on Clause 13 sub-clause (3), after the Amendment we last passed to that we now renumber the clause now appearing as 13 (e) to become (d).  Mr Chairman, this is really consequential because the decision we took combines two clauses and that necessitate renumbering so that the clause are in harmony with each. It is really consequential and it does not have much substance to worry any Member of this House. I beg to move, Sir.

Clause 13 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13:

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I have another Amendment on Clause 13. (Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, since we had already voted on Clause 13 and we did not allow the hon. Member to speak because we passed, I think it would fair since we are not to talk, otherwise, the Minister should not continue since we had already passed that Clause 13 for the hon. member who had stood up to talk, otherwise the Minister should not continue since we had already passed that Clause 13 as it is.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, we had not passed it as it is and I will give a chance to hon. Madam to move her Amendment.  But let us take the Minister’s Amendment first.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 13 sub-clause (3)(a) as it appears in the Bill be deleted.  This clause is superfluous it does not add nor does it subtract to any of the contents of the Bill it is unnecessary, and it serves no purpose, Sir. We had also discussed this Clause with Member of the Committee and we had formed consensus that it was necessary to keep it on the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 13(iii)(f) be deleted as proposed by the hon. Mover of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS KIRYAPAWO: Thank you Mr Chairman.  I am moving an Amendment on 13 (iii); I want that to have another section 13(b) but now it will be 13(f) because we have deleted (f). Now, while we are considering about country representation considering population, I wish to move that where a district has four counties, such a district should send in more than one representative - woman representative.  I had made some correction that instead of four counties, we say that each district with 600,000 people; such a district should send two women representatives because, I wish members would listen to me, though they can spare their opposition.  When we look at 13(ii) (b) we also look at -(Interruption)

MRS MATEMBE:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the information I would like to give the hon. Member holding the Floor, is that the issue she is rising has been taken as a whole as affirmative action as a subject of the Constitution which are making and then the issue came before discussion in CA, the ladies and gentlemen who support the women’s cause tried very much to ensure that, that affirmative action takes into account what she is raising and it was in fact rejected completely and the constitutional provision now allowed that woman district representative and I do not think that the law to establish an interim electoral commission would really provide that constitutional matter which is handled by the Constitution.  What is not yet sorted out there, is just whether this woman would be elected by universal adult suffrage or the college.  So I wanted to give that information if it is of benefit to this House.  I thank you.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to give additional information, while the reason advanced by the previous Informer are valid, one issue is not valid in the one which is the Constitution.  The Constitution is not yet in place and we are not working on that one.  So, I can take all other reasons, but any reason to say what we are doing that now, with the Constitution which is being made does not make sense.

MRS KIRYAPAWO: I thank the hon. Member for that information.  Mr Chairman, what we are saying here, is for effectiveness of representation -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MRS KIRYAPAWO: Mr Chairman, what we are advancing is the effectiveness and with that in my mind, I do not see why you consider a county with less people to have more than one representative and when we come to a district this takes all the counties is - denied at that effective representation.

I am speaking through experience how difficult it is to go around the entire district representing people effectively we can say the way we are doing, but I am here, we are not saying the truth; the truth is, it is very difficult to go around the district and we are not only representing the women, but we are representing the entire population in that district.  

So, even when we look at some districts, besides the size - the geographical features of some of these districts, they are such very large districts, that you find that even communication with the people you represent is also very difficult; even when you think of - you are making a programme and you say I am going to meet some people in one corner of the district, maybe a sub-county level, the information to reach those people, you find that even the district level, you reach there and they say, you have not communicated to them.  

So, that is why I am begging that district and I have them in mine, some of them in my district - a district like Kampala, Masaka, Mpigi, Iganga, Mukono, Arua, lira, Bushenyi, Kabalore, Mbale, Mbarara, plus Soroti, by the virtue of its size, such districts should be considered to have two women representatives; because now here, it is very difficult even to accept the second one.  Now, if I ask for the third and for the fourth, I do not know how you will support it, but you should consider having more than one representative to represent a district.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.  

MR KAVUMA:  I thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am a known ardent supporter of the women cause.  I am also a very firm believer in affirmative action.  But I think this time, my sister hon. Karyapawo has got something, one small thing wrong.  The analogy that the districts is too big, the population is high, is not the reason why this provision was put in our Parliament democracy laws; the idea was to give women who were at odds, disadvantaged, who had never been in places of decision making a constituency where they could come solely on the ticket of being women as affirmative action and it was felt then that a woman representative in a district will serve that purpose. 

Secondly, Sir, this affirmative action really is basically intended to afford an opportunity to our women to come and have some experience and we expect those who have been there for some time to graduate out of this constituency so that they can go and compete with the rest of the Ugandans while other come up also to increase in numbers.  So, I am really at pains not to support hon. Kiryapawo’s Amendment because I think the principle is faulty, we have made sufficient provision to ensure affirmative action at Parliamentary level and I think we should not be derailed from that.  I therefore, Sir, and in any case, some of the things could be really be solved administratively if it is too difficult for the women representatively if it is too difficult for the women representatives to visit people, that could be looked at administratively so that we see what can we do to facilitate them. But we should not go to amend our policy under the law without good and principled reasons.  I beg to oppose this Sir.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 13, as amended agreed to.

Clause 14:

MR SIBO:  -(Interruption)

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I agree with the Amendment of hon. Sibo and we have discussed it but I have one request to make to hon. Sibo to agree that instead of making the days 14 in (ii) where we are asking somebody to appeal to a tribunal and since we are interested in seeing that these matters are handled expeditiously, the time could be reduced to seven days in the interest of expediency.  

Secondly, Sir - and I think this is really when you - seven days, if we agree, then we must say seven days from the date of the decision; so that we have - we know when we start to compute the Bills.

MRS KADAGA:  Mr Chairman, I think that seven days is insufficient depending on where they are going to start.  If it is somewhere in Kotido, tribunal is in Kampala. So, I think it should be 30 days Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Sibo, do you accept to amend your Amendment?

MR SIBO: Mr Chairman, it appears that Members prefer 14 days to seven.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, are you still insisting on 14 days? Okay.

(Question put agreed to.)

MR SIBO: Mr Chairman, I would like to make another Amendment in Clause 14 (iii) for similar reasons, to provide time limit within which to make the appeal to the Supreme Court and include the words within 14 days of the terminations, between the word ‘may and appeal’ in the second line.  Again, this is a normal procedure when you want to appeal from a decision in a court, you are given specific days, and it is usually 14 days.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SIBO: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose an additional clause; Clause 15(v) to say that it shall take precedence over all other cases and shall be determined within three months of the appeal.  I want to say that it is absolutely necessary to provide this provision in a sense that we have had experiences before, where cases have taken five years to - in fact, never decided on within the right period of Parliament, a case in question was that of Mr Kitariko against the results of the late Mr Katama, he died more than five years ago. So we think that we should provide. What I am not quite sure though, although I have included it, is this second provision and I think the advice of the House of the termination within three months of the appeal: this -(Interruption)

MR KAWANGA: Mr Chairman, this question of taking precedence should be taken with a lot of and for that matter even some body who is - and the example - limiting it to three months is also being a little restrictive just take a leaf of what seen at the Constituent Assembly days.  Some Magistrates just did not give judgement and the period expired although there had to be a hearing and these cases lapsed simply because they had not delivered judgement.  So, this question of limiting that one is not - I can see the point but I do not think it solves the problems - a clause should be done as expeditiously as possible will be good enough and then in the rules - rather than setting in this statute. So, I think it is not wise to adopt hon. Sibo’s Amendment. 

MR SIBO:  Mr Chairman, I think we should leave the courts to take their own pace; I would not like to see a situation where we are going to control what the courts are going to do as legislature; I would rather we put in a clause may be to be decided as expeditiously as possible rather than trying to tie the judges hands to the extent that we are telling them to finish within one month of one two months. I think that is going far; too far.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 14, as amended agreed to.

Clause 15:

MR NTIMBA: Mr Chairman, Clause 15(ii), as you may remember last week, the hon. Member made an Amendment concerning the provisions for Ugandans resident outside the country to register and vote and we - because of the Amendment we abandoned this provision. How do you expect somebody who is a Ugandan who lives outside Uganda and to fails to register by virtue of the fact that he is out of the country.  In order to protect such a person.  

I would like to propose that Clause 15(ii) be amended to read as follows:

‘It is a duty of every citizen of Uganda of 18 years of age or above and resident in the country to register as a voter for public election and referenda.’

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ntimba, I do not have your amendment.

MR NTIMBA:  Mr Chairman, the Minister moved this Amendment towards the end of last time and they have not had time to circulate this, but you will be lenient enough to accept my valid proposals.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, no.

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr S. Kavuma): Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I wanted to give information that when this House was considering the provisions relating to people who are outside the country, the mode in the House at that time was, that may be for the initial period of our Parliamentary elections, it may not be wise, it may not even be practical to assist Ugandans outside to register and vote from wherever they are.  So, the idea was that, if a Ugandan wants to register and vote, he is free to come back and he registers, he could fly away, when elections time come he can still come back.  So, I wanted to give that information; so that hon. Ntimba takes into accounts before he develops his argument further, because it seems his arguments are in forgetfulness of what this House decided.  So, I think hon. Ntimba’s Amendment is  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: We do not have that Amendment.  Sorry it is not there.

MR SIBO:  I would like to make an Amendment 15(iii) to provide for (Inaudible) to read: No person shall frustrate or press any impediment.  Now, this idea of placing an impediment is not enough but I - frustrates in any other way.  I have seen this happens, provision, we do not have to pay an impediment, in order to frustrate someone; you can frustrate his without putting an impediment.  So, that is what - frustration does not necessarily mean impediment that is what I mean.  Impediment is a specific hurdle to jump; you do not have to jump a hurdle in order to be frustrated; you can be frustrated in other ways.

CAPT. GASATURA: Mr Chairman, I beg to oppose the amendment by hon. Sibo first on the basis that impediment need not be physical, but frustration would be quite difficult for definition and I find that what he is trying to move is well catered for under impediment.  I oppose the Amendment. 

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I had no hard and first feelings about hon. Sibo’s Amendments if he thinks it improves qualitatively any of the provisions we have, I would not object to it, but I am persuaded that maybe, what he is trying to cater for is adequately catered for; we do not lose either way.  But legislation in order may be, hon. Sibo may be persuaded to abandon the Amendment and he appears to have done so far.

MR SIBO: I withdraw the amendment.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16:

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I rise to propose an Amendment to add sub-section 16(vi) and this addition is as follows:  Election of the President of Uganda and election of Member of National Assembly shall be carried out concurrently.  I am bringing this Amendment, because we are now helping the Electoral Commission to prepare.  The Commission would want to know whether they are preparing for a concurrent election or for elections on different day; that is reason No. 1 to help the Commission to be prepared.

Secondly, it is cheap to have these elections at the same time.  Thirdly, if the two elections are not concurrent, the results of elections which are carried out first shall influence the second election. In other words, since we now have different political views in this country, if the President is elected people who hold these views are likely to have advantage in the Parliamentary Elections if the presidential election is held first.  The candidates who support the winner, the winning Presidential candidates are likely to have advantage over the others.

There is another probably more serious problem, if the incumbent president does win the presidential race; that is where the problem comes in.  What will happen is that, take for example, there are a number of people who are interested in this Presidential job -(Laughter)- and, okay, in this case, suppose I win the election, and I do not have Members of Parliament with whom to form Government what happens?  We have a problem  -(Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, this new president elect, since this new president elect will not be in position to form a government, because he will not have Members of Parliament they will not have been elected yet -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order, please. 

MR KAWANGA: Point of information.  Information for the presidential hopeful. (Laughter) In the new Constitution, you do not have to appoint your Ministers from Members of Parliament.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of information. I think the presidential hopeful should not be worried, we have got countries in the world which have had presidents where parliaments are in a minority in their support and they have worked, we have also parliaments, where presidents are actually in power and they have got to do a government of unity, in order for them to service and that is even much better. Therefore, if we are going to separate the powers of parliament from those of the executive, he should not tie presidency to the legislation. Otherwise, he will again miss the two. 

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I would like in response to hon. Kawanga’s remarks, I would like to inform him just as I did to hon. Matembe, that we are not acting on the provisions of the new Constitution because it is not yet the constitution of this country.  So, where you have the chief executive elected directly and you have parliament also elected directly, you have a problem, because you are going to have the president elect without people with whom to form a government and hon. hon. Manzi Tumubweine is speculating the form of government we are going to have by suggesting that we are going to form a government of national unity when the place.  What I am carried about is that, the incumbent president if he is defeated, he may have - in Nigeria situation and you might find the winning candidate finding himself in the same situation as Abiola. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, I want this election definitely, I would not like to find myself in the situation of Abiola. (Laughter) Hon. Kahinda Otafiire has indicated that this kind of government will not last more than 24 hours, but if you have got Members of Parliament, you can form a government and struggle from there at least, you have something, you may not have the Army, but you have some where to start from.  So, really, in order to provide stability, we may be -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Because we are feeling that NRM is going to remain and that Museveni is going to remain, it is not necessarily so.  The current president is a mortal human being and he can go at any time and therefore, we should provide for a situation which does not object itself to individuals; we should not have a constitution or a law that is situational.  Mr Chairman, I am moving this amendment in the interests of peace -(Interruption) 

KAZOORA: Point of order. Does the hon. Member who is holding the Floor realise that in less than two months we have a new constitution and whatever done here, if the constitution provides otherwise, it will be the constitution which will prevail over what the hon. Member is try to say.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I am moving this Amendment because I am interested in the continuity of stability in this country.  I am very interested in the stability of this country and I do not want people to imagine that things can just happen, things must be planned for; stability and peace must be planned for. If we have a situation, and we leave it fluid, and we find ourselves in that kind of situation, it will be ourselves Members of Parliament who are passing this law to blame.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16:

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, Clause 16(iv), I wanted to move the word ‘size’ again out.  The presiding officer and the candidate or their representative in case of a referendum, the parties contesting or the agents or their agents, if any, shall sign the declaration stating etcetera, etcetera and I am moving the words ‘size’ and adding the word ‘parties’ I said the other time that this is the normal legal language written is size, they are parties to contest, and this is parties with a small ‘p’ I tried to explain the other time, it is not parties with a big ‘p’; and therefore, it should not bring emotions and hair-rising things I am just using the language as it should otherwise be used, in law;  parties to a conflict, parties, to - it is never said, size. 

I know the Minister the other day said we are now changing, because of new situations, i think his change is out of fear, to use the word parties; it is not because of anything else, I am sure when he leaves this job and goes back to the court he is going to be using the word parties again and I can tell you, unless he is going to stay on for 30 years as declared by Kahinda Otafiire, if he does not he is going to boycott and he is going to be using the word parties.  So, I am suggesting the word ‘parties’ with a small ‘p’ instead of ‘sides’ to be inserted in the Bill so that it reads as a normally Bill.  Thank you.

MR KARUHANGA: The issue here is a party to a deal or a contract but what is missing, and what I would also like to add is the word ‘election’ after the word ‘referenda’ because the whole section is referring to elections for referenda.  Even if we are under the Movement, there would be - and constituency is being contested by more than one party more than one person.  The other agents should also be respected or who are agents of one of the parties to the election in a Movement because the word party is not for political party, but party in the legal sense and I think we should - I would like to ask the Minister also to add the words ‘election’ after the word referenda.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I have a lot of sympathy with the argument advanced by hon. Kanyomozi just I did last time.  But as a matter of fact, Sir, our trend in the legislating drafting which this House has been using of recent to talk sides, that is the situation in the referendum Statute, it is the situation in - I know the new constitution has not yet been promulgated, but it is the adopted methodology in drafting to refer to these things as sides.  So, we rejected this last time and I think for consistency purposes, to have a piece of legislation that is tidily drafted, we should keep the principle, I am not offering professional guidance, that we should stick to what we have accepted professionally as a development in our legislative technique, Sir.

DR LUYOMBYA: Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, we are here to make laws and laws have to be interpreted by lawyers and judges.  I would like the Minister to clarify for me whether he agrees with hon. Kanyomozi and hon. Karuhanga on the technicalities of the words rather than tell us that we are adopting new words which are not legal.  Thank you.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I am sorry.  I was not clear enough to hon. Luyombya to see whether he agreed to oppose hon. Karuhanga and hon. Kanyomozi’s insertion but Sir, when it come to interpretation, the court will interpret the law that this House has given it;  they have their rules of interpretation, they are all set, I do think we should endeavour to mix the roles of the legislature and part of the judiciary.  Ours is professionally as a matter of constitution to make law, we have been making these laws and the question for interpretation is a matter in the jurisdiction of the high court and the other court of competent jurisdiction, Sir.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18:

MR SIBO:  Mr Chairman, I would like to make an Amendment to provide a new sub-section 18(iv) to read:  The Secretary shall be the Accounting Officer for purposed of accountability.  We have made the Commission a self-accounting institution under Clause 18(ii).  Unfortunately, we have not provided as it is, responsible for the accounting of the funds provided for the Commission; it is normally, in fact, it is institutionally accepted that there shall be someone who is personal in pecuniary responsible for the accountability of the funds we provide to this Bill and for purposes of Public Accounts Committee, there is someone who is called upon to answer for the expenditure of the Commission and it is for that reason that I am proposing that the Secretary shall be the Accounting Officer, not the whole Commission.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I again on principle, I have not but I think again the drafting could improved because this has been addressed in our laws and to consider this formulation, that the funds provided for under his Statute shall be controlled and administered by the Secretary who shall be the Accounting Officer in accordance with the Public Finance Act. This is the normal formulation we have been using in our legislation and I think it is maintaining the same principle but may be saying it in a better way.

MR SIBO: Because it is the same thing because it is necessary to provide for someone to be an Accounting Officer.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19:

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I have an Amendment on Clause 19 sub-clause (i) to delete the whole of that sub-clause (1) and insert the new following sub-clause to read:

The Minister may on the recommendation of the Commission by Statutory instrument, make regulations for the effective performance of the functions of the Commission and in particular for the registration of voters and the conduct of public elections.  I beg to move, Sir.

MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, I would more explanation on the Minister’s Amendment because I would not like again to have a situation where the Minister orders at the 11th hour certain things by Statutory Instrument which change the nature of the elections.  I am saying this given what happened in the last CA Elections, suddenly out of the blue, we got an announcement that even those who had not registered as long as they above the age of 18, they can vote and I would like to say, if the Minister is going to issue Statutory Instruments, affecting the conduct of public elections, on the 11th hour without the approval of a National Assembly, it brings a lot of unless he is willing to provide that those Statutory Instruments will be presented to the National Assembly for approval first, if it is not going to be done that way, I think we are opening a floodgate and we may all be swept outside the -(Interruption)

MR KAVUMA: Help the House if I gave the following information that, the regulations we are talking about the subject of another amendment which is already circulated; they are going to be laid before Parliament, the Cabinet will have also an opportunity to look at them.  So, the fear raised by hon. Kanyomozi should not really arise, but Sir, permit to say why this Amendment is necessary because the Commission cannot go to Cabinet and defend these regulations we want to make.  

The same Commission, Sir, by our constitutional set up, cannot come to Parliament and defend any of these regulations if there was need to.  So, Sir, it is necessary that somebody who has access to these very important organs of State, has a role in the matter and the fear is catered for here, because the initiations of the regulation is being made by the Commission who are technical people, the Minister is not just going to wake up and say, these are the regulations I want, the law is the commission as - people to initiate then, the Minister will carry then to Cabinet, with the necessary consideration, the same Minister will bring down them to Parliament.  

So, there is no hidden agenda, the arguments that some announcements were made last time, to the best of my knowledge were never made by the Minister, so the analogy is really is false.  I would like to persuade Members of this hon. House to see the reality which we have to address so that these very important regulations are vetted both at government level and at the level of the national Parliament, so that we all know that what is put there, is proper for the conduct of a free and fair election to the satisfaction of every body. 

MR MARWAS: This law is an urban law and these regulations are really what matter most and if we do not take care of keeping these regulations in their right place, we are running a risk of having problems  You remember in 1980 the Chairman of the Commission then at the 11th hour had ordered the Commissioner to the candidates of the election, because there was no provision for it; the last election I do remember opened the gates at the 11th hour caused a lot of frustration to the people. 

So, what the Minister is trying to put across is really very dangerous, unless he is going to accept what the committee recommended to be added to the effect that the regulations that - will be subject to approval by Parliament.  Otherwise, short of that, we are running a risk.

MR KAVUMA:  I want to inform hon. Marwas and the hon. House clause which appears on the Amendment on page 4, which say, any regulation made under this section shall be laid before the legislature within 14 days, after they were made, if the legislature is then sitting or within 14 days after the legislature commences to sit.  If the legislature -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR KAVUMA:  If the legislature is not sitting at the time they are made.

Secondly, Sir, 5 says, that the legislature may amend or annual any regulation laid before it and the section within 14 days after they are - So, I am saying, we are providing for check points: (i) since this law is really skeleton, the matter to be addressed is going to be principally in the regulations.  Therefore, Cabinet should have an opportunity to look at them. But that should not be the end of the road, there must be legal requirements, which we have catered for here to bring those regulations before the National Parliament for vetting and they want to amend then they can cause the amendment or the annulment of the regulations. This is the formulation we did adopt in previous legislations and we discussed this matter with the committee, there was consensus out what we needed was a formulation that would offer the best position with regard to check points, rather than leaving it entirely to commissioners who are technical people, who have no access to these important decision making bodies.

MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, while one would agree with the Minister, the Minister did not finish the reading on page 3 on his Amendment and - because you read it to justify the position.  In that, he says, 14 days after they are laid and regulations shall cease to be reports but without prejudice to any thing lawfully done under them before the annulment.  

Now, 14 days’ elections are for one day, we do not even need 14 days it is a matter of hours and yet he said they will not be implemented, these Statutory regulations will not be implemented until they have been discussed by Parliament, then it could be accepted, but if you say that they can start operating and those which have operated, elections are over, then they are then I think the Minister is not being honest and serious about this issue.  Unless he accept to delete that without prejudice, then it would make sense, if he does not then it becomes a bit of a difficulty.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Otherwise, we cannot make regulations we wish to make.  Regulations must be within the framework of the Statute.  Otherwise, they will not be legal.  Therefore, I think we ought to realise that whatever we wish to prevent by law, we should prevent it within the Statute; within the body of the Statute.

Statutory Instrument for the better carrying out of that Law.  You will find that you have whatever regulation you want to make must first of all be presented to Parliament - debated by Parliament and approved before you can carry it out.  I think we will disable the Bill rather than I would like the House at this situation.  I would feel happy if we say - if we want to protect the registration to make sure that nobody who is not registered votes, we protect it within the Statute. Then let us give the Minister an opportunity to create regulations for the better carrying out of those provisions.  I thank you.

MR SIBO:  Mr Chairman, this House has got the powers to delegate or rather it is registered to powers to anybody including hon. Sibo.  But the Statutory Procedure we have followed so far, is that Statutory Instruments are made by the Minister under a Statute that has been made by parliament.  Today a statutory Regulations we have been made under Chapter 131, National Assembly Elections Act of 1964.  

I would have preferred, the Minister has promised this House that he is coming up here with a similar Act or Bill by consideration of the House.  This provision under Clause 19 should properly be and that National Assembly Elections Bill and should be considered first.  Such regulations therefore, should be amended similarly.  So, the Minister may want to delete this Prison - Clause 19 and bring this under appropriate Bill.  Thank you.

MR KAWANGA JOHN: Mr Chairman, I think the hon. Members have legitimate fears.  We can have this Statute and authorise the Minister to make regulations.  But to say that the Minister must place those regulations on the Table of Parliament and shall not come into effect until after 14 days after the placement on the Table.  The idea is that after the placement on the Table, then debate can be caused on the regulations for they get into effect. I hope the Minister will not have objection on that.  That will ensure that the regulations are made, and presented to Parliament and they cannot get into force until the 14 days are gone.

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, I wish to have my voice with the hon. Member who has just left the Floor.

Although it is an interim measure statute setting up a commission, and although as hon. Sibo pointed out there is a big Law coming on elections.  I think in order to save the conflict of our Law, it is necessary to give the Minister time to see how the C.A. gets on with its plenary next week.  From that experience together with the Members having been selected in the Interim Electoral Commission, sit down with him and advise him on how to draw up these regulations. Basing on what is taking place currently in the country, in the C.A. plus the advise will get from Commissioner’s then he can sit down and make the regulations not only to Members of Parliament, but other organs that are going to be elected in the my Friend hon. Kawanga.  I think the Amendment hon. Kawanga was seeking to have should be incorporated.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS  (Mr S. Kavuma): Mr Chairman, I want to categorically state far, that it is not an omission not to have the rules and regulations appended here.  As hon. Members will remember, we wanted to be provided for a Commission which should do some work while we wait for the Constitution to be promulgated, and the electoral law to be made. Once we have set up that Commission, they may find it necessary that in order to carry out their duties which we are -(Interruption)

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  While the Minister made the regulations, these regulations shall be passed by Parliament before nominations take place.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I can appreciate the concern Members are showing.  But what I am saying is that these regulations are intended to be made very well before the elections.  Mr Chairman, I do not think we have the capacity to go and think about the details we want to put in this, but if this House thinks that it prefers to do this –(Interruption)

MR KAWANGA: Mr Chairman, the Amendment moved here should be catered for because there is no way.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, in all sincerity hon. Kawanga’s Amendment covers all the situations we can think about.  I would concede to go along with it.  If it is going to help for hon. Members to walk out with it; if it is going to help for hon. Members to walk out with a clearer understanding of what we have provided, we can add it.

MR MANZI:  Mr Chairman, the amended section would be ‘the Minister may make regulations for the effective performance of its functions and in particular for the registration of Voters and Members of public elections and such regulations can be passed by Parliament before nomination day.’

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, the formulation by hon. Manzi is superior to the formulation by hon. Kawanga.  But there is a weakness he has pointed out.  This is where he says that the Minister may.  He would have said, ‘the Minister shall,’ and then this question of laying Papers on the Table, we have -(Inaudible)

MR KAVUMA S: Mr Chairman, I have other Amendments on Clause 19 which I am sure they are in line with what we have talked about.

I think my Amendment No.13 falls with by the way sides.  I wish to add this Clause which reads, ‘Notwithstanding section 38 of interpretation decree 1976, regulations.  Penalty is exceeding a fine of Shs 500, 000 or 5 million.’ Sir, the reason is that if this interpretation decree is not specifically negative by this law, then the authority making these regulations will never be able to provide for this –

Secondly, this Provision is talking about maximum penalties just in case any Member will be worried that they appear to be too harsh.  

Since we have provided that this will again be looked at in order to avoid the conflict, the situation warrantee that this kind of provision - that penalties which are not now covered by the interpretation decree which is a very old decree, must be put in this regulations.  I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put that Clause 19 sub-section (6) as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 19 as amended, agreed to.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that immediately after Clause 19, insert a new Clause to be Clause 20 and to read, “After the Constituent Assembly and the Constituent Assembly Commission, have ceased to exist under the Constituent Assembly Statute 1993, the Interim Electoral Commission shall succeed the assets, rights, obligations and liabilities of the Commission under that Statute.’

Sir, the reason here is really to provide orderly succession to what this Interim Electoral Commission will have done or will have acquired which may be useful for the performance of the duties of the Interim Electoral Commission in the exercise of carrying out its duties. If we leave a gap like we once did in the C.A. Statute, a problem may arise which would hinder the performance of the Interim Electoral Commission. The provision is innocent; it is intended to facilitate smooth succession by a Commission we are creating for what they may feel useful from what is being done by C.A. Statute.

Mr Chairman, there is typing error where we say ‘shall’, it should be ‘may.’

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: Mr Chairman, we advise the Minister that he should not invite the situation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr S. Kavuma): Mr Chairman, I have a further amendment which was circulated on a separate sheet and I hope every Member has it.  This Amendment is defended to create another section to provide for transitional provisions. This should be section 21 and it reads; ‘until Members of the Interim Electoral Commission are appointed, and the Interim Electoral Commission commences operation under the Statute, the Commission for Constituent Assembly may update the Voters Register prepared by that Commission under the Constituent Assembly Statute 1993.  Mr Chairman, the whole essence of this Bill and the Statute we want to come out with has been time.  

There is a lot of work that could be benefited from what the C.A. Commission has been handling.  There is a lot of experience and it is only proper and fitting that a Provision of this nature is put in so that it enables us to benefit from the experience, the technology available.  But this should be within a good time not to affect our programmes.  

I say this time of the essence because after this Bill has been passed it will have to go through another several stages like proof reading printing, and publication.  Yet matters relating really to updating to the Register, which will have to be done at the level of every RC II.  Part of it is a field exercise. We do not have to hold it or waste any time. 

We have also provided in this Statute that before appointments are made by the appointing authority, those appointments are going to be vetted by Cabinet and this hon. House.  All these are likely to cost a bit of time which should not really affect the fact of updating.

I was surprised to find that there are enough funds to complete the updating exercise of the Registers they compiled and those they have been computerising.  If we do not use those funds, Sir, chances are that we shall never use them.

Secondly, since this Commission has not yet been budgeted for, it would also mean that any Finances that have to be spent by the Commission in the activities we want them to carry on, almost immediately, will have to wait until we debate the next Financial Year’s Budget and definitely we shall lose greatly on time.  Sir, I beg hon. Members to accept this Amendment in the interest of facilitating all the provisions that we have been debating for the last week or so, so that at the end of the day they do not become mere Provisions of Paper.  I beg to move, Sir.

MR MWANDHA JAMES (Bugweri County, Iganga): Mr Chairman, I support the Proposal by the Minister.  I think it is important that what has been achieved under the Constituent Assembly should be passed over to this new Commission.  I thought that in terms of arranging these Clauses, that is Clause 21 should have been No.20 and number 20 should be No.21 because No.20 really give the final position as it were. So, I do support the Amendment but I suppose the Minister could consider the re-arrangement of the clauses.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, the Minister one day told us that actually what is going on to use the Registers.  In fact, we did not need the Law to do it. What is going on he even produces the list to show that work is going on very well.  We are saying that the need for this additional Clause is not needed.  Let the work continue.  The CA Commission can continue and finish and when the new Commission is appointed and it takes over, it hands over, he has already provided under Clause 20.

MR MANZI:  Mr Chairman, I support this Amendment in that one, it is not true that it is an updating of the Voters Register.  There is a computerisation of the Voters Register.  The two things are different.  But I think what we want here now is if we are not going to have Voters Registers done is a hurry, and make a mess of it again, and have no time for them to be even displayed, it is important that we should start early and start updating them.

MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, you cannot update the Registers when we have not demarcated the Constituencies.  The only thing they can do is to update the way to compile what they have.  They cannot update the Registers because we have not demarcated the Constituencies which the Commission is going to do.  I am saying, for the benefit of the House, these people of the CA can continue doing the work they have been doing, finish up the work and speed up this gentleman’s work to appoint the new Commission so that it ties with the law that we have passed.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I want to categorically say again that I never said that the CA Commission is updating Registers.  I addressed this question at the beginning of our journey in this Bill and I said they were only computerising.  They have no legal capacity to update the Register for use by the Interim Electoral Commission.  That is the legal position.

Secondly, we should not forget that in this Bill elsewhere, we provided that all referenda would now be handled by this Commission.  Now if there was to be a referendum on any issue in the Constituent Assembly, we have already removed that authority from the C.A. Commission.  There must be a body which can act on that in case we have need to invoke those provisions and the only we can do it is again to provide for this kind of situation.  I want to allay the fears of anybody that this move has no again at all. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Question put that Clause 21 as added on, do stand part of the Bill and agreed to.)

The Title:

(Question that the Title do stand part of the Bill and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTION AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Council do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Kavuma): Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered carefully the Bill entitled: ‘The Interim Electoral Commission Bill, 1995,’ and has passed it with some amendments.  I beg to report, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.  I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE INTERIM ELECTORAL COMMISSION BILL, 1995

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled ‘The Interim Electoral Commission Bill, 1995,’ read a Third Time and  do pass.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title settled and Bill passes.

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: With that we have come to the end of today’s Session.  We adjourn until Thursday, 18 May 1995 next week.
 
(The Council rose 4.00 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 18 May 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)







