Wednesday, 7 May 2014

Parliament met at 2.59 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I just want to clarify that today the Order Paper does not contain Prime Minister’s Question Time because he is not available. So, we shall just do the other business. Thank you very much. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Of late, the attendance of honourable Members of Parliament is quite wanting and yet this is a time when Parliament is supposed to be performing one of its most cardinal roles, that of appropriation. We are supposed to be making sure that the committee reports on the budget are brought to an end by way of preparing ourselves so that they are ready for you to receive them. 

More importantly, I keep reading in the papers that many of our Members are engaged in some popularisation of the candidature of certain people in the field. Is it possible for us to call off that activity so that it is carried out during recess, so that we are able to achieve what is set before us in the programme of Parliament? Is it possible?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Madam Speaker, it is the responsibility of Members of Parliament to go for constituency mobilisation because it is paid for by Parliament. Yes, we are paid to do that job. The clarification I seek from my honourable colleague is whether he is referring to members from one side or to all of them because I can see it is emptier on the Opposition side than – (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Wadri, where are your own members?

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.03
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, I rise under rule 30 to lay on the Table financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 together with the report and opinion thereof by the Auditor-General of the following sub counties:
1. 	Kakabara Sub County in Kyegegwa District;
2. 	Mpara Town Board, Kyegegwa District;
3. 	Apopong Sub County, Pallisa District; 
4. 	Seeta Namuganga Sub County, Mukono District;
5. 	Ibuje Sub County, Apac District;
6. 	Karambi Sub County, Kasese District;
7. 	Kyondo Sub County, Kasese District;
8. 	Mahango Sub County, Kasese District;
9. 	Bumbaire Sub County, Bushenyi District;
10. 	Kakanju Sub County, Bushenyi District;
11. 	Mutara Sub County, Mitooma District;
12. 	Mitooma Sub County, Mitooma District;
13. 	Katenga Sub County, Mitooma District;
14. 	Kagango Sub County, Mitooma District;
15. 	Kiyanga Sub County, Mitooma District;
16. 	Bitereko Sub County, Mitooma District;
17. 	Mayanga Sub County, Mitooma District;
18. 	Kabira Sub County, Mitooma District;
19. 	Kiryandongo Sub County, Kiryandongo District;
20. 	Buyengo Sub County, Jinja District;
21. 	Mafubira Sub County, Jinja District;
22. 	Laguti Sub County, Pader District;
23. 	Acholibur Sub County, Pader District;
24. 	Kilak Sub County, Pader District;
25. 	Atanga Sub County, Pader District;
26. 	Ogom Sub County, Pader District;
27. 	Katerere Sub County, Rubirizi District;
28. 	Magambo Sub County, Rubirizi District;
29. 	Kyanaisoke Sub County, Kibaale District;
30. 	Matale Sub County, Kibaale District;
31. 	Bwamiramira Sub County, Kibaale District;
32. 	Kabamba Sub County, Kibaale District;
33. 	Bubango Sub County, Kibaale District;
34. 	Kyenzige Sub County, Kibaale District;
35. 	Kucwiny Sub County, Nebbi District;
36. 	Erussi Sub County, Nebbi District;
37. 	Bulera Sub County, Mityana District;
38. 	Bukulula Sub County, Kalungu District;
39. 	Malangala Sub County, Mityana District;
40. 	Kanyum Sub County, Kumi District;
41. 	Mukongoro Sub County, Kumi District;
42. 	Kumi Sub County, Kumi District;
43. 	Matany Sub County, Napak District;
44. 	Agali Sub County, Lira District;
45. 	Ogur Sub County, Lira District.

I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. The reports are committed to your committee for expeditious perusal and report back. 

Honourable members, in the public gallery we have students from Ohio State University in the United States. They are on a study programme at Makerere University to familiarise themselves with the politics, economy and the different cultures of Uganda. You are welcome. Please stand up. (Applause) As you can see, majority are girls, so –(Laughter)

We also have other citizens in the gallery. There are people living with HIV and AIDS and members of the Civil Society Coalition on HIV/AIDS Prevention and Management. They are here to listen to the proceedings of the Bill, which we are handling at the moment. You are welcome. (Applause)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE HIV/AIDS PREVENTION AND CONTROL BILL, 2010

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, yesterday when we adjourned, we had gone as far as clause 21 but we had not taken a vote on it. 

Clause 21

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Before we left yesterday, we had different submissions on clause 21 and just like I said, our proposal was to merge clauses 21 and 19 and only 21(1) e would remain standing. 

Before the House adjourned, I had given the position of the committee and since it was contentious, we decided to sleep over it and I also hope that Members slept over it and maybe now we could have other ideas. I think that since our position as a committee remained as was proposed in the amendment, unless colleagues have second thoughts about this contentious clause, we would give an opportunity to those with second thoughts. This is my prayer. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The chairperson of the committee says that the two clauses should be merged and the only contentious issue here was (e). Would he be comfortable then to take (e) from 21 to 19 because it is all about disclosures and this is just providing for an exception? He used the word “merge”, so actually the two are similar. So, we could do this so that the debate would be put to rest. Some of us thought that 21(e) was relevant but if you say we merge it, would you be comfortable if (e) is taken to clause 19 and the remaining clause 21 is deleted?  

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Our position on 21(e) was not about where to place it. Our position was that it was not necessary and for reasons I gave yesterday, we should actually delete it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we actually had a very lengthy debate on this matter yesterday. So, I put the question that clause 21 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, agreed to.

MS AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, under 21, I had made a plea. I wanted to introduce, after (g), a new paragraph (h) which will read as follows: “This section shall not apply to a pregnant woman under section 14 whose partner refuses to go for routine testing.” 

Madam Chairperson, yesterday I stated that section 14 is to the effect that mandatory testing should be done for a pregnant woman together with her partner. However, many Members also stated here that most partners of pregnant women do not go for this testing. When they do not go for testing, and in the exceptions to confidentiality clause you permit a medical worker to give the test results of the pregnant woman, who has been compelled to test to protect the unborn child and her partner has refused to go and accompany her, we should exclude that pregnant woman’s test results from being disclosed. That is the essence of my amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a new provision be introduced as proposed by hon. Amongi. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 22, which is about persons tested to be notified on disclosure. We propose to insert a new sub clause (2) to read as follows: “(2) This section shall not apply where the results of an HIV test are for a minor or person of unsound mind.” The justification here is that it would not be necessary to inform minors or persons of unsound mind. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, are you not contradicting what we passed yesterday? Didn’t we talk about the duty to disclose? 

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, what we agreed on yesterday was the appropriate time and the manner of informing the minor. Looking at the provisions in clause 22 (a), (b), (c) they refer to the nature and purpose of disclosure, the date of disclosure and the recipient of the information. The committee thought that as it is in the draft here, we should exclude the minors. This was provided in the amendment we had yesterday - how and when to disclose to the minors. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the rationale, honourable chair? Should a minor of 17 years not be informed?

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, I had taken consideration of the amendment that we had yesterday. I think we withdraw our amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 22 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, clause 23 is about partner notification. We propose the deletion of the entire provision. Our justification for this is that the provision is open to abuse and is likely to discourage people from seeking HIV testing and care for fear of their HIV status being disclosed. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think that is breach of confidentiality. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 23 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, deleted.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 27, which is about state obligations, as follows: 

a) 	In clause 27(c), we propose that we substitute the words “process” and “adopt” with the word “develop”. The justification is that we feel the word “develop” is more suitable for use in the law here. 

b) 	In 27(e), we propose to rephrase the paragraph to read as follows: “(e) to promote awareness of the rights of persons living with HIV and duties imposed on persons under this Act.” We propose this for purposes of clarity.  

c) 	We propose to delete the entire paragraph 27(f). The purpose for this is that it appears to be redundant. 

d) 	Clause 27(g) - We propose to rephrase the paragraph to read as follows: “(g) promote and ensure non-discriminatory participation of people living with HIV/AIDS in government programmes.” The justification is: for purposes of clarity and specificity. 

e) 	In 27(h), we propose to insert the word “AIDS” between the words “HIV” and “programmes.” We propose this to make the provision inclusive of both HIV and AIDS. 

f) 	In 27(i), add the words “and AIDS” at the end of the paragraph. The justification also is so that we make the provision inclusive. 

g) 	We wish to introduce two new paragraphs immediately after paragraph (i) to read –(Interjection)– the (g) I mean here is just a chronology of the amendments we are making. We propose to introduce two new paragraphs immediately after (i) to read as follows: “(j) provide adequate funding for HIV and AIDS programmes. (k) give priority to most at risk population.” 

Madam Chairperson, our justification for this amendment is: to ensure that the HIV and AIDS programmes are adequately funded for purposes of prevention and management; and two, to provide protection of vulnerable groups of people who are at a greater risk of HIV infection. 

h) We propose a new sub clause (2) to read as follows: “(2) For purposes of this section, ‘most at risk population’ include fishing communities, prisoners, migrant populations or other areas as may be determined by the minister from time to time.” We propose this for purposes of clarity. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Essentially, I have no quarrel with the proposed amendments. My only concern is with 27(i) where you maintain that the state provides care and support to persons living with HIV/AIDS. What sort of care and support is envisaged under this section? Are you also looking at the state promising food, shelter, clothing, transport and the like? 

Aren’t you opening the coffers of the state too wide for people to litigate and in future say, “You are not providing me with this, you are not giving me shelter, you are not giving me food and so you are contravening this provision”? I do not know whether the committee can guide me on what kind of care and support they intend the state to provide under this clause. 

MR NDEEZI: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. To add to what he said, we are trying to do a good job here. We are trying to say that the state meets certain obligations, but I was wondering what happens when the state refuses or fails to meet these obligations. Can the chairperson of the committee show me a section that will help answer my question? Is there a penalty in case the state deliberately refuses to meet these obligations? We can tell our people that the state is going to provide everything and they do not provide.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, what constitutes care and support?

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Maybe just because in the Bill here it is not defined, but under HIV/AIDS treatment and management there are protocol guidelines that compound what care and support is. This includes provision of medicine, continuous counselling and also, where necessary, actual provision of food, among others. 

The support may also include a follow-up of these people in communities where they live, sometimes participating in committee activities where HIV positive people come out openly to share with their colleagues experiences, learning to live positively, etc. This is the kind of support we are referring to. We may not be elaborate here but we take the assumption that the broader management of HIV and AIDS includes treatment, counselling and provision of other support services such as continuous counselling, follow-up in their communities where they live and, where necessary, provision of food.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Care and support involves so many things. In terms of HIV/AIDS programming, we have care and treatment which tends to be medical, but when you include support you actually go to the area of gender where we have core programme areas. For people living with HIV/AIDS, under support we have about eight core programme areas including socio-economic, nutrition, legal support, protection etc. So, it opens up a whole chapter. 

It might therefore be appropriate to say, “The government shall devise measures to provide appropriate care and support to persons…” It will then be up to the minister to define what “appropriate” would mean at any given time. Leaving it the way it is, unless we remove “support” and say, “provide care and treatment to people living with HIV - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I want you to think carefully. Suppose there are 10 abandoned children who are HIV positive, don’t they need a home, don’t they need food and medicine? Do not just think about the adults; what do you do with such children?

MR SSIMBWA: Madam Chairperson, we set a precedent yesterday under clause 16 when we passed the issue of support and care. If we are to go by that precedent, then we will also pass this one. Yesterday, in clause 16, we dealt with provision of appropriate treatment to an HIV positive pregnant woman and we passed a section to do with entitlement, treatment, care and support. We agreed that we pass it as it was.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we should include the word “appropriate”. It qualifies. So, can you move?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chair, Uganda is making legislation on HIV/AIDS after over 20 years of programming, unlike other countries which started with legislation before they knew what to do with HIV/AIDS. The Ministry of Health has thematic policies on different aspects of HIV/AIDS, including care and support. Government knows the kinds of programmes they have been supporting. 

We could, alternatively, leave it as “care and support” and define what care and support means in the context of this law. We could provide specific areas where that support is limited like psycho-socio support and counselling, nutrition and other limited areas which we know are usually included in our programmes. Otherwise, if we leave it open, it can bring those challenges. In the definition clause, we can define what we want to include in care and support. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can the chairperson move to include the word “appropriate” so that we capture it in the law and then when it comes to the interpretation, we can – 

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, I appreciate the amendment to include the word “appropriate”.
 
MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, leaving it at that would still open very wide gates. Maybe in that case we could say, “provide appropriate care and support in accordance with clause 2” - the definition section - which hon. Baryomunsi has proposed, so that we are mindful of the kind of law we are making.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe we could say, “as provided by the minister from time to time” or something like that. This is because the care in 10 years may be different from the care after 15 years. You do not know what other care people may want. You cannot close the door. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I entirely agree that when we leave it the way it is, it is too broad. So, I want to propose that we state as follows: “provide care and support to persons living with HIV/AIDS where applicable” or “as defined in the definition close” as stated by hon. Niwagaba. I think that covers it. We can then, under the regulations, broaden this care and support that we are talking about in this Bill. I do not know if that covers it. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Well, we are getting afraid of broadness of this provision but the honourable Dr Chris Baryomunsi said we are legislating on matters that we know, that this is not a new thing. There is no amount of definition or interpretation that we can give that would help in 10 years or 20 years to come. We would still be limited. Since the care and support is well known within the HIV/AIDS programmes, why should we worry now and think everyone living with HIV/AIDS would go for this support? 

Madam Chairperson, you gave a very elaborate example that can happen tomorrow - some 10 vulnerable children without anybody else to help them and they would need more than what the law is providing for. We all give care and support in some way, but who should define for us that support and care? Should the issue of care and support actually be a matter that we legislate in detail, that the support should be this or the care should be this? 

Madam Chairperson, the principle here is well known. If it is appreciated by Government, I do not find any reason why we should not leave it as open and wide as it is because even the challenge we have is very open and wide. The issue of HIV/AIDS and needs in this area are open and wide. It should be the ministry or the implementing agency to make out a case, but there is no way we can define what constitutes support. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, I move an amendment that we say, “Provide care and support to persons living with HIV/AIDS in accordance with the stipulated national HIV/AIDS treatment guidelines.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay?

MR NIWAGABA: The only worry, Madam Chairperson, is: do those guidelines have a force of law? How do we incorporate the guidelines in such a way that there is a force of law to reinforce this particular provision?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe you will issue a statutory instrument; I do not know. Can the minister issue a statutory instrument? 

DR TUMWESIGYE: Yes, Madam Chairperson. When you say, “according to treatment guidelines”, they refer to actual treatment but issues of support go beyond treatment and management. So, maybe we can say, “provide appropriate care and support to persons living with HIV/AIDS according to government guidelines.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Oh, that is risky. What if they ask what appropriate care is. I think let us put the “appropriate” at the end - “Provide care and support to persons living with HIV/AIDS as appropriate” I think that –

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think the proposal you have just restated makes it smarter and is acceptable.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 27 be amended as proposed. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 28

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, the committee proposes the introduction of a new part immediately after Part IV on state responsibility in HIV/AIS control. This new part is to provide for the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund. The new part would now start from clause 28, if you re-number. It would read as follows:

“Part VI - HIV/AIDS Trust Fund 

28. Establishment of the Fund 
(1) There is established a Fund to be known as the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund. 

29. Object of the Fund 

The object of the Fund is to secure a predictable and sustainable means of procuring goods and services for the HIV and AIDS counselling, testing and treatment.

30. Source of moneys of the Fund 

(1) 	The moneys of the Fund shall consist of- 
(a) 	a proportion of the levies on beers, spirits or waragi and any other taxable item as shall be determined by the Minister responsible for Finance from time to time; 
(b) 	moneys appropriated by Parliament for the purposes of the Fund; 
(c) 	grants, moneys or assets donated to the Fund by Government with the approval of the Minister or assets donated to the Fund by any foreign government, international agency or other external body of persons, corporate or incorporated; or 
(d) 	money received by the Fund by way of voluntary contributions.

(2) 	The proportion of the levies referred to in subsection (1) (a) above shall be remitted directly to the Fund on a monthly basis.

31. Administration of the Fund 

The Fund shall be administered by the Minister responsible for finance in consultation with the Minister responsible for health.” 

Madam Chair, our justification for including this part is to ensure that there is a sustainable and stable funding for HIV and AIDS counselling, testing and treatment since this has been largely funded by donors. This amendment came out of some consultations that we have been trying to have with different stakeholders as far as this Bill is concerned. This is our proposal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us listen to the Members. I have one area of dissatisfaction but let us hear from others first.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chair, I am the vice-chairperson of the HIV/AIDS committee. Maybe there was a typing error here. I remember there was this so-called Road Fund, which has been in the Ministry of Finance and I can tell you once you say “Ministry of Finance”, it goes to the Consolidated Fund. 

Our aim here is to create a fund where money can easily be scooped out to get ARVs for our people who are in dire need of these ARVs and they cannot wait. I thought that this would be managed by the Ministry of Health in consultation with Ministry of Finance and not vice versa. Ministry of Finance does not know health issues very well; Ministry of Health knows health issues more than finance does. I thank you.

MS NETALISIRE: Madam Chair, my submission relates to what Dr Bitekyerezo has just said - putting this money under the Ministry of Finance. We have created trust funds in this House but sourcing this money from the Ministry of Finance is a dream that does not come true. We created a trust fund here for fisheries; I do not know whether hon. Ruth Nankabirwa has ever accessed this money since then. I believe this has never yielded results. [Hon. Members: “environment”] – Environment is also the same thing and the Road Fund has also faced many challenges. 

Getting this money and putting it under Ministry of Finance is frustrating the efforts to create a fund to help us solve the challenges we are going through. Madam Chairperson, I plead with the chair of the health committee to really agree with us to put this money under Ministry of Health.

MR SSEBAGGALA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I strongly oppose the creation of this fund. We are opening up a Pandora’s Box. Malaria is a major killer; do we have a malaria fund? When it comes to TB, have we created a TB fund? Do we have a cancer fund? 

What we must do, Madam Chair, is to have a holistic approach in as far as treatment and care is concerned. Otherwise, we will create various funds that we will not be able to implement. I oppose the creation of this fund. Let us have a holistic approach in as far as fighting HIV/AIDS is concerned. Creating funds in every sector will bring in that element of always creating funds. Let us not open up a Pandora’s Box by having a fund for HIV, fund for jiggers, fund for everything; let us have a holistic approach.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, I just want to inform hon. Ssebagala to really think seriously about this issue. Why do you think we have the HIV/AIDS Bill today in this House being debated and not one on malaria or the jiggers you are talking about? It is because of the gravity of the matter. Given the issues and the global politics surrounding this issue, I think it is important that we have a fund that will be dedicated to address the problems that we are facing with HIV/AIDS.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we sent you to Zimbabwe to study this matter; how does Zimbabwe handle this matter?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chair, I was in Zimbabwe with the honourable Dr Elioda Tumwesigye, hon. Beatrice Anywar and some other people. Zimbabwe taxes some specific items on a monthly basis and the money is put in the Zimbabwe AIDS Trust Fund. They have a committee that handles this fund within the Ministry of Health. In Zimbabwe, this is the money they are using to give treatment specifically to people of Zimbabwe because the donors completely removed support when Zimbabwe did what they did. (Laughter)

Here we are as a country and there are signs and symptoms of donors running away from us because of our behaviour, which is very good behaviour. I would urge this honourable House to support the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund for our people. I would kindly implore hon. Ssebagala - the country is ours, please be sympathetic to the people with HIV/AIDS; they are in trouble. I thank you.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Madam Chair, I really need to convince hon. Ssebagala on why we need this fund. Currently, we have about 1.5 million people living with HIV/AIDS. These people have to take drugs every day of their lives. We have children, who are born with HIV and they are going to live the rest of their lives with HIV.

For people who require treatment every day, when we get financial shocks in the system, they are bound to die. Every day we are losing about 64,000 people due to AIDS; every two hours, you lose an equivalent of a mini bus. So, proposing that we need to have a fund where money will be put to secure, to guarantee that these people will get the required drugs at the time they require them is something anybody should support. We know that saving a life is the highest ethical act one can do for fellow mankind.

Why are we coming in at this time? Of course, you have noted that when you have challenges and donors have threatened to cut off funding, you are bound to put people at risk. By the way, when you have an AIDS trust fund, it even gives you an opportunity to lobby for more funds; that is what is happening in Zimbabwe. They are now among the first countries to access significant funds from the Global Fund because they have a trust fund and have funds specifically earmarked for HIV/AIDS.

MS NAJJEMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I just want to remind this House that last year as I was chairing the committee on HIV/AIDS, I brought a report here on behalf of the committee and after that report was considered, this House resolved that we have a trust fund. I do not think we need to open up debate on whether we should have a trust fund for HIV/AIDS or not because actually, we resolved as Parliament, from among the many recommendations that we presented to the House, that we should have a fund. So, I think it should only be a question of where to have the fund but not whether we should have a fund. (Applause)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I may have a limited appreciation of the Bill but I think the problem started from where the fund should be housed. I wonder what the role of the Uganda AIDS Commission is, because this Parliament could appropriate money directly to Uganda AIDS Commission for purposes of handling all matters that relate to HIV/AIDS. It serves no purpose to leave it to Ministry of Health; they have their own problems and financial shortfalls. They will spend the money for HIV/AIDS on workshops and useless seminars, giving it to –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Thank you, hon. Otto, for giving way. The proposal of the committee is that this money will specifically be for counselling, testing and treatment and the broader areas of HIV. If you look at which ministry is responsible for those thematic areas of HIV, it is Ministry of Health. Therefore, contrary to your fears, the money is more protected if it is under Ministry of Health rather than the other agencies.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, I would agree with Dr Baryomunsi on that. Of course, I know what happened to the Global Fund; some of the people who ate the money in the Ministry of Health are still at large. 

That notwithstanding, Madam Chair, I do not think that in the committee proposals, under (1) (a), we should put a specific levy on beers and wines for purposes of putting it in the AIDS fund. I do not think that is right. Let the taxes be collected normally by URA and then this Parliament appropriates money for the purpose of HIV/AIDS. Why are you bringing a special tax on wines and whiskeys? Supposing people do not drink the whole month? (Laughter) What happens to the fund?

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. First, I would like to associate myself with the submission of hon. Otto. This morning, we were trying to deal with the report of the Uganda AIDS Commission and when you look at the budget, Government funds 60 per cent and the donors 40 per cent of the activities. The Abuja Declaration requires us to raise our funding for the health sector to 15 per cent; I think we have never done it. Now we are running away from undertaking an obligation as Government to fund the health sector and we are running to these funds. 

I am of the considered opinion that – I actually associate myself with hon. Ssebagala - we oppose the creation of this fund and we appropriate money normally to the Uganda AIDS Commission to undertake its mandate. Today, when you look at the statistics-

THE CHAIRPERSON: It will depend on what collections are made or not made; is that what you are saying?

MR MWIRU: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: If there are no collections, there is no money?

MR MWIRU: Not necessarily, Madam Chair. If this sector is very important, then that is the reason why we should give it priority. This is all we are saying. If this sector is actually very important like the minister tends to say, and I agree with him, when we are budgeting and looking at the health sector, we should then take it very seriously and actually put in more money. Instead, what we are doing here is creating a fund.

Madam Chair, you remember I have raised a matter of national importance in this House and asked a question for oral answer on the Road Fund. When we created it, URA refused to release the money saying that under Section 14 of the URA Act, they only collect money and take it to the Consolidated Fund; they cannot take it to another fund. Despite the question clearly stating that money created for that purpose-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is the reason this committee is proposing this fund; they do not want the money to go to the Consolidated Fund.

MS KABAALE: Thank you, chairperson. I am standing to give information and boost our proposal for the fund and I would like to give examples. Previously, the prevalence of AIDS had gone down but now, it has risen to around 15 per cent. I would like to inform hon. Ssebagala that when there is a situation, which is wanting, that is when we seek for a fund. The Road Fund you are referring to was created because the state of the roads in Uganda was bad; that is why we proposed the fund. So, I feel that if you are a caring Ugandan, given the increase in the prevalence of AIDS even in institutions and the whole country, you would really think about our people. 

MS KATAIKE: Madam Chair, thank you. I just want to share with colleagues that one time when I was a para-doctor, we used to participate in conferences where Uganda was famous for the fight and control of HIV/AIDS. Now, we were no longer on the scene; we instead see countries like Zimbabwe, Botswana and Rwanda, which are performing well and their success is based on a fund. 

Just like my colleague has said here, we have agreed in principle. We have issues at stake, our budget is wanting and we cannot just look on as our fellow Ugandans are dying and we are willing to contribute. So, I want to appeal to those who think that an HIV/AIDS fund may be – [Mr Mwiru: “it must be appropriated also”] - Yes, we concur with that but we must put in our own money also and make it available.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want to just plead with Members who are opposed to this fund to understand the object of this Bill. The object of this Bill is clear - it is aimed at controlling the spread of HIV/AIDS and reducing transmission.

Of course, the challenges the health sector has faced are clearly known. Other than providing medical care, we are supposed to ensure that we have testing kits available at all times at the health facilities. We have been heavily reliant on donor support; it is high time we withdrew from that and got our own funds to support the HIV/AIDS programmes.

We have heard from the media, and I am sure most of you have been reading, that health facilities do not have testing kits. We have shortages because we do not have the money ourselves; the money comes from elsewhere. So, once this trust fund is within our country and controlled by us, we shall be able to ring-fence funds and we shall have all the testing kits and medical treatment that we need. Of course, with the EMTCT programme, Madam Chairperson, this fund is really a necessity. I want to request that you put the question and we vote on this matter. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are there any objections? Honourable members, first of all, we already adopted the resolution; this House already owns that resolution. What we should now discuss is the home for this fund. That is all. We adopted it here.

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Kasule Lumumba): Madam Chairperson and Members, I think I now want to support hon. Ssebagala. Several times we have resolved to create funds here and we have even been so particular and specific on the sources of money - for fisheries from this, road fund from fuel, etc. Now, what is the problem? 

In my opinion, it would be better for the Minister of Finance to explain to us why this has not been happening, so that we take a decision when we actually know whether this fund will be implemented. Otherwise, I see the same thing happening as has happened before. Here in Parliament, we have debated several times on the issue of the Road Fund and it is even in the law - a percentage of what is charged as tax on fuel. Let us not give people false hope. What we can do now is examine what has been happening and how best to improve so that we get a practical solution to the problem.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I really must take issue with what the Government Chief Whip is saying because she is the face of the Government. These funds have not been implemented and yet we made laws clearly and the laws were assented to by the President. It is the Government which is not enforcing them.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. We are surprised the Government Chief Whip is presenting the way she has presented. We believe she sits in Cabinet and we believe she is part of the system. We would actually want to have the Road Fund implemented and if by passing this fund it will make the Government implement this and the Road Fund, it is the way to go. We are not opposed to this fund. Madam Chairperson, as you just said, it was already passed by this House; it is only the home where we should put this fund that is the issue. 

I would like to tell the Government Chief Whip that recently, I was at a health centre IV in Nankoma, which she and I represent. I found 500 people there, women mostly; they had come for treatment but there were no drugs and there was no food. They do not have meals and some of them travel many kilometres – [Ms Lumumba: “Is it because of the HIV/AIDS Fund?”]- Madam Chairperson, please protect me from the Government Chief Whip. 

I think a fund like this would help us access some of these things for the HIV/AIDS patients. So, we support the creation of the fund. (Applause)- If it is a special fund, it could be managed by any ministry or Uganda AIDS Commission but nevertheless, they are all Government departments. What we want is the money. Money must go to the fund and we also think that money for the Road Fund should also start going there. We ask the Government Chief Whip to ensure that all these monies are remitted and ring-fenced.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chair, rule 209 of our Rules of Procedure clearly bars the House from re-considering a decision that has already passed, unless a substantive motion has been brought to rescind that decision. I would pray that since the House has already made a decision that we have an AIDS trust fund, the issue we should now discuss is where it should be housed and how the money to that fund is appropriated.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Those are the rules of the House.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, thank you. We already took a decision and I associate myself with the previous speaker. If I recall, the purpose of the fund was to ring-fence this money and also to attract funding, which we lack at this time. The issue of the domicile should not really bar us from proceeding. Whether it resides in Ministry of Health or Ministry of Finance should not be a problem as long as it fulfils the purpose. To me, it should not stop us from proceeding.

Madam Chair, you already guided us that we already passed this and agreed on it and we should proceed. Therefore, when we come to that stage where we think it should reside, I think that is where we should seek consensus. Otherwise, I support the creation of the fund. We already pronounced ourselves on this fund so we should proceed to have this fund created.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new Part VI be introduced in this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, honourable chair, the domicile - Where will it reside?

DR OMONA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair and honourable colleagues. We had proposed that this would be administered by the minister responsible for finance in consultation with the Minister of Health –(interjections)– I am saying that this was in our amendments, which you must have. I am now taking the new amendment as proposed by the House. (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chair. I think now that we agree that we create the fund, it does not matter where it is housed. This is because under Article –(Interjections)– I do not know what has happened to colleagues; they cannot even listen to each other.  Under Article 153 (2), when you go to Consolidated Fund, it clearly states that once money is collected under a fund, it cannot be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund unless for that particular purpose. Meaning that it can be housed in finance or elsewhere because it is ring-fenced by the Constitution under that Article. So, we may not even have to waste a lot of time on that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Mwiru, the reason we want to be specific is that we have the experience of the Uganda Road Fund, money is collected specifically for the Road Fund and it is not remitted. Despite the Constitution - 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, the point I am making is that it is actually by law because even if we say that now Ministry of Health, it is not going to be us to collect the tax, it is going to be Uganda Revenue Authority. But the Constitution clearly tells them that once money is collected for a particular fund, they cannot actually use it for another purpose other than that for which it is intended under the Act. This is the law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we know the provision. What we are saying is that why hasn’t it happened? The law is there, the Constitution is there, the Road Fund money is being collected – that is the question!

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, Madam Chair. It is good that hon. Bitekyerezo and the team went to Zimbabwe. When you search further about the fund, it is administered by the National AIDS Council, which is an equivalent of the Uganda AIDS Commission and when you look at the mandate of the Uganda AIDS Commission, it coordinates activities to do with prevention and control of AIDS.

So, I would believe that this fund be taken to Uganda AIDS Commission so that it administers it in reference to its mandate. 

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I am really confused here, by the statement of the chair. What we have here about the administration of the fund it is stated that the fund shall be administered by the Minister responsible for Health. So, the Ministry of Finance is supposed to look for the source where this money should come from but not administer it. So, I need some clarification, Madam Chair from -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we defer that portion a bit, while you consult and go to something else.

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Chair. Maybe, for information, as I surely agree that we defer this, as long as the introduction of this part has been taken, I think other amendments we can stand over and then bring that one.

But what I want to state in response to the concerns of colleagues, hon. Simbwa and others, is about the fear of where to put this money. Madam Chair, the failure of yesterday should not prevent us from moving forward today. If we fail with other funds, I do not think this should be a failure also.

We had proposed like I had read and I am actually just saying that we accept the amendment that is coming up. We had proposed that it should be managed and administered by Ministry of Finance in consultation with the Minister responsible for Health, but we are –(Interjections)– do not refuse, it is actually what I read - 

We are proposing that we will take the amendment that it should be reversed, managed by the Minister responsible for Health, in consultation with the Minister responsible for Finance. This is the amendment that we wish to take from what is emerging.

Now, as to whether this fund should not be put under Uganda AIDS Commission or Ministry of Health, I should accept, I could have had a lapse of memory, but to the best of my memory, I know that even Uganda AIDS Commission is a vote under Ministry of Health, with mandates that are narrower but maybe detailed than Ministry of Health. So, we propose that let this be under Ministry of Health and then because - if you look at the mandate of the Uganda AIDS Commission may not go even to the extent of procuring commodities such as testing kits, buying of medicines for HIV/AIDS control and treatment. This is was our thinking.

So, where the fund will be, Madam Chair, I think we can stand on this and debate it, but I am very happy that the House has taken our amendment to introduce this part. 

MS ANYWAR: Madam Chairperson, the institution of Parliament appropriates money and even holds Government accountable – we are trying to establish a fund and we have done that before, as you rightly observed. You have had the Road Fund, the Environmental Fund and we are trying to create another one. 

Madam Chair, my take is that as an institution of Parliament, under your able leadership, this pronouncement we have made on the established fund must be implemented because if we let it go by and we lament that we established the Road Fund, the Environmental Fund and the government or Ministry of Finance is not remitting it, it is as if they are going away with it. They have to implement that even as they come to ask for more moneys, which this august House has to give to them, should they not implement it, Madam Chair, we should have the capacity under your able leadership to tell them that we are not giving you more funds until you remit what you are supposed to have remitted under a certain vote.

And even we ring-fence it, Madam Chair. Otherwise, if we just let it go like that, they are going to take this institution of Parliament for granted. It is high time we put this on record that Government or Ministry of Finance comes and tells us why they have not implemented this specific fund and direct them to do so before the next budget is approved for them.
Thank you.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. When I heard alarming figures, the numbers of people who are living with HIV/AIDS I got alarmed too. And this reminded me of the Global Fund, the money that was administered by Ministry of Health. The money was misappropriated. Looking at the people who are suffering, your ministry misappropriated these figures.

This government has been to international conferences. Abuja Declaration, 15 percent of the budget should be put in the Ministry of Health; Maputo Declaration, nothing. Madam Chair, I support the fund and I propose that the Ministry of Finance collects the money and ring-fences it. It should be given to the AIDS Commission, not the Ministry of Finance because I used to sit on the Public Accounts Committee and we looked at the accounts of the Ministry of Health were wanting; they had a lot of problems.

So, this money should specifically be collected by URA, sent to the Consolidated Fund and the money should be ring-fenced and sent to Uganda AIDS Commission to administer this fund.

I thank you, Madam Chair.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. It appears that our work is now simpler. I do not know whether we should really defer this matter because the mood in the House and the consensus is that finance should not be part of the options where we are going to house this money.

So, what remains are the two institutions: should it go to Ministry for Health or should it go to the Uganda AIDS Commission and what should be the guiding principles on where this fun should be housed?
 
MR ALEX BYARUGABA: Thank you, Madam Chair. It is not proper honestly to compare this issue with the Road Fund and other fund because this is a very dangerous issue. It affects all of us. Anyway, the information I want to give is that one of the mandates of the Uganda AIDS Commission is to mobilise, to expedite and monitor resources of the AIDS Control Programme and activities. So, we should not waste a lot of time – first of all, we should cancel out Ministry of Finance because that is why most of these other funds have failed to be operationalized. So, we should not repeat the same mistake because we have learnt the hard way. This money should simply be ring-fenced and passed over to the Uganda AIDS Commission.

MR BAHATI: I am still holding the Floor –(Interjections)– are you also going to give me information?

THE CHAIRPERSON: The other Member was just giving information.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chair, I would like to plead with colleagues – when you say that the fund be placed under Uganda AIDS Commission, it is like appropriating money to Parliamentary Commission but you change and say it should go to the Department of Sergeant-At-Arms. That money will still be under Parliament –(Interjections)– yes, because the person who is responsible to this House is the Minister of Health. Therefore, we should agree to have both the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Finance to work on modalities on where it can –(Interjections)– yes, we cannot escape from the mandate of those two ministries.

Madam Chair, I think we should pass the principle. If the majority of the Members say it should go to Ministry of Health, let us record Ministry of Health. The problem I have is that people think that we will be in these offices permanently –(Interjections)– yes, because if one person makes a mistake, it does not render that office unoperational. Those people talking about global fund issues – yes, we all know that there were problems with the global fund but people were prosecuted and monies were recovered.

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. First, we should do a correction to the point advanced by the hon. Maj. Bright Rwamirama in comparing the Uganda AIDS Commission and the Ministry of Health with the Department of Sergeant-At- Arms of Parliament. The Uganda AIDS Commission is an institution created by this Parliament and has a clear mandate, and it is under the Ministry of Presidency though the funds are administered under the Ministry of Health.

So, I would like to request that we should think about the guiding principles, and these principles should be what do we want to achieve with this fund? Does the Uganda AIDS Commission handle issues of treatment? Does it handle issues of coordination? If those questions are answered then I think the Uganda AIDS Commission would be the best place to handle this fund. This is because we are ring-fencing this fund in a way that it will be managed in a transparent manner so that we can achieve the objective of the creation of this fund. Thank you, Madam Chair.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. There are two junior ministers of health because the senior minister is not around –(Interjections)– yes, and I am the shadow minister. Members just need to be enlightened about the work of the AIDS Control Programme and about the mandate of the Uganda AIDS Commission. But they also need to know the mandate of the Ministry of Health. 

What we are talking about are the line ministries to handle this fund. The AIDS Control Programme is not a ministry though it is a programme within the Ministry of Health. And the chairperson of the committee has stipulated the previous position of the committee on which I sit – the impression of Parliament is such that it should be vice-versa because of the injuries we have suffered under the Road Fund in the Ministry of Finance. That is why we are saying it should be handled by the Ministry of Health.

But under that, we should be able to decide whether it should be the Uganda AIDS Commission that has been campaigning to get this fund – recently they organised a workshop because they had earmarked this money – I dismissed their suggestion because the Committee of Health had already made a report. Otherwise, the essence of their workshop was such that the Uganda AIDS Commission should be the one which Parliament should authorize to run this fund. I found that quite obnoxious and so I didn’t agree with them.

Therefore, the ministry under the AIDS Control Programme should have the mandate to control this fund.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I want to propose that we defer this issue and we come back to it at the end.

MS LUMUMBA: Madam Chair, given the mood in the House, it is better we take decision now. 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

MS LUMUMBA: I think what Members are not clearly explaining is the fact that the vote for the Uganda AIDS Commission is under the Ministry of Presidency and KCCA –(Interjections)– yes and so if you take this fund to be managed by the Uganda AIDS Commission, it means the Ministry for Presidency will come to explain to this House or will be the one to account to this House.

However, recall that we are talking about treatment. So, is treatment done under the Ministry for Presidency –(Interruption)

PROF. BUKENYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I think why we are agitating for a fund is to support those who are already suffering from HIV/AIDS and require treatment on a daily basis until they die. That is one. Two, we require this fund to support capacities to investigate and this investigation is changing almost every day.
Three, we require this fund to mobilise information to support those who are already infected and those not yet infected.

The question I have is: who is currently buying the drugs that we give to these patients? And who is negotiating with the pharmaceutical companies to support a reduction in the pricing –(Interjections)– National Medical Stores is actually under the Ministry of Health. Therefore, Madam Chair, with the limitations that have been taking place at the Ministry of Health, I would strongly advise that those who have been involved in the procurement and in the negotiations of this matter should continue. But what we can do is to ring-fence it by saying that the money from this fund can only be utilized in the following fields: procurement of drugs, procurement of investigative materials and stop there. The Minister of Health will of course come to account for that money spent in that area.

I used to be in charge of the Uganda AIDS Commission and I see them here. This commission is doing a lot of work but most of its work is about mobilization, sensitization and investigations. They are the ones who tell us how we have been doing as a regime in terms of treatment, and whether we should change to this and that. I know recently they were debating a three-dose sort of pair for treating of patients. Otherwise, the purchaser is the Ministry of Health. So, in spite the problems we have had with the Ministry of Health that should be the job of that ministry.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, are there still any objections to the Ministry of Health. Okay, I would like to propose that we defer this matter. We can ask the chairperson of the committee and the mover of the motion, hon. Sarah Kataike, the hon. Vice President together with hon. Paul Mwiru to formulate the text that we shall use.

But I also want us to address how we shall handle it in the Finance Bill. You adopt formulation on how to handle the sources because we shall have to include it in the Finance Bill. We shall expect a report from you tomorrow. Let us proceed.

Clause 28

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that the old Clause 28 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Old Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, I am following as it is in the Bill – Clause 29 (1) (b), the committee proposes deletion of the word “legal” appearing at the beginning of line three. The justification is that the word “guardian” is already defined in the Bill and it is not necessary to qualify it here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which one is that? Can you read the text as you want it to flow?

DR OMONA: Clause 29 (1) (b) – as it is appears in the Bill, it reads “Where the person is a minor or is incapable of giving consent with written informed consent of a parent or legal guardian of the child or other person.” The committee proposes the deletion of the word “legal” appearing at the beginning of line three.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why do you want to do that?

DR OMOWA: Madam Chair, it is because the word “guardian” is already defined. We take guardian as it is defined in the Bill. So, we thought it would not be necessary to again use the word “legal.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, it is not as simple as that. You know that there can be a guardian appointed by court; there can be a guardian who has acquired status over you and there are those guardians who are natural. You must have proof that you are the person authorized either by birth, court and some authority to be the guardian.

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, I have no problem if that can apply too because when you look at the definition of the word “guardian” you realize it reads thus: “’Guardian’ means a person who has the legal responsibility for providing the care and management of the person who is incapable either due to age or some other physical, mental or emotional impairment to the administration of his or her own affairs.”

The committee had thought that it would not be necessary. But if it does not change the meaning, we have no problem in conceding to that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think you better leave it as it is.

DR OMONA: Much obliged.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question – 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chair, I still have a problem with Clause 29, particularly sub clauses (2) and (3). In sub clause (2), I notice that it is silent on who is to give this person the information mentioned there under. Two, it is also silent on the timeframe in which this information should be furnished.

In sub clause (3) – it refers to ethical regulations – but where do we find these ethical regulations? Are they in the form of a statutory instrument or they are just medically known? How do we enforce this particular clause that is simply referring to “ethical regulations” whose source is unknown?

So, I would like to ask the committee chairman to guide me on those before I give my approval to pass them the way they appear.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What are “ethical regulations” chairperson of the committee?

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, on these, the assumption the committee made was to take this as to the ethical regulations as prescribed by the National Council of Science and Technology, which supervises any scientific research that takes place in this country. The regulations are prescribed by the National Council of Science and Technology that supervises every bio-medical research.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I just want to provide some additional information to the effect that in addition to what the National Council of Science and Technology prescribes, this Parliament also passed a law to create the Health Research Organization of Uganda. In doing so, we clearly gave that organization the mandate that includes, among others, drafting and publishing health research regulations. So, there is already a law to create institutions that come up within these regulations.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chair, if it is so that the ethical regulations are those prescribed by those institutions, then that should be specified in this Bill. This is because the ethical regulations he is talking about here are nowhere in the definition. 

So, this should be amended to specify that the ethical regulations mentioned are those prescribed by so and so. That will make it clear as far as what is being talked about here is concerned. That wouldn’t have been necessary if those regulations had been defined in the definition part of the Bill. So, since they were not defined, we better have a complete write out of it. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we, since we have not yet done the interpretation section, arrange to define it when we get to that section?

DR OMONA: Much obliged, Madam Chair, because we also have the Uganda National Health Research Organization that prescribes these. I think let us take that advice – we can define that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please formulate it and you can bring an amendment as we do the interpretation.

DR OMONA: Much obliged, Madam Chair.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chair, in that respect, we also need to capture this. Let us not forget about it in the appendix for cross reference purposes so that we have that Act of the Medical Research and the other one.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which one?

MR NIWAGABA: That Act which the hon. Dr Baryomunsi referred to and the Act in respect of the National Council for Science and Technology should be referred to in the cross reference when we go to the appendix; we shouldn’t forget and also in the schedule.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But why don’t we put it in the interpretation section?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chair, for purposes of record, the Act is called the Uganda National Health Research Organization Act, which was passed by this Parliament a few years back.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Madam Chair, allow me make some comments: One, in response to hon. Winfred Niwagaba’s submission on sub clause (2) where he talked about the timeline. I would like to say that we don’t have to specify the timeline in the sense that we are talking about a person whose consent is sought. It would imply that actually this information will be provided at the time the consent will be sought. So, there is need for the law to state that they must provide that information such and such number of days or hours.

The second comment I wish to make is on (3) – whether we actually need to have research incentives. In research, it is not allowed to provide incentives to participants. Rather, we do provide compensation for time or anticipated inconvenience. Otherwise, it is not allowed to provide for somebody to participate in research. It can be seen as coercion.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, do you want to say that compensation shall be provided?

DR TUMWESIGYE: Yes, that it shall be provided with appropriate compensation in line with guidelines under the institutional review or under the National Council for Science and Technology or under appropriate ethical bodies. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 29 be amended as proposed by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 30

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, Clause 30 talks about anonymous testing. We propose to rephrase it to read as follows: “A person who consents to anonymous HIV testing shall not be required to provide a name. And subject to sub clause (1) an identifying symbol shall be substituted for the person’s true name.”
The justification is that it is the name of a person that can potentially disclose his or her true identity. The other information like age and address may sometimes be useful for research purposes.

MS KABALE: Thank you, Madam Chair. In the normal testing of HIV, usually names are not included. So, I don’t know where it comes from that you are talking about not providing such information yet it is the normal circumstance that prevails. In fact, when they are testing, they will instead ask for the person’s parent’s name. When they deliver the results, they will call you by that parent’s name. In the circumstances, I don’t think this is even relevant save the age and address, which are important.

DR OMONA: Thank you honourable colleague for the clarification. First, anonymous testing only exists mostly for research purposes. We don’t even use it in the normal care and management of HIV. But suffice to say that in responding to hon. Kwagala Kabale’s concerns, if you read the clause as it appears in the Bill, you realise that it talks about not providing all these items – name, age, address and any other information. But if none of these is provided and it is for research purposes, then that information will also be useful. So, for research purposes, researchers may need the address so that for statistical reasons, one can use the data collected in that respect. But also researchers may need the age of the subjects but not necessarily the name. And that is why we are objecting to the mention of the name. Otherwise, without this other data what is the test for?

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable chairperson, I have not understood the rationale for making those changes because 31 is very clear that if you are anonymous, you don’t need to give a name, you don’t tell your age, address or any other information. But here you are concentrating on the name. I really don’t see the rationale.

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, in 31 as you have read it – we don’t want to exclude all these. Just like I said, age is important but also address and any other information may as well be important other than the name that discloses the identity of the individual.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But do you recall what you said? You said rephrase to read as follows – it means you are deleting this and replacing it with this new rephrase. That is why I am saying I don’t understand the rationale.

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, in fact in essence –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chair, this falls under part four, which talks about HIV/AIDS human biomedical research. We are saying there are cases where research is undertaken like the Rakai studies that were carried out. For example, if you are testing the efficacy of a drug, you administer a drug to particular people and the others you give a placebo which is a non-drug - in some of these instances, you don’t need to identify the people who are being tested. But the other areas like age, address and other information relating to the people you are studying may be useful for epidemiological studies. That is why we are now deleting the name and leave the other aspects.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But that is not what your amendment said. You said rephrase the entire clause to read as follows – that is what your proposal is saying.

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, actually in essence, our amendment as I have read it, adds up to deleting Clause 30.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But that will be against what hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi is saying, because he is saying the others are important.

MR NIWAGABA: When you look at this clause and your proposed amendments visa-avis the explanation, you are not restricting this anonymous testing to spherically research purposes. So, when you look and compare with the earlier clauses we have passed in particular 19 and 21, they tend to conflict in the long run.

If this testing is anonymous but you are not restricting to research – take the example of a situation where a court issues an order instructing you to disclose the details, how do you marry this clause and those other ones?

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chair. There is a difference here and I thought that the hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi had stated the purpose of this Clause 30 - anonymous remains anonymous. No single attachment to age and address or as it is here – you cannot try to amend – there is a difference between anonymous and confidential. The ordinary HIV testing is confidential. What we are talking about, which is for research purposes, you don’t need to refer to the same data again. So, everything is done for that purpose. It could be in one location – you meet me in the streets – that is the purpose of this. You try to change it, you will get something else and kindly, you will definitely change the meaning of the word “Anonymous.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what do you propose?

MR OBOTH: I propose that this is left as it is.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Madam Chair, I would like to agree with hon. Dr Omona and hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi because their positions are the same. Under clause 31, it means people undergoing anonymous testing – you are not required to provide age, address or any other information. But actually we need age and address. What we don’t need is identifying information, which is the name of the person.
Why do we need age? You might want to, for example, go to an island to know which category of people have HIV and what is the prevalence with this category. But you also need location and so on. But what we don’t want you to do is to tie that to a name. So, what hon. Dr Omona is proposing is that in rephrasing, he is replacing – in essence he recognizes the fact that names should not be indicated and that we can remove age, address and others.

In sub-clause (2), he is also replacing it – it talks about symbols. So, we are basically removing the same two sub-clauses but deleting the word “name” but retaining age and address. But if this is not satisfactory, we can delete sub-clause (1) and just retain sub-clause (2) that talks about voluntary anonymous testing where we talk about substituting the person’s true name or identity with a symbol.

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Madam Chair. I really don’t get it why the committee wants to amend clause 30 (1) yet it still appears okay. Basically, what this says is that if I submit to anonymous testing, I don’t have to give the name, age, address or anything.

However, as a person who is being tested, I could voluntarily agree to give my name and that will be okay. But I am not required to do so; I can only give it out voluntarily. That is what this sentence is saying.

So, for me, this is still okay. You don’t have to change anything in order for it to be useful. Thank you.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chair. Part four of this Bill as was alluded to by the hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi, the heading – and we need to appreciate this – is HIV and AIDS related to human biomedical research? You are not going to allow your biodata – age, for your information, is an identifier. Age, address and whatever it is, can be used as identifiers. You can see that our group identity here could be a certain age group. So, you cannot change this provision and this is an international standard. Uganda is not reinventing the wheel on this anonymous testing. Other countries are also doing the same.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chair, what this provision means – let us take an example of a research that may be carried out on HIV/AIDS in Kampala to know the magnitude and dynamics of HIV in Kampala. You will need to compare the prevalence in Kawempe and Rubaga or Nakawa. But you will also need to look at the prevalence among the young, the elderly and so on. That is why we are saying that what can be withheld should be the name because the age becomes very important when researchers are analyzing trends among people of different age groups.

On the address, I am sure there were many people from Rubaga, it wouldn’t identify a person as Dr Baryomunsi but it would state that people in Rubaga have a higher prevalence compared to those in Kawempe. What it means is that –

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi, what you are saying does not support this amendment.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chair, can I seek clarification from him? He is saying that it is not necessary to restrict the age. But supposing you are doing some research in which I submit for the anonymous testing but when you ask for my age, I refuse to give it to you? 
What this clause is saying is that it should be the person tested to voluntarily submit that information but you are not requiring that information – the person can voluntarily give his age and the location where they stay.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, I will give you the engineering perspective and I will follow up from where hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi stopped. If Government wants to do some research for policy decisions, there is certain information that must be required. Yes, a person may agree to do an anonymous test, but what information are you – if I test as Aridru that I am tested negative or positive, what information are you going to get out of that? It is absolutely nothing.

The information that would probably be required by Government for purposes of policy decision – (Interjections)– just a second - let me develop my point. Two, I don’t have to tell them where I live. But there are two pieces of information that are so critical: that Aridru or Ajedra is a male; that Ajedra is 50 year old. And there is nowhere in the world you can dispute those positions.

So, those are the only two positions that should be required if one is going to do an anonymous test.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then why are you disturbing clause 30?

MR AJEDRA: Further more –(Interjections)– legal information? No. Madam Chair, in Botswana, there were statistics that were done by the World Bank and they just wanted information in terms of location on which is the most prevalent town or area with high risk rates for HIV/AIDS. They only looked at a few things, the area where that person lived generally, the age and sex of the respondent and that was it. If I give these three; that I am a male, aged 50 and I live in Arua, how many people are living in Arua with 50 years? How many male persons live in Arua? You will not be able to get that information. So, those are the three pieces of information.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is why we are taking issue with the chairperson’s amendment. Yes, hon. Oboth.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, we are taking it as if this anonymous testing is the only testing that will be done in Uganda or anywhere. Government is a custodian of other data; why would Government wait for anonymous testing to do research? Other information would be available and they leave out the names. Why do we debate here as if the only information that would be available is through this anonymous testing; there is confidential one which the medical professional, the ministry and the government will be having. If you want to compare the age differences, you do not go for this one. You will be a poor researcher to use anonymous testing results to compare age, sex, location – let us not lose focus of this. If you want to go anonymous, you go anonymous entirely. 

MS SANTA ALUM: Madam Chair, I really do not see the reason as to why the committee chair is still insisting on disturbing clause 30 because in clause 29, it is very clear of the type of testing that you need to do when the person is informed and where the person can give the name and everything. And we are saying that the name can be left out but the age and address must be given. But I am wondering, for example, if you want my address of Oyam District and yet there is that bit of stigmatization - what are you trying to say when I give you my address? Is it different from the name that you are now suggesting that we should leave out? Maybe we need to change the title of this clause 30 from “Anonymous” something which I even do not understand. Thank you. (Laughter)

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I thank colleagues for the concerns they have raised on this. I had expected this and thank those who have looked at this critically. The contention with this clause, like hon. Oboth, among others has said, when we say “Anonymous” it is really anonymous. And Madam Chair, I am now saying this after having been informed by the contribution of colleagues here: When you say “Anonymous” it is entirely anonymous and this talks about testing for research purposes. Madam Chair – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So if it is anonymous, what quarrel do you have with clause 30?

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, as it is in the Bill here, it does not carry any programme sense at all – whether in management of HIV or even research. We now accept to amend by deleting clause 30 (1) – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So there is anonymous testing?

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, just as I have said – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But clause 30(1) is just explaining what is meant by “anonymous testing”; why do you have a quarrel with that?

DR TUMWESIGYE: Madam Chair, I recognise that when you closely read this clause, it says, “It shall not be required to provide a name, age, address or any other information that may potentially identify him or her” which tends to leave to discretion of what information to give to the participant. But on the other hand, the participant, having read this might also ask you why they should give you age since it is stated in the law that age should not be given. But I want to give you an example where anonymous testing was used and where age and possibly address could have been relevant. 

For a long time, before we started having sero-behavioral surveys – where you check on the prevalence in the whole country – we used to depend on antenatal surveillance systems; where routinely, a sample of pregnant women would allow that we take their blood across various hospitals and this blood would be brought and tested in Uganda Virus Research Institute without the names of those women but with the age. And age would help us to know that, for example, women aged 15 to 19, the prevalence was much higher than those aged between 20 and 24. And the age was relevant.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, have you read the proposal by the chair?

DR TUMWESIGYE: I have read the proposal and it tends to limit to only names, which is okay because you do not want age and address to be put under restricted information.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 30 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, clause 32 talks about discrimination in the workplace (page 16 of the Bill). The proposal here is that we want to re-number the clause appropriately. And the justification is for proper chronological numbering since there appears two clauses numbered as “32”.

For clause 32(3), we propose to re-draft the provision to read as follows: “A health institution shall provide free of cost: 
(a) 	International guidelines to all persons working or present in health institutions who may be occupationally exposed to HIV with appropriate training for the use of the universal precautions provided in the second schedule.”
(b) 	Post exposure prophylaxis to persons exposed to HIV with appropriate counselling services.

Justification: We need this for specificity and clarity purposes. This is because the definition of “Health institution” has been introduced in the Bill. And, secondly, there is need for the Bill to make reference to the second schedule where the universal precautions have been provided. Also, post exposure prophylaxis is the treatment given to the people who have been exposed to HIV.

And then, Madam Chair, for clause 32(4), we also propose to re-phrase it entirely to read as follows: “Subject to sub-section (3), a health institution shall assist the person who acquires HIV to access HIV-related treatment.”

And the justification for this is: (i) For clarity (ii) Issues to do with the compensation of employees by employers are provided for in the Workers’ Compensation Act, Cap 225. (iii) The duty to provide HIV/AIDS related treatment should not be placed on the institutions but be left to the State.

For clause 32(5), we propose to re-phrase the entire sub-clause to read as follows: “Every health institution shall, within 60 days of the commencement of this Act, ensure that the universal precautions on post exposure prophylaxis in accordance with the regulations are complied with.”

The justification here is that: (i) The substitution of the word “Institution” with “Health institution” is a consequential amendment arising from the amendments made to sub-clause (3) above. (ii) The words deleted in paragraph (a) are unnecessary details. (iii) The deletion of paragraph (b) is a consequential amendment arising from the main amendment made to sub-clause (4) above. 

Clause 32(6), we propose to redraft the provision to read as follows: “Notwithstanding the provisions of this Act, a policy introduced by an employer shall not require mandatory HIV testing including pre-employment HIV testing.”
The justification is that the word “Require” is more appropriate than the word “Specified”. Two, the deletion of the words, “After requirement for claiming treatment and compensation” appears after the word “Testing” in line three, is to broaden the provision to apply in all cases. 

Clause 32(7) we propose to substitute for the word “An” appearing in line one with the word, “Or”. The justification is for easy and practical implementation. 

And finally, in clause 32(a), we propose to substitute the words “An Institution providing health care services”, appearing at the beginning of the provision with the words, “A health institution”. This is for consistence with amendments made to sub-clause (3) above. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there are several clauses amendment. Let us go one by one. Okay, 32(3); I put the question that that clause be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Sub-clauses 32(4), 32(5), 32(6), clause 32(7), as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 32(8)

DR OKUONZI: I want clarification from the chair. When he puts the words, “A health institution” instead of ‘”An institution”, does he want to exclude institutions which are normally not designated as health but which do provide some services – is he aware of that?

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the head note? 

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The amendment to 32(8) – if I may read verbatim as it appears in the Bill: the head note of clause 32 talks about discrimination in the work place. And in clause 32(8), it reads: “An institution providing healthcare services shall ensure basic cleanliness and hygiene and implementation of infection control measures in accordance with the regulations and any other laws for the time being enforced.” 

Our amendment to this was to substitute for the word “Institution” appearing there with a “Health institution”. 

We preferred a health institution because we wanted to make amendment to define a health institution; to say, an institution may mean any other institution literary defined. So we are defining the term institution here. 

DR OKUONZI: Madam Chairperson, I think that is the reason why originally this clause was put, because there are some institutions which are not specifically designated as health institutions which do provide some type of services which are important and we cannot exclude them by hiding under this new amendment. 

MR KABAJO: In support of the honourable who has been previously holding the floor, we have organisations like AIDS Information Centre which carry out tests. If those are not classified as health institutions, in clause 32(8), if you change “Institutions” to “Health institution”, you might exclude those, which we do not want to exclude. 

There are other institutions which provide such services, like family planning services, which could also be allowed to carry out HIV testing services. Therefore, the change the chairperson is proposing will not be in the best interest of the public who are served by these organisations.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, I think the gospel of hon. Kabajo and hon. Dr Okuonzi, has entered me properly, because if we say health institution we will be completely disregarding AIDS Information Centre, TASO and a variety of NGOs which are not health units but are doing this work and we will be abandoning the masqueraders in health - like hon. Ken Lukyamuzi talked of masqueraders in law - so I want us to capture everybody who is providing these services. So I am kindly requesting him to withdraw it. 

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, we concede to that; let it remain as it is in the Bill. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that the original sub-clause (8) do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, on clause 35, with the headnote, “Exclusion from credit and insurance services”. Clause 35(4)(a), we propose to substitute for the words, “Commissioner for insurance”, appearing in the last line with the words, “Insurance Regulatory Authority”. 

We say this because the insurance regulatory authority as an agency of Government is responsible for regulating the insurance sector and we think is best placed to carry out that mandate. Thereafter, that amendment, we propose to substitute for the words, “Commissioners of insurance” wherever they appear under this section with the words “Insurance regulatory authority”.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I thought the numbering had changed but probably what he was reading was (35) in the original text, which shows that what the chairperson was referring to was (34) with the heading “Prohibition from public service”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, it is (35) “Exclusion from credit and insurance services”.

MR OBOTH: There was a repetition of (32) for the record and you may have to refer to it. Whereas you rightly said (35), the chairperson is following the original text and he went to “Exclusion from credit and insurance services” and we left out (34). I thought (34) in the original text becomes (35) in the -

THE CHAIRPERSON: They will be renumbered sequentially. Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 35 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, clause 36 has a footnote; “Discrimination in health institutions”. I want to emphasise that this is (36) as it appears in the Bill. We propose to delete the words “Or be charged a higher fee for any such services” appearing in line two. We propose this to avoid vagueness and abuse.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What are you amending?

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, clause 36 with the footnote; “Discrimination in health institutions”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Read the full sentence and how you want it to appear.

DR OMONA: Let me first read the original one, Madam Chairperson, to inform Members: “A person shall not be denied access to health care services in any health institution or be charged a higher fee for any such services on the grounds only of the person’s actual, perceived or suspected HIV status”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, how do you want it to read? What is the rationale for amending it?

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, let me admit that we will take it as it is in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 36 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, in clause 37 as it is in the Bill “Access to health care services”, we propose to delete the entire clause because we think it is covered entirely in clauses 35 and 36.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 35 is credit and insurance services, isn’t it?

DR OMONA: Yes, Madam Chairperson and (36) talks about discrimination in health institutions. If I may read (37) verbatim, “A health institution, whether public or private, and health management organisation or medical insurance provider, shall facilitate access to health care services to persons with HIV without discrimination on the basis of HIV status.”

Madam Chairperson, we thought that the spirit in (37) is covered in (35) and (36) and if that is the case, we would propose deleting (37).

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, I was about to agree with the chairperson but then I saw that in (37), there are other organizations, especially health management organisations and medical insurance providers, which are not covered in (36). If (37) was only talking about a health institution, whether public or private that shall facilitate access to healthcare to persons with HIV, that would be okay because it is already covered under clause 36. However, (37) also talks about health management organisations or medical insurance providers and I am envisaging a situation where a health insurance company would want to discriminate and refuse to offer medical insurance to somebody on the basis of being HIV positive.

So the question is, are those types of organisations properly covered under what is referred to in clause 36? If they are not properly covered, then it would be better to leave it as it is.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want clarification. I do not know whether by deleting (37) and then leaving clause 35(4)(c), we are not contradicting ourselves. This is because clause 35(4) states that “Where an applicant elects to undergo an HIV test pursuant to sub-section (3) and the results thereof are positive, in (c) the insurer may decline granting the cover being sought.” Unless that clause was deleted, but if it stands, then (37) contradicts it, in my view - clause 35(4)(C).

DR OMONA: Thank you, honourable minister. Madam Chairperson, we thought that the insurance operators have got a choice to discriminate but basing on costs and also depending on what they cover under their insurance schemes. The segregation here would be basically determined by the costs involved. There are some insurance companies or operators that may, as we went on finding out, want comprehensive data about the health of the persons they are insuring. In some cases, they decline to cover, within a certain product of their services, those who are HIV positive because of fear of other complications associated with HIV/AIDS.

So, Madam Chairperson, this was the thinking of the committee.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have listened carefully to the explanation given by the chairperson. However, he has not covered other organisations. Rather, he has just emphasised the insurers. An honourable member raised the issue of other institutions that also provide health related services to those who are infected. So if, because of the medical insurers, we exclude this, then it means we shall not be able to capture other organisations from which people benefit. I think we can delete the issue of the health service insurers but maintain other organisations that provide services related to HIV/AIDS. Thank you.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Madam Chair, perhaps we might have to re-commit clause 35 because it tends to discriminate against HIV. When you look at 35(4)(b) and (c) they say: “The insurer may impose a reasonable additional premium to the benefits ordinarily purchased or the insurer may decline granting the cover being sought.” And you can find most of the insurers might want to decline and I know even in the US, this was the debate under the “Obama care” trying to have exclusions of HIV and cancer, among others. I think the insurers should be able to say, “Okay, if you have this condition, maybe we shall not allow covering beyond this amount of money or we can impose additional premium.” But to say that you should not cover completely – I think it is not fair.

Then – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: How do you force an insurer to cover you?

DR TUMWESIGYE: But by stating it here, you are almost saying – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, it is “May”; how do you force an insurer to insure you?

DR TUMWESIGYE: And then clause 37, where we are talking about access to healthcare services, I think it is put here for emphasis. If you remove it, because it is catered for under 35, maybe the emphasis is lost. I think here you are coming out to clearly state that there should be no discrimination based on HIV status. And I want to submit that clause 37 remains for emphasis and clause 35(4)(c) should be removed but (b) remains. The reason I am saying this is that most of the health insurance companies always want to use pre-existing conditions – not only for HIV but even other chronic diseases – to discriminate against people. And I believe we should not allow them to do so. Rather, they should impose a penalty, say, we are going to put a limit so that if you go beyond this amount of money, then we shall not cover you. But discriminating people based on pre-existing conditions is not good.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, we have already passed that. You will ask for a re-committal later. Let us proceed with clause 37. I put the question that clause 37 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, we are proposing to delete the entire provision because of the consequential amendments arising from the amendment made to clause 18(2).

THE CHAIRPERSON: What are those?

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, we took this looking at clause 18(2) before the House passed it yesterday.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, committee chair, these are not related. Suppose I deny you a promotion, is that under clause 18?

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, if I read clause 18 as it is in the Bill, “A person who contravenes any of the provisions of this part shall be liable for a civil wrong.” And Madam Chair, we had had the same reason for deleting clause 18 – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, committee chair, this is something completely different. That is why I asked you that: If I am your employer and I deny you promotion because you are HIV positive, can’t you sue me?

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, consequently, we had the same arguments for 18(2) yesterday and I think we withdraw our amendment. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chair, I would like to appeal to the committee chair that he should maintain clause 38.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But he has withdrawn the amendment. Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 38 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, before we go to clause 39, we are proposing to insert another provision to read as follows: “Protection of Children Living with HIV against Discrimination: A parent or guardian or a person having custody of a minor shall not discriminate against him or her on the grounds of the minor’s actual, perceived or suspected HIV status.”

And our justification here is that we need to provide for protection of children living with HIV against discrimination by parents or caretakers. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed by the chair.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause, as added, agreed to.

Clause 39

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, clause 39 talks about attempted transmission of HIV. The committee proposes the deletion of the entire clause. And the justification is that it may be very difficult to establish the threshold of attempt in this case.

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Chair. Right from yesterday, when we were moving amendments, we realised that some people can deliberately cause a person to get HIV either through rape or when they are aware that they are infected and then decide to woo another into sex. So why don’t we just improve the English here – like the nurse who deliberately attempted to transmit HIV. This is because when you discover that you have deliberately transmitted HIV -

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Chair. The information I want to give the honourable from Iganga is that what she is talking about – the intentional transmission – is catered for under clause 41, which is soon to come but this one is “Attempted” to – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we are looking at attempt.

MS KABAALE: As guided by the Speaker of Parliament, the chair must also buy our input into this Bill. So we kindly ask you to improve on the English and we maintain this clause by saying – I am proposing – “A person who deliberately transmits HIV to another person commits a felony.” Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then you have gone to clause 41.

MR ALEPER: Madam Chair, I still think this clause must remain. For example, we have got cases where nurses have been arrested for transmitting HIV using syringes which contain contaminated blood. Now, the word “attempt” here gives a scenario where a nurse is supposed to treat a patient but she is also aware that blood is contaminated and she puts it in a syringe. And it happens that one of the workers within the hospital gets to know that this nurse is about to transmit HIV to someone – that is the attempt we are talking about. So in that event, she must be liable; so this provision must remain.

MR BIGIRWA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I tend to buy the committee’s idea because from the beginning, while I was reading this, I was asking myself how attempted transmission can be interpreted or understood. My colleague here raised the issue of imagining – the matter, which I think is before court, of this nurse. But transmission of HIV is not necessarily through syringes and the rest. So I think the committee must have done enough research and wide consultations as far as this issue is concerned. To me it is vague for one to imagine attempted transmission – to me it is an imagination and that is why I support the committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, suppose you collect contaminated blood in sufficient quantities for purposes of – isn’t that an attempt? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] You are prepared. (Laughter)

MS KATAIKE: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would like to continue where a colleague behind here also put a scenario; we are also aware that we have people who are infected but many times try to rape others. Even in that case, they may fail to rape someone because maybe I am a strong woman who overpowered him. But I still have to go to Police to report because they take advantage.

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would like to support the chairperson. (Interjections) Please, listen to me. Why am I doing this? This is because this particular clause is going to affect the women and more so the rural women. What I know about men is that when they are infected, they will accuse their wives of infecting them – that is what they always assume. In order to protect the rural woman, let us delete this clause because it is the woman to suffer most. Why do you want to criminalise the women? And even when you look at the percentage of people affected by HIV/AIDS, it is the women who are the most affected. So let us delete it.

MS GALIWANGO: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would support that the clause remains given the fact that contrary to what my colleague, hon. Mutyabule, has said that it is the women to suffer, indeed it is true that it is the women and the girl child to suffer. Many times, there have been attempts of rape and defilement and the culprits have been discovered and are stopped before they do it. And yet they know that they are aiming at transmitting HIV since the person would have known their status. If I know I am HIV positive but I want to go to bed with a young boy who is not yet infected and I am discovered before I do it, I am liable to prosecution. Therefore, I support that the clause remains.

MS NINSIIMA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to submit that what we were being told is that in the courts of law, there is likely to be a very big challenge to prove “Attempted transmission” and that is the reason we were being advised to leave out “Attempted transmission” since we have “Intentional transmission” because it is a little more practical to prove “Intentional” than “Attempted”.

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Chair. We were here listening carefully right from yesterday. But when we entered, we were given four pieces of information – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Who gave you?

MS KABAALE: We found them being distributed. And in that same line, we are wondering whether some people should now support the papers that have been distributed to us. That is why the debate is changing because some of them indicate women and so forth.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, those papers did not come through the Office of the Speaker.

MS MUJUNGU: Thank you, Madam Chair. For every offence, there is an attempt and that remains rare – the intention of someone’s mind. So Madam Chair, someone who has an evil mind but fails to do something - that amounts to attempt. He has failed to do it but he had an intention of doing it. So whoever attempts to transmit HIV should be punished. So I support this position entirely. (Applause)

MS LUMUMBA: Madam Chair, I support the position that we keep this clause but my concern is about the penalty of 12 currency points. How much is that – that is Shs 240,000; or imprisonment of not more than five years. The currency points are not commensurate to the number of years for imprisonment or the offense which the individual who has survived will have survived. So I suggest we increase the currency points. 

MR GODFREY LUBEGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have a question. Who is to blame? Some people do it indirectly and others directly. For example, a doctor may be bribed to give wrong information, for instance, on people who are going to get wedded. One may ask a doctor to claim they are negative and afterwards, she discovered that the man was infected. So who is going to be punished for that crime?

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I do not agree with the colleague who said it will be difficult for the courts of law to determine whether there was an attempt or not. The burden of proof is upon the complainant. He must bring witnesses to prove that the person attempting- 

Secondly, HIV is spread through several ways: sexual intercourse, blood transfusion and sharing sharp instruments. Colleagues are debating as if HIV is spread only through sex - for example, in my culture, in Bugisu, we do circumcision. If one intentionally uses a knife after circumcising boy A and uses it on boy B knowing very well that you should take precaution not to contaminate the blood of the two. Where it is proved that you wanted to contaminate their blood and say, infect my son, definitely, I will have a case against you. So, Madam Chairperson, I plead with colleagues to let the clause say, “Intension”, and leave the burden of prove to the complainant.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want to start from the premise of the Penal Code. In the Penal Code, we have the crime of rape and there is attempted rape. If you look at the Domestic Violence Act, there are crimes related to attempt. So in the principle of law, criminal intent is an offense. 

So on the basis of principle, 39 is correct. Secondly, I want to plead with the women of this country that I move an amendment to state that pregnant women who test and their partners do not accompany them, their results should not be disclosed. I did that because I felt we needed to protect the women of this country. 

So, I appeal that we should not on the principle of attempted and intentional transmission look at this only on the side of women. Let us look at the principle of a person infected who intentionally wants to transmit the disease; whether you are a woman or a man. 

The law is blind; when you make a law, you have to do it blindly. And in a circumstance where – (Interruption)

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chair, while I appreciate the concerns of my honourable colleague, I want us to differentiate; if somebody is pregnant and she is not married and she goes to antenatal clinic, certainly she will not go with her husband because in any case, she may not have one –(Interjections)– people are not necessarily impregnated by their husbands. She has a good argument and I want us to develop it further. What is the essence for withholding the results for such a person? Is the idea to allow her to spread the disease or what?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, the law will state, “partner or husband” they are both covered. 

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, you have rightly stated, it is partner. So, as we come to this particular part seven, let us look at the law as blind. We are looking at a person who is infected, be it a man or a woman whose intention is to transmit or attempt to transmit HIV. Whether you are a man or a woman that is wrong on principle and for that I am standing to support that 39 should be retained. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Chairperson, we are making a law that should be utilised and we have tenets of a good law; a law should not be vague. If it is vague and unclear, it leads to absurdity. I want to inform you that when you talk about HIV/AIDS that is a very complex matter. For example, there is this belief that when you are circumcised, your chances of getting HIV/AIDS are reduced. When a circumcised man meets with a woman who is infected, she is not able to transmit HIV to that man. Therefore, when you say, “attempted”, then it is vague. 

Madam Chairperson, we should not take this as something that is beyond our control. Remember, when HIV was at 30 percent, through education and advocacy, it reduced to six percent. Now, we want to criminalise it. By the way, I want us to test this law and you will come back and tell me. You will criminalise it and you will see the effects. 

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. To me, whereas we are making this law now definitely, if any law comes into force, there are some people who will suffer and those who will gain from it.  We have read in papers and even experienced it from our relatives and our children who have been raped. A man is HIV positive, but he wants to push his thing into this young girl. So as we try to lower the rate of HIV in Uganda, it is important that intentional transmission of HIV should be avoided through a law. That is the reason why this clause of attempted transmission of HIV – having read and even gotten experience from relatives, who have HIV through sexual intercourse –(Interjections)– Madam Chairperson, we are debating and we are in the city of Kampala. But I want to inform this House that when people go up country, especially men, and they know that they are sick, they want to spread the virus to the rural women. So the law is right, we should stay the clause. 

MR TUMWESIGYE: I thank you, Madam Chairperson, and I agree with the sentiments of Members of Parliament on attempted transmission comparing it with attempted rape and others. But I want to plead with you to look at clause 39 closely, which is very different from clause 41. 

I want to give you an idea; in Uganda as I said, we have approximately 1.5 million people who have HIV. Out of those, most of them are aged 20 years and above. Maybe one million of those have spouses or partners. Now, for every 100 HIV positive people, some of them without their knowledge, 60 of them have an HIV negative spouse; they are discordant, which means, 600,000 Ugandans who are positive have an HIV negative partner and either with knowledge or without knowledge. And for every HIV transmission, it begins with a discordant person.  So, do you see a situation where people possibly were discordant but one partner develops a quarrel with the person who is HIV positive in this relationship and they may even have children; and she or he takes this person to court, for attempting to transmit HIV? 

In short, this attempted transmission, because we do not have an adequate measuring yard stick of attempt, we do not have a proper definition of “attempt” and considering the number of people that are leaving in discordant relationships in Uganda, I would beg that we delete this; aware that we have many Ugandans, some of them your children and they are living and studying with people who are HIV negative who are likely to be stigmatised –(Interruption)

MR ALEPER: Madam Chairperson, I raise on a point of order. Is the honourable minister in  order to say that there is no right definition of the word, “Attempted” and yet it is very clear in ordinary English usage that the word “Attempt”- my honourable colleague there defined it as “intent or having an ill mind” to do something. Is the minister in order to say there is no definition?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister and members, we should not just concentrate on sexual transmission. Supposing I am in hospital; I go to the blood bank, identify infected blood and move to a particular patient; but I am only arrested with my blood trying infusion. Isn’t that an attempt? Honourable members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, this is about offenses leading to breach of confidentiality. The chairman can advise me; I do not know if this section caters for those doctors like my honourable colleague stated, who tell lies. The patient-doctor relationship is fiducial. There are people who connive with the doctor to say they are negative. I do not know if the doctor said that you are positive and yet the information between you and the doctor is confidential – I do not know if that is our understanding of confidentiality – I do not know if the chairman gets me. There are patients who connive with the doctors to say they are okay; they give false results, which is also confidential anyway because the discussion was between me and the doctor. Does this clause cater for them?

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, maybe I did not hear properly what hon. Odonga Otto said initially because there were a lot of mummers from behind. Madam Chairperson, can I have hon. Otto make his case again?

MR ODONGA OTTO: The section says, “Any health practitioner who breaches medical confidentiality or unlawfully discloses information regarding HIV status of any person -”. There are people who connive with doctor to give false results. The discussion between me and the doctor – I may know that I am HIV positive, but I tell the doctor that tell my spouse that I am negative. But that is already medical confidentiality. So I do not know whether they are making it an offence for that doctor to tell the spouse that I am positive even when I confidentially agreed with him to say I am negative. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I have not understood you. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. A very well trained doctor like me, you are completely bound by medical ethics! For us where we studied from and where we practice, it is very difficult for any well-educated doctor to give somebody negative results when they are positive; it cannot happen. The only problem I have is abuse of this thing we have finished. People will see someone standing with people’s daughters and they claim that this boy attempted to spread the disease and they will start putting people in prison for nothing. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, attempt will be a question of evidence; please and we have finished with that.

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On Clause 40, which relates to offences related to breach of confidentiality, we propose to substitute the entire provision and amend it to read as follows:” 40 Breach of confidentiality by medical practitioners or qualified officers. A complaint against a medical practitioner or qualified officer for breach of confidentiality may be made to their respective established bodies in accordance with the Medical and Dental Practitioners Act Cap 272 and Allied Health Professionals Act Cap 268 by any person.”

Madam Chairperson, we say this because we want to ensure consistency with the already existing provisions relating to inquiry into professional misconduct like the Medical and Dental Practitioners Act Cap 272 and the Allied Health Professionals Act Cap 268.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, are you saying that if I commit this offence I am only subjected to professional discipline but not to the Penal Code? That is what you are saying.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, your guidance is in order. I do not know why the chairman is taking complainants to the professional body when the whole Bill, which we are considering, has created criminal liability and yet for this specific one on confidentiality, you want to take it differently. In any case, that does not answer hon. Odonga-Otto’s fear on how we pronounce doctor in Italian. Doctor is the Italian pronunciation of a doctor.

Madam Chairperson, in my view confidentiality here has to be a matter of fact. You cannot have a negative result and you ask a doctor to give you a positive one or vice versa and then you say it is confidentiality. I just wanted to answer hon. Odonga-Otto on his role on doctor.

The chairperson of the committee, Dr Omona should help and tell us the rationale as to why he is shifting this very good provision from this law to another law. If you have conflict of interest, you could also declare them.

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson and I thank hon. Oboth and hon. Odonga-Otto for showing concern about this particular clause. On record and if that is what hon. Oboth may take to be conflict of interest, let me declare that I am a medical doctor and a practitioner but I do not take this clause for any personal interest. I just think that we should legislate beyond that.

Madam Chairperson, having heard the contributions from colleagues and as it is, yes sometimes we have to compromise and move forward. I want to plead with colleagues that I concede but with an amendment on the penalty. We should amend the penalty as this one is so grave. According to the Bill, it is talking about ten years. We think that this is so grave or heavy. I would propose two years and the equivalent currency points.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I agree entirely because when you look at the punishment for confidentiality, it is very grave compared to that of intent to infect the person. So possibly this could also go for five years and the same currency points of 20 like in the other case.

MS ALUM: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. If we are making a law, it should be uniform for everybody whether you are a doctor or a patient. When you go wrong, the law must catch you. We have been talking about five years and we should maintain the five years. 

However, Madam Chairperson, I would like to refer to what hon. Odonga-Otto mentioned about this doctor who gives false information, in this case to a third party. Now that we are dealing with the offences, I do not see where we are going to cater for that if we leave this part without mentioning something related to false information given to a third party or to a spouse after the doctor connives with the husband or wife.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, I want to thank the chairman of the committee for conceding because we have to create statutory offences and that is what we are doing now. However, regarding reducing the sentence, I would not buy that. You see, we have to deter people from doing that kind of thing. Someone comes to test and you are a doctor dressed in a white robe and you look like a real doctor - Yes, you know I studied Latin for four years so you will excuse my accent. After that, you leave the hospital and the doctor is in a bar telling people that this person who was here today and he is positive - I think that must be punished severely.

Moreover ten years is just a maximum sentence. The courts can give you one year or two but we are saying, it should not exceed ten years.  It passes a very strong message to the young people out there. Court can even just caution you depending on how lucky you are that day.

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, I want to bring the attention of Members to Clause 21 where we talked about exceptions to confidentiality and I want us to direct our attention to clause 21(1)(e). We passed clause 40 and we should also be mindful that those other exceptions are catered for very clearly here. It may not have been mentioned here but this should also cater for that.

Hon. Odonga-Otto, I want to plead with you. There are stringent laws in certain countries for instance in the USA about negligence. When a health worker commits himself to take care of a patient, he has committed himself and anything that takes place without him will work against him. As I speak, in the USA this implies that when at a scene of an accident a doctor takes trouble to approach an accident victim and says, “What is your name and what is the problem” it implies that the doctor has committed that person to his care and if he does not take care of that person, the law will act against him.

In those circumstances, unless you have the time, you can see somebody suffering and dying because you fear that the law may act against you. So I want to plead with you that if you make it so stringent, it may not be my problem because I also need a doctor but it may be a problem. If you make it very tight for doctors, they may keep away from offering certain services for fear. I am just pleading with you that at least let the penalty be some lenient penalty. I think this is-

MS GALIWANGO: Madam Chairperson, it is true that when a doctor discloses to a third party, it is an offence. But I would also plead with the Members that we reduce it to five years instead of ten and 20 currency points. This is because when somebody attempts to kill another person, he is given five years. In this case, someone is telling another person to be careful, this person is like this. They should have an equal punishment. That is my plea to the Members. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, the test is higher for the professional because you take an oath. The other person does not take an oath but the doctor takes an oath.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Whereas we understand the dilemma of the medical doctors in this House, I also implore them to understand the dilemma of the possible patients that would lose trust in you and you cannot compensate trust. When confidentiality is breached, there is no amount that can compensate for it. But as one Member stated here, for the sake of uniformity whereas this is a different offence, probably we could borrow from the preceding clause and have it at five years. We all need to set the standard a little higher because we do not want doctors who gossip. We want to have confidence in them and we want good doctors like hon. Bitekyerezo and the ones who are in this House.

MR OKUONZI: Thank you very much. Hon. Odonga-Otto raised an issue which when I look through, I do not see an answer to. The chairperson has made a lot of amendments and maybe some of those amendments have answered them because I cannot remember all of them.

Breach of confidentiality is what we are discussing here but hon. Odonga-Otto was raising the issue of falsification of results. I wonder whether this has been captured anywhere. Maybe it has in the amendments because I cannot follow them properly but they need to be addressed somehow.

There is also unethical disclosure –(Interruption)

MS KAYAGI: Thank you, madam Chairperson. I want to draw the attention of the House to clause 18 and I hope this clause will answer the fears of hon. Odonga Otto. It says, “a host unit or medical practitioner involved in HIV testing shall take reasonable measures to ensure that the testing process is carried out efficiently.” This efficiency also includes giving out true results. I believe that when you test someone, you again tell the person the results and when you are telling them, you should ensure that the results are genuine.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I had a similar question in my mind but I want to ask Members to wait until we get to Clause 44, which talks about misleading information or statements and then we can see how to fit in the issue of falsification of results.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes minister, hon. Elioda?

MS OPENDI: Can I conclude so that I do not come back? Madam Chairperson, still on Clause 40 we are talking about a health practitioner and when I look at the definitions, I do not seem to see who a health practitioner is because in other clauses, we are talking about a medical practitioner. So who is a medical practitioner and who is a health practitioner? There is need for a clear definition of “health practitioner” so that it is not confused.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, we shall include that in the interpretation. Hon. Dr Tumwesigye.

MR TUMWESIGYE: Perhaps I will start with that. In the definition there is the term “medical practitioner” which means those who are registered under the Medical and Dental Practitioners Act but there is no definition for “health practitioner”. However, a few minutes ago one of the hon. Members of Parliament did say that as long as something is in the dictionary, we can always refer to it even if it is not explicitly indicated in the interpretation. This means that some of the definitions, as defined by the dictionaries, can be taken in here.

I have a submission on Clause 40 and that is on breach of confidentiality. I want to plead with Members that ten years is too long for this and really, equating it to intentional transmission and others and you take somebody for ten years- In some places, you find a whole district has one doctor. What are the other effects of this doctor being taken away for ten years? People are going to die.

I would hasten to add and propose at least five years or even better, two years. This is enough punishment and we must note that when you look at clause 21 on confidentiality, sometimes what you are to disclose- There is no clear black and white, there are shades of grey like Clause 21(e) where the medical practitioner feels- You may know somebody in continuous or close contact with an infected person and feel that is likely to endanger that person by causing transmission. You tell her or him that, that person is likely to be positive and then somebody turns that around and says, “You have broken confidentiality” and you go for ten years on the waters. 

Madam Chairperson, I want to plead with Members to reduce the sentence from ten years to about five or two years. I also wish to add - Okay, I rest my case. Thank you.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Chairperson, I am baffled. Say for example I am a doctor and I have tested and know the health status of a friend of mine who is very close to my niece, daughter, my close relative, a friend or my wife. I call and say, “My niece, I know that person you are attached with is likely to endanger your health and might be positive.” Because of love, this lady runs and says, “My uncle the doctor has told me that you are positive.” So how do we handle that, Madam Chairperson?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, it is covered under 21(e) which we have passed.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I also wanted to give the hon. Minister the same information that exceptions have been created in this Bill. Even when we talk about a doctor disclosing or what you feel the doctor should cover, you can create it under an exception clause. However for this case, you cannot move and take away the discretionary powers of the courts because the disclosure could be for a good cause or it might be someone who may be into media and they put an announcement and post on Facebook saying, hon. Ssasaga has been testing today and he is positive. In that case, that person deserves ten years. So let us leave it to the discretion of the courts of law to determine the extent.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Even for the severity of the sentence, the court will determine. If they give you six months – what the provision is saying is that not more than 10 years. It cannot exceed 10 years. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, I raised a very strong argument for maintaining 10 years but I want, with your permission, to change my mind because having read 21, 21 allows a medical practitioner to give that information where you see someone is in continuous contact and if the nature of the contact in the opinion of  the practitioner poses a danger – because most of these disclosures by doctors are for those who are positive – that you take care there because you may hit a landmine. So, it then becomes contradictory to give 10 years because most of them are happening in good faith –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, hon. Member. The key word is “unlawfully”. In 21, we have given conditions under which you can disclose. This is unlawful where you go to face book and – 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I would suggest that you give it two years and not 10. 

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you. The main purpose of making any law is for public interest. When you are looking at any case, courts look out for motive - well, the main purpose of the law is mainly for deterrence and punishment. The lawyers are fond of talking about the spirit and letter of the law and that the main purpose that we are making all these laws is for mainly deterrence, ensuring professional performance and efficiency.

Therefore, I do not see any problem of why we should argue whether this should get less or more years. The moment you know what you are supposed to do and you do not do it, you should face the law and the punishment. So, I would like to say that the spirit of this Parliament for most of the laws that we have passed here is to deter and prevent so that when you do it, you know you will pay for it. I suggest that we keep the years as they are there because the purpose is to deter and make every practitioner clear.

What I want to point out, Madam Chairperson, is that I have looked at other laws referring to health practitioners. I have looked at three different Acts and they are separating the health practitioners in three categories. They are saying that those who are 10 years and are supervisors and there are those who are medical practitioners and they are saying those who act under supervision. They are giving different regulations for them; those who work under supervision are not punished as much as those who are supervisors. The supervisors are given a higher punishment than those who work under their supervision. 

So, I do not know since the definition between medical practitioner and health practitioner, as the Minister has raised, is not clear; there is need to differentiate that. The one that I was specifically looking at was the one for New Zealand made in 2013 which is Head Health Practitioner Assurance Performance Act. They are saying that those who work under others, because they are under supervision, should get less punishment. So I wanted that definition to be made of what we are referring to. Who is a “health practitioner” so that we know what we are talking about otherwise if that is for purposes of deterrence, we keep the years. I thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So hon. Gen. Tumwine, I hope that we shall benefit from the text of that when we come to the interpretation section. Finally, hon. Oboth. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chair. Well as I am aware that punishment serves several purposes,  not only to deter but I am also aware that we have offences in this country or in the world that have one of the worst or very harsh punishment but they have not been deterred, including murder. We sometimes fail in the objective of the law when we try to go for these offenders with open hands and eyes.

In this provision, the law is not proposing a maximum and you had guided clearly. Where a law is not providing for a maximum, it can even be a caution. I needed to help Dr Omona and many of them who may not be familiar with this that when the law says that not more than two or both - anything not more than – every doctor must have passed mathematics – (Interjection) – whatever, it is not more than 10. But here we are saying that in case you are so worried, some of us are proposing that we say not more than five years. So, it could be anything from zero, one or to five. Zero is a caution – (Interruption)-

DR TUMWESIGYE: Information.

MR OBOTH: On sentencing and punishment? 

DR TUMWESIGYE: Yes.

MR OBOTH: I will benefit from you.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Thank you for accepting to take the information. I know that Uganda is part of the East African Community and as much as possible, we try to harmonise our policies, laws and regulations. 

Under the East African Community HIV/AIDS Prevention Management Bill, for such offences, they are giving a term not exceeding five years. So, five years would be really fair.

MR OBOTH: Before I take further information, you are referring to that as a Bill. Right? Is it an Act?

DR TUMWESIGYE: An Act.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, there is more information from a medical doctor.

DR BARYOMUNSI: We are aware that there is a Sentencing Act that guides on the kind of penalties that should be prescribed. But one of the areas one looks at when you are defining how long should somebody be confined is how dangerous that person is to society. 

So, are we saying that a doctor who breaches confidentiality is very dangerous to society that he should be looked for up to 10 years or this could be reduced to two or five years? Is the doctor very dangerous to society?

MS KABAALE: Information.

MR OBOTH: I wanted to conclude.

MS KABAALE: Information before you conclude.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Some further information?

MS KABAALE: Yes. Thank you, Chairperson. As a Member who sits on the Committee on East African Community Affairs, I would like to buy the idea of Dr Ellioda Tumwesigye because whenever we go to compare notes regarding the laws that they are passing, they have been informing us that when we are passing our laws, they should be in line with their laws. So, I would buy the idea that we harmonise with the law that the East African Community passed. I thank you.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, if I may conclude. I believe that a sufficient case has been made in this area. The principle is agreeable to all Members here. It was not actually for your information, hon. Olivia Kabaale, it was hon. Ellioda Tumwesigye’s idea. He was giving further information citing another. But this was a proposal already in – we were proposing five years as a maximum threshold that nobody should be confined for more than five years but could be for less than that.

Hon. Baryomunsi, we are not saying – you cannot compare somebody who breaches trust and confidence. He is actually a killer who kills you while you are still walking. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, hon. Members, I would want if you are proposing to reduce the sentence independently but not to say that because the East African Legislative Assembly legislated as such. First of all, that Act has not been laid here and so we have no Judicial Notice about it. It is just a Bill. So, you make it independent but not because East Africa has said so. (Applause) Motion.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I beg to move a motion that the question be put to five years.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, let us start with the proposal that the clause be amended from 10 to five years. Is that okay? We start with that one. I put the question that the sentence be amended from 10 to five years.

(Question out and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that Clause 40, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question out and agreed to.)

Clause 40, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, hon. Members, Clause 41 is the one that I have been hearing persistently. So, this is an appropriate time to adjourn so that Members can think about it over night and we come with fresh energy tomorrow. Can I ask the mover to propose that the House resumes.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.42
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Medard Bitekyerezo): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.43
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Medard Bitekyerezo): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Bill, 2010” with amendments: Clause 21 has been amended with some addition; Clause 22 passed as it is; Clause 23 deleted; clauses 24, 25 and 26 passed as in the Bill; Clause 27 amended but part (4) deferred. Then clauses 28 and 29 amended; Clause 30 passed with no amendments; Clause 32 passed with amendments; clauses 33 and 34 passed; Clause 35 amended; clauses 36, 37, 38 and 39 passed and Clause 40 passed with amendments. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.43
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Medard Bitekyerezo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to thank you very much. It is a small Bill but apparently it needs a lot of thought. So the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.44 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 8 May 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)
