Friday, 4 May 2012

Parliament met at 1.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting which has interrupted your schedules in the budget process and also in your constituencies. Just 22 days ago, we had a special sitting in this Chamber to pay tribute to Prof. George Wilberforce Kakoma. In yet another twist of fate, we have again congregated this afternoon to pay tribute to Prof. William Senteza Kajubi. Fate has predestined the loss of the services of two great Ugandans in a period of less than one month. We are about to celebrate the 50th anniversary of our independence in October and it is sad many Ugandans whose lives and services are connected with Uganda’s independence are falling by the way side before the D-day.

As you may be aware, Prof. William Senteza Kajubi was the chair of the committee that was established to consider and approve the national anthem, the national flag and the national emblem for the young Uganda that was going to be born. The profile of Prof. Senteza Kajubi is not only long but rich and cannot be recounted in a few minutes. His legacy is greatly imprinted in the education sector of Uganda. He did not only serve as an academician and scholar but twice served as the Vice Chancellor of Makerere University and Principal of the Institute of Teacher Education, the present day Kyambogo University. Prof. Ssenteza Kajubi served many other institutions in Uganda covering a long and meritorious career spanning almost six decades.

As the chair of the Education Service Review Commission, Prof. Senteza Kajubi and his colleagues bequeathed a well thought-out and comprehensive document which is the blueprint that has guided and will continue to guide the education sector in Uganda, that is, the Kajubi Report.

On behalf of the Parliament of Uganda on my own behalf, I wish to join the other Ugandans who are mourning the loss of this great Ugandan. We would like to extend our sincere condolences to the children, the wife, friends, in-laws and the large family of Ugandans whose lives Prof. Kajubi touched. He leaves a legacy and a challenge for the people of Uganda. May his soul rest in peace.


(Entrance of the late Prof. William Ssenteza Kajubi)

National Anthem (One Verse)

Laying of wreaths

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE PROF. WILLIAM SSENTEZA KAJUBI

THE SPEAKER: Let me invite the Prime Minister to move the motion. I want to appeal to members to try and do the tribute in one hour because at 3.00 p.m. the family is expected in Namirembe for a funeral service.

1.31
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Prof. William Ssenteza Kajubi. 

“WHEREAS Parliament has learnt with deep sorrow the demise of the late Ssenteza Kajubi which occurred on the first day of May 2012 at his residence;

AND  WHEREAS the late Prof. Ssenteza Kajubi, an education professor, was instrumental in shaping Uganda’s education system since the country’s independence in 1962;

NOTING that the late Prof. Ssenteza Kajubi is to date regarded as one of Uganda’s best educationists as evidenced in several educational professional bodies and commissions which he chaired such as the 1963 and 1989 education review commissions;

RECOGONISING that the late Ssenteza Kajubi was a great education professor as illustrated by the fact that he was able to chair, direct and preside over university and other tertiary institutions;

FURTHER RECOGNISING that despite his advanced age, he was still resourceful to the young generation who sought his guidance on issues of education;

NOW, THEREFORE, it is hereby resolved by Members of this Parliament that:

1.	Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, the Government of Uganda and to all Ugandans.

2.	Parliament takes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered and contributions made by the late Prof. Ssenteza Kajubi in different capacities.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the motion is seconded.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker and honourable members, on behalf of the Government and on my own behalf, I wish to convey our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family and all the people of Uganda on the passing on of the late Prof. William Ssenteza Kajubi, which occurred on 1st May this year at his residence in Bugolobi, Kampala. It is a very sad experience for Uganda to lose yet another proficient Ugandan who shaped the future of this country in the post-colonial period.

On 12 April 2012, just less than a month ago, we gathered in this august House to pay tribute to the late George William Wilberforce Kakoma, the composer of the Uganda National Anthem. Prior to independence, a sub-committee for the creation of the national anthem was set up. It was one of the three sub- committees established to deal with Uganda’s national symbols. Prof. Ssenteza Kajubi was the chairman of those committees.

When the committee on the composition of the national anthem felt that all the entries for the anthem were dissatisfactory yet time was running out, it was Prof. Kajubi who rung the late Prof. Kakoma, at about 10.00p.m., and beseeched him to save the situation. He also dexterously saved it as we witnessed last month in this very House. It is therefore such a sad coincidence that both accomplished personalities will not be around when we celebrate the golden jubilee of our independence.

The late Ssenteza Kajubi can be rightly referred to as one of the most famous educationists, a man who contributed greatly to directing the country’s education identity. As we celebrate the life of the late Prof. Senteza Kajubi and mourn his demise, we need to recap on his various contributions to the development of this country. The late Kajubi’s illustrious career included the following: 

He contributed greatly when he actively participated as a member of the Inter-University Council of East Africa. He is remembered for his constructive advice to the council and his legacy for valuing people’s works; for insistence, he advised and encouraged Mrs Joyce Mpanga to join the LEGCO in 1964. He was a member of the Council of the Education Commission of 1963, which assigned the responsibility for education in Uganda to the central and local governments. He also enjoyed politics but steadfastly pursued improvement of the education sector during the turbulent years of the 1970s.

In 1977, an education policy review commission was appointed under his chairmanship. However, because of the liberation war of 1977 to 1979, its report was neither officially published nor its recommendations implemented.

The late Prof. Senteza Kajubi was also the chairman of the famous Kajubi Education Review Commission of 1989 whose deliberations resulted into the current Government White Paper on Education. Among the outcomes of this commission are the many reforms that we see in the education sector such as the introduction of universal primary education, establishment of other national universities other than Makerere University and the establishment of the National Council for Higher Education, among others.

He served as a lecturer at Makerere University before rising to the rank of Vice Chancellor of the same university twice, from 1977 to 1979 and from 1990 to 1993. He was the founder of the Department of Teacher Education at Makerere University. The late was also the head of the Institute of Teacher Education, Kyambogo from 1986 to 1989. He founded Nkumba University, where he also served as the Vice Chancellor. The late Prof. Senteza Kajubi also served as the Director of the National Institute of Education, Makerere University. His constant advice to the Central Government and the Buganda Kingdom is greatly valued. 

He was instrumental on the committee that selected the national anthem and court of arms. He participated in the national Constitution making process both in 1962 and as a colleague in the last promulgation of the 1995 Constitution, in the Constituent Assembly.

We need to appreciate the fact that the late Prof. Senteza Kajubi worked at Makerere University when it was the only university in Uganda, so there was no immediate reference to any other institution. What the late Prof. Kajubi and his contemporaries therefore delivered was original and best suited for the students of the time. It is no wonder that several universities and tertiary institutions have since been developed. The fleet of students from outside Uganda into Uganda’s several universities is testimony that this country offers standard education, the foundation of which can be attributed to Prof. Senteza Kajubi and his contemporaries. 

Prof. Kajubi leaves a strong legacy that should inspire all of us to serve our country diligently and humanely. He remained a lifelong teacher and student. According to Prof. Lugujjo, the late always moved with a pen and a notebook to write down new ideas. That was Prof. Senteza Kajubi - an intellectual always fascinated by ideas. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I invite the Leader of the Opposition to second the motion, I want to inform you that Makerere University is represented by the Chancellor, Prof. Mondo Kagonyera, and the Vice Chancellor, Prof. Venansius Baryamureeba. They are all up there in the gallery. (Applause) They are together with Professors Luboobi, Obua, Lugujjo and Associate Professor Aguti, Dr Allan Birabi and Mrs Gabona. (Applause) Members of EALA are also up there in the public gallery together with some of the presidential advisors plus many other distinguished Ugandans.

1.44
THE LEADER OF OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I stand here to second the motion for Parliament to pay tribute to the late Prof. William Ssenteza Kajubi. On behalf of the Opposition and on behalf of the family of the late Mugoya, who was my uncle, and on my own behalf, I wish to convey our sincere condolences to the family upon the death of Prof. Ssenteza Kajubi. 

Madam Speaker, sometime back, I think in the 1990s, there was one gentleman called Mugoya who was the First Secretary in the Uganda High Commission in the UK. He was my uncle. He died. He was shot in the legs during Amin’s time and when the UPC Government took power, he was taken to UK for better treatment and he was also made First Secretary. He was a career diplomat. He had married a daughter to the Prof. Kajubi and that is why today I want to declare my interest that the person lying here is my grandfather. 

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I want to thank the Prime Minister for what he has presented. He said that the professor was a hardworking person and he did a lot in Makerere. I hope he meant his words. Prof. Kajubi’s long life of hard work and success of course starts from the blackboard as a high school geography teacher and goes on to the university as a professor and later as a vice chancellor, which nobody can dispute. It is a tragedy that he has died when the education sector in Uganda needed him most.

As a politician, Prof. Kajubi represented the hot seat of Kyadondo North in the Constituency Assembly. All of you know the national fracas in 1995 that marked the breakdown of hard line dialogue and the long journey to a costly trial under one-party rule. Professor tried to entrench democratic federalism in Uganda during the Constituency Assembly - I know hon. Amama Mbabazi was there - but without success. When voters in Kyandondo North replaced him in 1996, Kajubi bowed out gracefully to another academician, Dr Israel Kibirige Ssebunya, which is very difficult for many politicians today.

As a policy maker, Prof. Kajubi will be remembered for the education policies that the government has been trying to implement in the past two decades. The findings from the Education Policy Review Commission, that is the Kajubi Commission of which he was chairperson, will undoubtedly go down as one of the most delicate and yet most commendable contributions to this country. He has died while campaigning for a hands-on and practical education system which is more relevant to Ugandans today.

As a vice chancellor, Kajubi led Makerere University during the very difficult times of structural adjustment challenges, and all of us must agree on that. The 1990 strike at Makerere University claimed the lives of two innocent students, namely, Tom Okema and Tom Onyango, who were shot and killed by Police on 10 December 1990. Of course all of you remember that in that fracas Jacob Oulanyah, the current Deputy Speaker of Parliament, was shot at and badly injured and admitted at Mulago Hospital. Prof. Kajubi is quoted to have said later, “That incident was one of the saddest days of my life.” This was during a review workshop on the quality assurance framework for higher institutions of learning. He took the political blame for the actions of others. 

Makerere University, of course, all of you remember, used to be praised, glorified and exalted. However, today Makerere University is the reverse of its past. Makerere was named the Harvard of Africa according to Narciso Matos who was the chair of Carnegie - the international corporation development programme - because both Makerere and Harvard were seen as leading institutions in their home countries. Prime Minister, Makerere was known as Harvard. Both institutions have had high profile graduates. But what do we see today? 

To keep Prof. Kajubi’s legacy as an administrator at Makerere, Government should bring to book the persons who shot dead the innocent Toms in the 1990 demonstration at Makerere University. I repeat, to keep Prof. Kajubi’s legacy as an administrator at Makerere, Government should bring to book the persons who shot dead the innocent Toms in the 1990 demonstration at Makerere University. Justice has never been seen in this incident that happened in Makerere during his time yet he takes political responsibility of an unfortunate occurrence that was not of his making. Someone shot the students and has never been made to answer. Why? Is it because their names start with “O”? It is food for thought.

Government should also provide enough funds to this formerly very prestigious Makerere University and other universities to rebuild the infrastructure from the scrap the buildings have degenerated into. We need to fund Makerere University and other universities. 

Government should also consider revisiting the learned recommendations of the Kajubi Report so that the education system benefits from his immense knowledge and experience in this particular sector.

I want Prof. Kajubi, who is my grandfather, to know that much as he cannot speak to us directly at this time, we shall greatly miss him. We will miss Prof. Kajubi the astute politician; Prof. Kajubi the policy maker; Prof. Kajubi the Vice Chancellor; Prof. Kajubi the educationist where I belong; and Prof. Kajubi the administrator, among others. 

When we lost my uncle, Prof. Kajubi was the one leading hymns. He sang all the hymns from page one to the last one without referring to them. All of them were in his head. It is then that I knew Prof. Kajubi was a real Christian. I am particularly worried that this cadre of seasoned administrators is leaving behind a huge gap which we as legislators must become concerned about. We need to become concerned about it.

I want to say farewell, Prof. Kajubi. Your sweat was not in vain; some of us will always remember you and we shall bank on you even if you have gone. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said, I would want you to keep the contributions short. May I also appeal to you to treat this with the dignity he deserves. This is a tribute to a really great man.  

1.53
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, I too rise to support the motion moved by the Rt hon. Prime Minister commending the late Prof. Senteza Kajubi for his illustrious life and service to this country and mankind. We shall all greatly miss Prof. Senteza Kajubi who has died a very eminent person by all standards. 

Prof. Ssenteza Kajubi, just like most eminent personalities of his time, had a humble background and beginning in public life. Through education, commitment, dedication to work and resolve to succeed in life, Prof. Kajubi became a household name in the education circles in Uganda and the whole of East Africa. 

He equally became a renowned figure in the administrative circles and politics in this country. We are all aware that he was a member of the Democratic Party. The Rt hon. Prime Minister has also reported that he served in the Constituent Assembly. He was the Vice Chancellor of Makerere University at a very difficult time. In this regard, he served Makerere at a time when almost everything was very difficult. However, Prof. Kajubi, like the late Frank Kalimuzo, Prof. Wandira and Prof. Lutwama, through perseverance and resolve managed to keep Makerere running and churning out students. Some of us happen to be graduates from Makerere at that time. We would like to commend him for the job that he did at that time.
 
Madam Speaker, indeed many people even after Makerere were able to access higher education through the personal efforts of people like the late Prof. Kajubi here, Prof. Nsibambi, Prof. Wandira and others whom I may not be able to mention. They utilised their international contacts gainfully with institutions like Carnegie Foundation, Rockefeller Foundation and Ford Foundation to ensure that brilliant students produced by Makerere would secure scholarships to pursue higher education not only at Makerere but in other renowned universities. That was at a time when the country did not have sufficient resources to ensure further education of brilliant students. Prof. Kajubi and the others I have mentioned made critical contributions to the furtherance of education in the pursuit of education and knowledge for many Ugandans, some of whom have now returned to be the leaders in this country today.
 
Prof. Kajubi is better known by the bulk of Ugandans in regard to the contribution he made in popularising universal education for the benefit of all. He articulated the need for universal access to education, which he further went out to amplify. Many of us who are politicians here know what universal access to education has been able to do for the bulk of the citizenry in this country. I am sure with the implementation of the UPE and USE programmes, which are now very popular, Prof. Kajubi has died with a clear assurance and certainty that he has left this country in the hands of a crop of leaders that would always ensure the evolution of his ideas. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

1.58
MRS ROSEMARY SSENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Wakiso District and on my own behalf, I wish to express our sincere condolences to the family and the nation upon the demise of another hero. It is so sad because it is hardly a month when we were here paying tribute to the late Prof. Kakoma and little did we know that it would be this short a time for the country to mourn yet another great man.
 
Dear colleagues, following independence, when the country was grappling with questions as to how to educate Ugandans when unemployment was wide spread etcetera, Prof. Kajubi was there to provide answers and solutions that have brought our education sector this far. We have lost a genius. We have lost a great educationist, a living educationist, a living education encyclopaedia and a mentor to all of us, the educationists.
 
Madam Speaker, I cannot hesitate to say that when I was the chairperson of the Social Services Committee in the last Parliament, the Kajubi Report was a very crucial instrument in the execution of our work as a committee. Our good work then for the education sector is therefore greatly attributed to his contribution. His selfless and distinguished contributions in the field of education and beyond were quite exceptional and widely recognised nationally and internationally. He touched the head, the hearts and minds of many students of education and teachers who passed through his able administrative mentorship.
 
I wish to hail the Makerere University School of Education in conjunction with the Kajubi well-wishers who on 20 December 2010 held a grand ceremony to commemorate the distinguished services of over 60 years rendered by Prof. Kajubi to his nation as a teacher and as an administrator of tertiary institutions. This was a very great honour, though a very rare opportunity, to acknowledge an achiever when he still lived. I would like to thank Makerere University for that.

I would like to thank Government – (Member timed out).

2.01
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I pay tribute to Prof. Senteza Kajubi, I must not forget to thank you personally, Madam Speaker, and the Government of Uganda for according this great son of Uganda the occasion of being here with us. (Applause) Much as I am a member of the Opposition, I must call a spade a spade.
 
I first came to know Prof. Kajubi at the Clock Tower when I was in the primary school there in P.5. He was a great communicator and a talented debater; he would rarely lose an argument in public discussions. He spoke with wit and debated with humanity. He always admired progressive people, young and old. I was a great admirer of Prof. Senteza Kajubi as an orator. He commanded speech and debate and could take an argument the way he wanted. I would not have been surprised if he had become the President of Uganda. He deserved that entire attribute.

Prof. Ssenteza Kajubi was a great admirer of great men. He admired John F. Kennedy, William Shakespeare, Julius Caesar, Bernard Shaw, Benjamin Franklin, and he admired Murder in the Cathedral. It would not be fair for me not to quote at least an excerpt from those he admired. Prof. Senteza Kajubi admired the inaugural speech of John F. Kennedy; he said, “We observe today not a victory of party but a celebration of freedom symbolising an end as well as a beginning...Ask not what your country can do for you but what you can do for your country.”

Prof. Senteza Kajubi has served Uganda. Nobody should question what he has done. He has left an education legacy, which will survive centuries and centuries. We are proud of Prof. Senteza Kajubi. (Member timed out)

2.04
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Madam Speaker, I would also like to join my colleagues in thanking the Prime Minister first of all for bringing this motion. I also want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for according us this opportunity to pay tribute to this great man of Uganda. 

I am the chairman of Buganda Parliamentary Caucus. We, members of Buganda Parliamentary Caucus, want to pay tribute to the family of the late Prof. Ssenteza Kajubi and to Uganda upon the loss of this great son. Prof. Senteza Kajubi was a member of the Nsenene clan of Buganda. He was a Salongo. He was a Member of the CA, as other members have mentioned here. He has been a very big pillar in the kingdom of Buganda, a very big adviser and a great adviser to the kingdom.

From 1963 when he was a member of the Education Policy Review Commission, he participated and chaired very many committees as has been mentioned here by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Between 1973 - the year I was born - to 1976, Prof. Senteza Kajubi was chairman of the Regional Council for Teachers’ Education for Eastern Africa and he was the advisory editor of Africa Encyclopaedia.

We want to thank God for the gift of Prof. Senteza Kajubi. Professor, you have led this country and you have made your contribution to this country. We pray that what you admired most will be put forward for the betterment of our country. For God and my country! Thank you very much.

2.08
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As the DP Whip, I want to say that we are proud; even members on the other political divide are a product of the Democratic Party, and that is what the DP can produce.

What can we learn from Prof. Senteza Kajubi? He was humble, humorous, a very understanding person and not a person who was fond of intrigue. You know, politicians these days have a lot of intrigue, trying to pull each other down. When Prof. Senteza Kajubi lost the seat, he never went to any radio station lamenting, howling or whining but continued with the struggle. 

They have talked about education but the challenge is with us Ugandans. He has educated and pioneered so many things like UPE but as we talk, 83 percent of our youth do not have employment. He has done his part together with others, but we have not lived up to what he has done. It is a challenge. Hon. Migereko has said that under the capable leadership now, they are going to fulfil that. Let me hope that by 2016, most of these youth who are benefiting from universal primary education will be having jobs.

When you read what Gureme, one of his compatriots, has written today, he has says when they were joining Buddo they came from bush schools. How many can come from Kamuli, from Karamoja, from Arua and join Buddo or these good schools? These are the things we should really fight for to see that the legacy that he has left behind lives on.

One of the first persons to identify the late Prof. Senteza Kajubi was the late Benedicto Kiwanuka. I am perturbed why his portrait is not among those here. We have been talking about this but his portrait is not here and yet he is one of those icons that we have lost.

As I conclude, I keep asking myself what kind of food, education or culture these people had that made them what they are. We are losing them; 50 years down the road as we celebrate our golden jubilee, these people are being lost. When you look at Ugandans today with their selfishness, lack of humility, pulling each other down, corruption, mention it, what - (Member timed out).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not bring controversial issues to a dignified man’s tribute. Treat him decently.

2.12
MS CHRISTINE ABIA (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I look at the portrait of the man lying in front of us today, I would be a proud mother of such a man. However, the question I ask is: how many mothers at the grassroots would have their children celebrated as we celebrate the gentleman before us today? It makes me ask the question: who are the real historicals of our country? Who are the heroes? Before us is one of them. We have celebrated bush heroes but we have not celebrated the lives of academic giants who are the real heroes. I think it is a lesson to the sitting government to begin investing in academics and the future of this country rather than investing in things that are not useful to the nation.

A celebrated educationist and academic, he left a legacy. We all acknowledge his enormous contribution in the education sector, but what prevails in our country’s education sector today? The Prime Minister attributes the enormous numbers of students coming from across the region to the excellent education system that we have. However, Mr Prime Minister, you might as well wish to know that the influx is probably because we provide the cheapest education and not necessarily that we are the best in terms of quality.

Secondly, the Prime Minister talks about a long life but I had the opportunity to visit Ohio State University and the Alban State University and I found professors who were 90 years and 99 years still in the laboratory. That makes me ask: why do we appreciate 87 years as a long time yet other people are looking at 107 years as really short? We need to appreciate the fact that 87 is actually short, and this makes me ask the sitting government: how do we treat our elderly people? What kind of medical insurance do we have for them? It seems we actually do not plan for our aging population; we just leave them at the mercy of their families and we do not celebrate them as heroes.

Madam Speaker, I have a message for Makerere University today. This gentleman lying before us was a professor because he was struggling to be in his office. Today the image we get about Makerere University is not what we used to know about the Ivory Tower. We are talking about accusations and counter accusations at the highest level. It is embarrassing for us who travel out of this country sometimes to say, “I come from Makerere University.” In the media what you see is the fight among the top leadership. (Member timed out)

2.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MINERALS (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, I rise to support this motion. As I do that, I wish to bring the apologies from the ministers of education who are not here today. They have sent their condolences to both you and the bereaved family.    

The late Prof. William Ssenteza Kajubi was a pillar in the making of what the education system of Uganda is today through the various roles he played. I, therefore, wish to salute this House and UFS for having brought his body here for us to pay tribute to him. 

This was an illustrious son of our nation. He actively participated as a member and chair of a number of education commissions. He was an administrator of education institutions at college, institute and university levels. He was a prolific writer and a very eloquent presenter at various fora, among which at one occasion he called upon the business community in this country to participate in the construction of education institutions.

He was an ardent advocate for affirmative action towards girls and special needs education. He was a dedicated and very resourceful teacher at King’s College Buddo. He had a passion for the improvement of education standards at all levels. As an old student and member of Board of Governors of Mackay College, Nateete he never missed any school activity. He was one of the major contributors to Mackay public lectures. He was a member of the Teachers for East Africa Alumni.

Borrowing from the words of Paul to Timothy in the second book of Timothy 4:7, I am here to testify on behalf of the education fraternity that Prof. William Kajubi has fought a good fight; he has finished the race and has kept the faith to serve the education industry. May the Lord rest his soul in eternal peace. Thank you. 

2.16
MR MOHAMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I learnt of the death of Prof. Kajubi, I asked myself if there would be a special sitting of Parliament to recognise and appreciate his contribution. Incidentally, I later on received an SMS about the same and I thank you, Madam Speaker, for calling this sitting.

The achievements and contribution of Prof. Kajubi are a long, staggering list which we cannot exhaust at this sitting. However, he will profoundly be remembered for his contribution in the education sector - first as a secondary school teacher, and then the principal of Kyambogo and as a vice chancellor of different universities, and his great contribution in the Kajubi Report which the government adopted as a White Paper. We now ask ourselves today: to what extent have the recommendations and suggestions in the Government White Paper been achieved? 

In that report, he considered that government should start up vocational training institutes to address the problem of unemployment. Of course, we have to remember that his earlier ambition as a young man was to study agriculture; realising that Uganda is an agro-based economy, he felt he would contribute towards it. However, he was advised by his headmaster then to pursue education because he saw in him a person who could contribute immensely to the education sector. 

Madam Speaker, in the political struggle, Prof. Kajubi is remembered as a CA delegate and his strong agitation for federalism. Unfortunately, he has passed on before this country has attained federalism as a system of governance that would enable people to access resources and equal development. 

As a politician and a strong DP member, he contributed a lot. As the Vice Chancellor of Makerere University, he met some of the politicians and advised them not to emulate some of the bad attributes that the current government has manifested in failing to fulfil some of its obligations.

For the last five years I have been in Parliament, I have not had an opportunity – I stand to be corrected – to see such eminent persons sitting in the executive gallery and being recognised. I have only seen them being laid before us here and only recognised after they have passed on. May the soul of Prof. Senteza Kajubi rest in eternal peace. Thank you. 

2.19
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Madam Speaker, I thank you for convening this special sitting. Professionally, I am also a teacher. At this point I congratulate the late for his contributions especially while he was chairperson of the Education Review Commission. I represent a rural constituency where over 80 per cent of our pupils are in the UPE sector. Therefore, his contribution to that cannot go without appreciation. On my own behalf and on behalf of the people of Buhaguzi, I extend my sincere condolences to the family and the entire nation for the loss of such a great son. 

Madam Speaker, we have heard from a large number of speakers that he was also among those who were advocating for the creation of more public universities. As Bunyoro, we regret that he has died at a time when ours has not come up yet, but we believe his soul will keep about to ensure that Bunyoro gets a public university. I believe that with the capable Government in power, there is no doubt that we shall get it. I also believe that at his time of death, he has left Uganda in a much better position than he found it. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

2.21
MR YOROKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this great opportunity to pay tribute to a great man, a great citizen, in this special sitting of Parliament. 

The late Prof. Kajubi, no doubt, goes down in history as a great man, a great citizen and a great role model for some of us who were very young when he was already in service of this country. I came this morning to view the body and met other great men like him who were comforting the family. They included Prof. Mugambi, who taught me complex numbers at Makerere. This is a class of people that has shaped this country and given us a great service; the likes of hon. Mayanja Nkangi- I was not even in primary school when Mayanja Nkangi was a minister in Government and up to now Mayanja Nkangi is still serving this country. 

It is a great honour for us to be paying tribute to Prof. Senteza Kajubi for his service. It is amazing that one man can be an embodiment of such great talents and capacities - an educationalist and a politician. Also recently, he was being interviewed on TV and he went into song - what hon. Nandala-Mafabi was referring to - and I saw such a great person.

When an African of this size and age dies, it is a library that has been burned out. I hope that we shall put mechanisms in place to capture some of the talents and ideas of such men before they pass on. (Member timed out)

2.24
MS ANIFA BANGIRANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to add my voice to thank you and the Government for giving us this opportunity to pay tribute to the late Prof. William Senteza Kajubi. The late Prof. Senteza Kajubi was not only an academician or educationist but indeed he was a nationalist. The professor cut across the barriers of colour, tribe, religion, age and political lines.

Prof. Ssenteza Kajubi was highly, and will remain highly, recognised for his historical report that was referred to as the Kajubi Report. I personally came to know him during the time of the Constituent Assembly where we were sitting according to alphabetical order. As young politicians, we came with zeal and excitement but he took time off to mentor us and take us through the historical background of this country. From that time, I came closer and closer to the professor. I can say I am one of those people who have highly benefitted from Prof. Kajubi’s tireless and endless efforts to mentor the young generation. 

My second meeting with the late Prof. William Senteza Kajubi was when I was at Nkumba University. For the five years I spent at Nkumba University, Prof. Senteza Kajubi did not only want to see us, especially the mature students, attain certificates but he had to fight to ensure that we attain development skills. He was a career developer for most of us the students who passed through his hands at Nkumba University. (Member timed out)

2.27
MR TIMOTHY LWANGA (NRM, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to a giant of a person. The late Prof. Senteza Kajubi is probably the greatest person who has ever lived in this nation of ours in this century. He was great but despite his being a giant, he was humble. 

When you think of Prof. Ssenteza Kajubi, you think of a Buddonian because he was one, you think of a politician, a humble person, a loving father, an exemplary administrator, a person who was always interested in others. You also think of a loving father not only to his children but he loved us all, and you think of a mentor and a role model. Many of us learnt a lot from Prof. Kajubi. We were really young, because I am almost the same age as his children, and I got a chance to be treated like a son and I learnt a lot from him.

What intrigues me is that in today’s Uganda, I wonder if we, the leaders, are role models to those who are looking at us. When our turn comes and we have to go, will those we leave behind us speak about us the same way we are speaking about the late Senteza Kajubi? We must have role models. We must have a way of mentoring the young so that the future of this country is assured.

The late professor has done his job. Those of us who have got the eyes and the ears have heard. It is our turn to ensure that we follow suit, learn from what he has done and we build a future that will be admired like their past has been admired by us. (Member timed out)

2.30
MR YAHAYA GUDOI (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion as a former teacher. I am a beneficiary of all that the late did. When I joined ITEK, now Kyambogo University, I read a lot of the professor’s findings and research and I got a diploma from his teachings. Secondly, when my daughter joined Nkumba University, he was the vice chancellor there so my daughter is also a beneficiary of the professor’s sweat.

When we lose such a person, it is hard to replace him. His legacy is not just floating in space but the legacy the late has left behind is traceable. He has written many books, the White Paper, the Kajubi Report, and has educated all Ugandans, even all of us Members of Parliament who are in this House. However, if all his contributions in the White Paper or the Kajubi Report were taken up by the Government, I think the education sector would be better than what it is now. (Member timed out) 

2.30
MR MARTIN DRITO (NRM, Madi-Okollo County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I represent the people of Madi-Okollo in Arua District on whose behalf I stand here and send my condolences to the family of the late Prof. Senteza Kajubi. 

Madam Speaker, the contribution of the late Prof. Kajubi was not only national but his contribution was international in nature as well. However, what is most important was the fact that Prof. Kajubi’s contribution knew no ethnic boundaries as far as his service in this country was concerned.

I had the privilege of having been taught by Prof. Kajubi while at Namilyango College and he taught us three values, which he referred to as the 3Hs. The first “h” of Prof. Kajubi was honesty, the second was hard work and the third was humility. These are the three values with which the late Prof. Kajubi lived and these are the three characteristics that we as leaders should emulate in serving our people.

Prof. Kajubi was a man of unique character but I will single out two aspects of his life. The first aspect is that he was the cotter pin of Uganda’s education system. His involvement and contribution to the education system in this country covered from the primary level up to the university, and that was the late Prof. Kajubi.

The second aspect of Prof. Kajubi’s life that has never been highlighted was the fact that he was one of the foundation bricks in the first independence of this country. His contribution to the National Anthem has already been mentioned. His contribution in the Constituent Assembly has already been mentioned. The fact that the body of Prof. Kajubi is lying in this House is already a manifestation of his contribution and recognition of this great son of the land. (Member timed out)

2.35
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the motion that has been moved. I received a message from hon. Dombo and he requested that you give me two minutes to read this small message on his behalf, and thank you for allowing it. 

Hon. Dombo is away in Zanzibar on official duty. He was a guild president in Makerere University when Prof. Kajubi was the Vice Chancellor. He wrote through his secretary that, “Inform Dr Baryomunsi to deliver my condolences on the Floor of Parliament during the motion to pay tribute to the late Prof. Senteza Kajubi. I enjoyed working with him while I served as Guild President of the students’ guild when he was Vice Chancellor. May his soul rest in peace.  Thank you very much.”  That was hon. Dombo speaking through me. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I was also a student at Makerere when Prof. Kajubi was the Vice Chancellor, and I am sure some of us who are his products do not disappoint. I want to appreciate the achievements and the great work that have already been outlined by various speakers. We want to send our condolences to the family and all his friends and the entire country.

Madam Speaker, as has been noted, we are losing a generation of academicians that laid a foundation for the transformation of this country through the education sector. The other day we were here paying tribute to Prof. Kakoma and now we are here paying tribute to Prof. Kajubi. This leaves us with a challenge; to all the professors, academicians and teachers who are heading educational institutions, the challenge is before us to ensure that now and in future, we should be able to produce people of the quality of Prof. Kajubi.

We want to encourage the leaders of Makerere and other universities and tertiary institutions that they should take heart and also put in more effort to ensure that the quality of education in this country continues to improve. We are challenged as Parliament to reflect on what we can do to improve the quality of education in this country. 

We must thank the Government that has made tremendous investment in the education sector. I want to disagree with those who are saying that the NRM has not prioritised education. I think a lot of investment has been put in the education sector through UPE, USE, free A’ level and now the bursary, which is being organised for university education. However, as Parliament, we should support Government to look at the quality of the education we are giving our children in this country so that we are able to produce products like Prof. Kajubi in future. I thank you very much and want to thank the members for the contributions about the great man who is lying before us. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

2.39
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker and the Government, for giving a role model a decent send off. I bring condolences from Bunyoro Kingdom. 

As a student of Makerere, 1988 to 1991 undergraduate, I want to speak for those of us who were there during the difficult times, and I would like to explain the benefits of those reforms. I want to speak for MPs like hon. Baryomunsi who has talked, hon. Raphael Magyezi, hon. Mawanda, hon. Felix Okot Ogong who is not here, and many colleagues, some deceased like Noble Mayombo, - I must also add Mao because if you talk of the late Mayombo, you have to talk about Mao - and many others, including Kagoro who cannot speak because he is at the Table. It is because of Prof. Kajubi’s reforms and Minister Mushega that this country has moved this far in as far as education is concerned. 

We may have lost the boom and we may have lost the travel allowances, but at that stage, the university was only admitting 1300 a year from the whole country. Now look at the 30 universities today; if those reforms were not undertaken, we would not be where we are. 

It is important that we admit that those reforms - the structural adjustment programmes – were a bitter pill to swallow, but it helped this country to reform and have more than one university. We now have universities in all parts of Uganda. The resistance, understood as it was for us who had to sacrifice at that stage, was really to set ground for the country to move on. (Member timed out)

2.41
MR RAPHEAL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I bring the condolences of the people of Igara West in Bushenyi and of my own family to the family of the late Prof. Ssenteza Kajubi upon this tragic loss.  

A lot has been said about our late professor. As a student of the late Prof. Ssenteza Kajubi, and somebody who has read his books, I would like to focus on how we can actually appreciate and ensure that we carry forward what he said and what he did, and that is by upholding and maintaining his legacy. Under this concept of widening, he was certainly in the right direction. However, I hope we can use the life and death of our late professor to reflect on those challenges and bottlenecks which impede access to education for all in Uganda. 

We are here celebrating the life of a commissioner who presided over educational reviews in 1963, 1977 and 1988, and there is something that has not been said - he actually helped in the population policy review in 1993. Today we are facing a scenario of commissions which keep on renewing their terms and accessing a lot of funds yet at the end of the day, they even fail to deliver their reports. I hope we reflect on the challenge of lack of integrity in the education sector and use the life of Prof. Kajubi to improve our own system in Uganda. (Member timed out­).

2.44
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. The people of Moyo District join the rest of the country in mourning our dear beloved professor. During one of his educational tours in Moyo District, he answered questions and the people realised that he was a moving encyclopaedia and a philosopher. He would eloquently answer all their educational questions and because of that, they referred to him as the grandfather of education in Uganda.

In 1990, when I was teaching in Mackay College Natete, the late professor came to our college and his speech made me go to Arua and start a private school. The mushrooming private schools in Uganda are due to the work of Prof. Senteza Kajubi. Although he is physically lying before us here, spiritually Prof. Kajubi is alive because all his good deeds are still alive with us. We are implementing whatever he recommended, which means the professor has not died; he is listening to whatever we are saying about him - (Member timed out).

2.46
MR MICHAEL MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I rise to support this motion and also to pay tribute to a great intellectual, a great man who has supported this country in many areas. Let me start by thanking H.E the President for having personally gone to visit and pay tribute to the late in his house in Bugolobi. 

Madam Speaker, let me also thank you personally, Government and Members of Parliament for having accorded this great man the respect that he now has as he lays in state. I would also like to thank Makerere University, his colleagues the professors, lecturers of Makerere University and Nkumba for a very good job they have done in recognising the late professor. I would like to thank his family and the doctors who have been very close to the late professor for having kept him alive and energetic. I thank all those who kept him where he has been.

Madam Speaker, the world, and more so because of the evolution of nature, has gone through five major revolutions and these are key pillars in the transformation of mankind. One has been civilization, the agrarian revolution, industrial revolution, scientific revolution and now the ICT revolution. Professor has been a key person in this country, a giant in the civilization and transformation of our education. (Member timed out)

2.49
MR LATIF SSEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we pay tribute to a gallant son of this land, we must ask ourselves some questions. We all know that death is not the end of someone’s life but it only opens doors for another life. I know Prof. Senteza Kajubi is entering the next life where all of us are going. Given the fact that he has contributed greatly not only to Uganda but to the entire world at large, I am convinced that we could do more than just paying tribute to him as we are doing right now. In Kampala, we have many roads that are named after people we do not know. Some of these roads are Siad-Barre, Colville Street, Duster Street and so forth. I think we should have these streets re-named in recognition of the services rendered by such great people. 

Madam Speaker, even in the university where he was the vice chancellor, there are some university halls like University Hall, Livingstone Hall; why don’t we name one of those halls of residence after him in recognition of his services towards Makerere University? (Member timed out).

2.51
DR BAYIGA LULUME (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion. Some of us are direct products of the late Prof. Senteza Kajubi who is before us now. As a medical student, I enjoyed one of his great speeches when he had been invited to present a speech in mentorship of the medical students. We were in our final year. 

In his speech, he said, “All I learnt, on which I count my achievements, I learnt in a kindergarten”. It was amazing for a professor to attribute all his achievements to his education in a kindergarten. He expounded on this message and said that it is only in a kindergarten that children are formatted. That is when they are told what to do and what not to do. They are taught not to play violent games, not to eat what does not belong to them, and in so doing he was telling us not to be corrupt. He loathed the unethical behaviour which has bedevilled all institutions with corruption.  That was Prof. Senteza Kajubi the man. 

In Makerere University, he helped us when we were students in the formation of Baganda Nkobazambogo amidst a lot of resistance because he believed in cultural institutions, cultural values and kingdoms. As a democrat, he also formed and natured us through his inspiring speeches to the Uganda Young Democrats. We are deeply indebted to the family of the great Prof. Senteza Kajubi because we gave him a lot of work outside academic work when we were going through our mentorship in political terms and also in culture terms; he indeed supported us even in financial terms. 

We are really very thankful to his family, particularly to his wife, for accepting the rest of the politicians, social workers and all the others who came for mentorship which he did not jealously guard. They gave up a lot for the rest of society to benefit from him, and indeed the rest of the society outside his family did benefit from this great man’s resources. We thank him for his great work. May the Lord rest his soul in peace.

2.54
MR KENNETH KIYINGI (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also do rise in support of the motion as moved by our hon. Prime Minister. As a young leader and servant of the people, I am really humbled by the enormous contribution by our late professor, Senteza Kajubi. In this spirit, I do call upon all the youth of our country to come out and invest in education and positively contribute to building our nation. 

It is really sad, and it is in such sad times that one measures the magnitude of greatness of such a great man. It is really humbling for me. At this point in time, allow me to also thank the family members for their contribution to the life of our late professor. 

As I conclude, I continue to thank God for the wonders he made through our late professor. We shall always remember him for his positive contribution to Uganda’s education system. May we all live to work and be known by good works. I thank you.

2.55
MR MEDARD SSEGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank honourable colleagues too for allowing this great man to lie here; and secondly, gratitude to the Prime Minister who has moved this motion. I stand here to speak on behalf of the people of Busiro East where this great professor is going to be laid to rest, and to also to convey our condolences to the nation, the President and the Kabaka of Buganda to whom this great professor was a great advisor.

I got to know Prof. Kajubi through an old friend of my father. I did not have the opportunity of being taught by Prof. Kajubi but I had the opportunity of being supervised by Prof. Kajubi even when I was in law school. He helped me organise and re-organise my thesis, to my surprise. I asked him, “You are not a lawyer, how do you supervise a lawyer?” He said, “Young man, I am a professor.” I confirmed, he was indeed a professor.

Prof. Kajubi was a great man in many respects. As a politician, I attended his political rally in 1995 which was disorganised. He said that this was just the beginning and not the end. 

One day I asked Prof. Kajubi, when he was leaving Nkumba as vice-chancellor, how he was going to survive; he said, “You can guarantee your pension without stealing.” I asked Prof. Kajubi why he was leaving Nkumba University which was still young and growing, and he had this to say, “If you are an intelligent man, you are able to train and mentor people to take over from you; you do not have to live forever.” (Applause)

Finally, Prof. Kajubi taught me this: Great men come, live and go. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

2.58
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I speak of Prof. Senteza Kajubi as a family friend, role model, father figure and the family man. 

Prof. Senteza Kajubi went to school with my father and I went to school with his children. I was always a frequent visitor to his residences when he was at Makerere, Kyambogo and Bugolobi. My siblings, cousins and I grew up with his children Becky, Tina, Damalie, Samalie, Wasswa, Kato and Tom Kalibaala who are all here with us today. I wish to thank you, Madam Speaker, on their behalf for the honour and recognition given to Prof. Senteza Kajubi.

Prof. Senteza Kajubi’s home was one that we were always welcome to, day or night. His solution when we complained of being squeezed was to build another room on the house. You remember his house at Mosque Hill which I think went from about two bedrooms to about seven and built at his expense. When we went out without permission at night and got into trouble, Prof. Kajubi was the only parent who would come to collect us but he would always give us a punishment of either writing an essay or doing kitchen duty the following day. He would call my mother and say, “Do not worry; Maria is here but I am keeping her for a day so that she can do her punishment.”

Prof. Kajubi was always willing to debate with anybody from a three year old to an eight year old with the same passion, vigour and curiosity that he displayed all of his life. I think we were all better for knowing Prof. Kajubi. He was always looking out for a study tour, scholarship, job placement, a career development opportunity for everybody and anybody he came in contact with. Go well Prof, go well Ssalongo. 

THE SPEAKER: I thank you. Let me invite the Prime Minister to wind up.

3.00
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the colleagues who spoke for the glowing tribute you have all paid to the late Prof. Senteza Kajubi. 

I had hoped, Madam Speaker, that the full picture of his accomplishments would come out, and therefore I beg your indulgence to fill the gap. Allow me just a few minutes to say that he was the first chief of staff of Teachers for East Africa from 1973 to 1975. He was the chairman of the Regional Council for Teacher Education for East Africa from 1969 to 1971. He was the chairman of the East African Regional Council of Education in Nairobi. He was the vice-president of the International Council for Teaching. He was also the first president of the Association for Teacher Education in Africa. He was also President of the Uganda Scientific and Cultural Society and the secretary-general of the Uganda Teachers’ Association. He was a member of the 1963 Uganda Education Review Commission that we have talked about. He was a consultant for the National Education System for Namibia at Independence.

Prof. Kajubi was a legislator in the East African Legislative Assembly from 1972 to 1976 where he contributed to legislative activities of the region for peace, harmony and development. He was also the chairman of the Uganda Population Review Commission that drafted the 1992 Population Development Policy. He was also the chairman of the East African Airways Corporation Central Negotiating Council, which guided industrial relations between managements and the workers union in 1972 to 1976.

He was also the chairman of the Central Negotiating Council of the East African Community General Fund Services that arbitrated between administrators and East African Community workers between 1972 and 1976.

Prof. Kajubi contributed greatly to the banking sector as a member of the founding Board of Directors Bank of Uganda, which of course we all know is the Central Bank of this country. He was a member of the Board of Directors of Uganda Commercial Bank, which was the first indigenous peoples bank that mobilised savings and promoted investment. 

He was a celebrated scholar with several publications. He was an accomplished researcher whose works won him several medals and awards including: the first African Fulbright scholar to the United States of America in 1952; distinguished service award for dedicated service to the development of education in Uganda; an order of the Crested Crane National award, 2011; Ekitiibwa Kya Mafumu ne Ngabo, Order of Merit of Kings College Buddo, and award for dedicated service of the Inter University Council for East Africa, among others. 

Last and most importantly, he was a decent man. Talking of mentoring, Madam Speaker, as someone who has been around in politics, I can say the most practical kind of politics is the politics of decency. Nothing is more heartbreaking for me than the demise of decency. The greatest tribute we can pay to him therefore today and after is to live the legacy of decency in politics that he so much cherished and represented. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I apologise to the family for interfering with the time for the church service, but you will agree with me that he deserved this tribute. 

On behalf of the women of Uganda, I want to take this opportunity to thank Nalongo Senteza Kajubi, the wife, because all this great work he did, she supported him. So, we want to thank her very much for making it possible for him to do all this great work. 

I want to thank the members. I know some of you had gone back to your constituencies. Thank you for returning to Kampala. I got you out of your committees but you will agree that it was important for the country to give a befitting farewell to this dignified and decent man. Thank you so much. 

National Anthem (One Verse)

(Exit of the late Prof. Ssenteza Kajubi)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, again I want to thank you very much for allowing me to disrupt your work, but it was an important national activity. I want to adjourn the House to Tuesday, 8 May at 2.00 p.m. as we had originally agreed. Thank you very much for coming. 

(The House rose at 3. 11 p.m. and adjourned to Tuesday, 8 May 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
