Thursday, 14 May 2009

Parliament met at 3.18 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. I regret that we are starting business a bit late by almost an hour. I hope in future this will not be the case. We have received the Order Paper but I just want to adjust it a bit to allow the Minister of Finance to lay on the Table the Supplementary Estimates 2008/2009, Paper No.2

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, Article 156 of the Constitution allows that in respect of any financial year, if it is found that the amount of money appropriated for any purpose under the Appropriations Act is insufficient or the need has arisen for the purpose of which no amount –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I have risen on a point of procedure. I realise that the matters to be considered as laid down in the Order Paper are very important, including this paper which is going to be laid on the Table. Unfortunately, when I look at the other side of the House, there are hardly two or three people. I am wondering what has happened. I thought that is the ruling party and what we are discussing is more important to them. They have to present to us what they are doing, particularly members of the Executive. I do not know why the other side is empty. That is why I am concerned. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I really do not know what happened. Maybe they have crossed to your side. (Laughter) I quite appreciate this. I have noted it and I actually started by regretting that we have started late because I was waiting for over an hour. Maybe they have a problem, but let us go on with these formalities of laying papers on the Table and then I will decide what to do later. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think for the future we should do better because I understand there is a caucus of the NRM going on and yet we have the plenary of Parliament. To me Parliament has now been subordinated and the caucus is the main one. I think something should be done about this. We can all caucus but when there is a Parliament sitting, any caucus should stop their meeting and come to the plenary. This is not good. 

THE SPEAKER: I have nothing to add other than concur with you.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, my concern is the repeated disappointment expressed by the Speaker concerning absence of members in the plenary. This is a matter which must be taken seriously by the whips on both sides. Even if the NRM caucus is meeting, they should at least ensure that their side is well represented in the House. I understand that a couple of times, the FDC also have their caucus meetings but they always ensure that some members are in the House in case any matter arises. 

I am just lamenting but I want this lamentation to at least end up in some kind of action. We cannot just continue to complain that members are not coming to the House. This time it has happened when you, Mr Speaker, are the one chairing the meeting. You waited for over an hour and now you are sitting in an empty House. This is a show of indiscipline on the side of the government which is supposed to be ruling the country. This is a serious matter. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I see no dissension from what you have said but the Prime Minister has noted your concern. Can you continue? 

MR KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, Article 156 of the Constitution allows that in respect of any financial year, if it is found: “(a) That the amount appropriated for any purpose under the Appropriation Act is insufficient or that a need has arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act; or

(b) That any monies have been expended for any purpose in excess of the amount appropriated for that purpose or for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act; 

A supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid down before Parliament and in the case of excess expenditure, within four months after the money is spent.”

Therefore, in execution of the above legal requirement, I beg to lay on the Table the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.2 of the Financial Year 2008/2009. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Let the Committee on the Budget take it up, study it and then report promptly to the House.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION CONTROL 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a member of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and we had made all arrangements to have our report discussed this afternoon. However, I am feeling exceedingly uncomfortable that we are going to discuss such an important issue in the absence of our colleagues in big numbers. I would beg that you guide us whether it is procedurally right.

THE SPEAKER: It is procedurally right. We are not taking any decision. We can proceed. When it comes to taking a decision, I will take a decision then. You know we changed this issue of our procedure. We can start business now as long as we do not make any major decision. 

3.28
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control (Amendment) Bill, 2008 be read a second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, it is seconded. Tell us what this Bill is about.
 
MR KIVEJINJA: Mr Speaker, the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control (Amendment) Bill, 2008 presented to this Parliament had the main objective to amend the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Act, Cap 66, to provide for dual citizenship. 

Secondly, Section 6 of the Constitution (Amendment) Act, Act 11 of 2005, amended Article 14 of the 1995 Constitution that prohibited a Ugandan from holding the citizenship of another country while at the same time being a Ugandan citizen. So this is the main objective of this Bill; we require amendments to the existing Bill so that we are able to implement that application for dual citizenship.

3.30
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Mathias Kasamba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to present to this House the report of the Defence and Internal Affairs Committee on the Citizenship and Immigration Control (Amendment) Bill, 2008. 

Before I proceed with the report, I beg to lay on the Table some of the minutes of the committee meetings and some of the documents, which during our interface with the various stakeholders, were submitted. These include the report from the National Citizenship and Immigration Board, report on streamlining management and reporting Structures of the National Citizenship and Immigration Board in the discharge of the constitutional and statutory functions. I beg to lay on the Table some of the working documents.

The Citizenship and Immigration Control (Amendment) Bill, 2008 was read for the first time and referred to the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs. The committee has scrutinised the Bill in accordance with rule 161(d) and now begs to report.

Methodology

In considering the Bill, the committee held meetings with: 

•	The Minister of State for Internal Affairs and his technical team. 
•	Members of the National Citizenship and Immigration Board; and 
•	The delegation representing Ugandans in the Diaspora. 

We scrutinised the Bill, the Citizenship and Immigration Control Act (the Act which this Bill intends to amend), the Constitution (Amendment) Act 2005, the report on streamlining of management and reporting structures of the National Citizenship and Immigration Board. 

We made on-spot visits to the Directorate of Immigration, which is on Jinja Road. 

Object of the Bill

The Bill seeks to amend the Citizenship and Immigration Control Act to conform to the provisions of the Constitution (Amendment) Act 2005 and in particular articles 14, 15(1), 15(2), 15(6), 15(7) and 16 to provide for: 

1. 	Dual citizenship 
2. 	Offices of state, which a person holding dual citizenship is not qualified to hold 
3. 	Former Ugandans who wish to reacquire Ugandan citizenship 
4. 	Deputy Chairperson to the National Citizenship and Immigration Board; and 
5. 	Conduct of the members of the Board. 

We made the following observations:

1. 	The Bill seeks to operationalise Article 15 and 16 of the Constitution. 

2. 	Many of our people in the Diaspora have lost citizenship due to lack of an enabling law providing for dual citizenship. This Bill intends to give such people an opportunity to regain Ugandan citizenship. 

3. 	The legislation will also give citizenship to non Ugandan nationals who are making enormous contribution to our nation and wish to attain Ugandan citizenship. 

4. 	The committee recognises the need to elevate the status of the Directorate of Immigration within the ministry to the same level as the Uganda Police Force and the Uganda Prisons Services. This will make it possible for the Directorate to have an elaborate structure and improve on its functionality capable of effectively and efficiently fulfilling the mandate of the Directorate. 

5. 	During the course of considering the Bill, it was further realised that there was need to revisit the Citizenship and Immigration Control Act to provide for: 

•	The organisational and policy formulation and strategic oversight functions of the Board; 
•	The financial and human resource semi-independence to the Directorate; and 
•	The Citizenship and Immigration Control Secretariat.

	Some of the above require further consultation with various stakeholders and cannot be accommodated within the object of the Bill. It is therefore our considered recommendation that the Ministry expedites the process of coming up with a Bill to accommodate these desirable changes. 

6. 	The committee observes the need to make some changes in the Bill. At an appropriate time, I will move the proposed amendments to clauses 2, 3, 7, 9 and the Fifth Schedule.  

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, after further consultations with the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Board, it was found appropriate to strengthen the functionality of the Directorate for better service delivery. This need is well articulated in the consultant’s report - Streamlining of Management and Reporting Structures of the National Citizenship and Immigration Board - in the discharge of its constitutional and statutory functions, and the report of the Select Committee on the Immigration Department. It is important that the Ministry of Internal Affairs takes note of the recommendations in this report and acts accordingly. 

The Committee supports the motion for the second reading of the Bill. I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: I want to thank you, chairman and members of the committee, for the report. Now the debate is open, hon. Members.

3.36
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report but I want to be informed. What benefits shall we, as a country, get by having citizens who belong to two countries? What will the benefit be to our country?

I do not believe that one has got to be a citizen in order to invest in a country. It is my understanding that the bigger portion of the investments we have here are by non citizens.  

I wonder what would happen if I belonged to two countries and the two countries went to war. Which one will I support? It is even worse if the two countries have a law of conscripting me to fight. If both of them have conscripted me to go and fight for my nations, where do I go? Do I go with the first one to grab me?

I do not see the purpose of this law. To me it looks as if this law is being made because it was demanded by people who are living outside Uganda and not by us; it is not in our interest. If they are Ugandans, why do you make a law for them? Let them denounce whatever they have and come back and belong here. Why should you, someone who is already a citizen of another country, cry to become a Ugandan citizen?

My feelings are against this law. I think there is something hidden which we do not see, which this law is going to serve. It is, in my opinion, dangerous to have a law like this. A citizen can commit a crime here, run to a second country where we do not have any repatriation protocol, and that person will be protected there because that is his country. Why should we provide for a situation like this? Mr Speaker, I am not in favour of this law. I thank you.

3.39
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to comment on observation No.3, and I thank the chairman and his committee for presenting this report.

I want to get clarification: when we are going to consider the non-Ugandan nationals who are making enormous contributions to our nation, what is going to happen after these contributions fade out? Will they still be considered citizens? Is it because Ugandans have failed to make enormous contributions to our country that we are going to exchange citizenship for those who will make these enormous contributions? 

What will happen if one million Chinese decide to come and make this enormous contribution to Uganda? Are we going to consider them to get dual citizenship? What will happen to the children of these people who have made enormous contributions to this country if they request that they remain here with their family members? What are these enormous contributions in the first place? 

When we produced cotton - white gold - in the 1960s and 1970s, it developed industries in Europe. Can we now also request that we get citizenship in the UK because we contributed very seriously to the development of their industries? We have done that and it is on record; Uganda developed industries in Europe sometime back. 

What about the case of East Africa, because we intend to get citizenship for the East African Community? My research has informed me that if you open this, almost three quarters of the citizens of Rwanda will get citizenship in Uganda. According to the records, I think almost half of them have got illegal citizenship in Uganda and nothing has been done about it. This is because they have a right to say that they helped in liberating Uganda in the Luwero Triangle war. Is that what we are considering? 

I want a list of these important contributions that can be considered to allow for dual citizenship. Otherwise, there must be some hidden motive behind this. One of them, as the Shadow Minister of Defence and Security said, is that we are going to allow for persons who will be recruited to spy either in Uganda or outside. This will consume a lot of taxpayer’s money. 

It is now easy for one to create anything outside and you demand for money and go spend it without accountability. This has been happening in this country. So I request that this be clarified before we consider this request. Thank you very much.     

3.43
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairman of the committee for giving us this report. I draw your attention to page 2. The need for our sons and daughters of Uganda who are living abroad to remain Ugandans cannot be overemphasised. (Applause) They are our sons and our daughters, especially us from the North. With the war which has raged on for so long, most of our sons and daughters are living abroad. We want them to feel proud of being Ugandan. We want them to come to this country and bring us whatever they have earned at any time without any condition. (Applause) 

This report indicates that it will be an opportunity given; why do we condition our own? They are free to come back home anytime and bring the fruits of their labour. To say you are just going to give an opportunity means that they are at the mercy of those who are making this law.

THE SPEAKER: No, the opportunity could be in this way: you are a Ugandan, even if you go to Sweden and they also give you their citizenship. At the moment, once you do that you cease to be a Ugandan. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true but that has been a very big padlock to our own children. We want this to be without any strings attached. We do not want any hidden agenda. We should let our children come in and earn both citizenships without any hindrances. It should be just given. 

Mr Speaker, you have guided me on that but if you say they were going to give opportunities, let us not forget that some of our children left our country in many circumstances. If we say “opportunity”, it means the opportunity might not extend to everybody. Some were labelled rebels, terrorists, and so on. So if you say “opportunity”, it will be selective. We want all our children to enjoy the citizenship of this country.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank my sister for giving way. We are talking about our children – our sons and daughters – so I do not understand this. If they are our sons and daughter, how do we give them citizenship yet they are our children? How do you give citizenship to your children?

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, I want to give my colleague, hon. Okello-Okello, some information. We continue to refer to them as our sons and daughters because they went and for different reasons acquired citizenship of other countries. However, because of our law, they lost their citizenship to this country. So our argument is that we create a provision for them to come back home.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, colleagues. I was coming to my second point. I think observation No. 3 needs to be critically analysed before we can take it on. I am wondering: who is going to weigh the enormous contribution of these non-citizens in order for them to be granted citizenship in this country? What are the procedures for selecting people for this?

There is a Luganda saying that, “Okutambula n’abambejja tekikufuula mumbejja” –(Interjections)- I am Nantongo. (Laughter) It literary means that associating with royals does not make you belong to the royal family. We say that there are people who contribute enormously, but given the history of this country, we have seen how heroes and senior citizens of this country have been selectively chosen. How can we guarantee that these will be genuine people? Who is mandated to select them and what is the procedure? Who is going to approve them? 

It has been the case in our country to allow a one-man-show - one person to give us the way forward. Therefore, I will not support this sort of insertion that those who will contribute enormously deserve to become citizens. What about our own Ugandan who contributes enormously outside this country?

3.51
MR BAKKA MUGABI (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish first of all to support the committee, and I support this motion. 

I want to address myself to the observations on page 2. Under No. 4, the committee observes that there is a need to elevate the status of the Directorate of Immigration within the ministry to the same level as the Uganda Police Force and Uganda Prisons Service.

The committee further says on page 3, observation 5, bullet No.3: “Provide for the citizenship and immigration control secretariat”. In the conclusion, the committee says: “… after further consultations from the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Board, it was found appropriate to strengthen the functionality of the Directorate for better services ….” They go on to call for a better Bill to take those matters into consideration. 

I have a problem with this. What does the committee mean when they say that the directorate should be taken to the same level with the Uganda Police Force and the Uganda Prisons Service? These are very huge organisations whose work we know very well. I do recognise the enormous work that a directorate has at its desk, but for the committee to recommend that they should be taken to the same level as the Uganda Police Service and the Uganda Prisons Service is not fair. 

After elevating this directorate to the level of Uganda Police Forces and or Uganda Prisons Service, they will be like the other departments. It will become a huge department with a big human resource and they will start demanding for bigger salaries, equating themselves to URA, Uganda Police and therefore asking for huge wage bills, which this country cannot sustain. 

I support the motion but I completely disagree with the committee on the idea of raising this department to the level of Uganda Police Forces, Uganda Prisons Service and so on. 

3.53
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for finally coming up with a report on this important Bill, which most of our people in the Diaspora have been yearning for. 

I support this motion and I urge my colleagues to pass it. This is because most of our fellow Ugandans working in the Diaspora, like those who stay in the USA, even if they have some benefits when they are leaving those states, sometimes they are forced to relinquish the Ugandan citizenship so that they take up the citizenship of the country where they are staying. So by not having this kind of law, we deny them a legitimate right –(Interruption)

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Thank you, my brother, for giving way. There are allegations that Dr Mallinga, a minister in this government, is an American. When he left Uganda, he acquired the citizenship of America. He came back here but there are allegations that he is still earning pension from America. So what is his status? Does this law cure that problem?

MR BANYENZAKI: It may not be for me to clarify that, but I think you are talking about Ugandans who hold what is called a Green Card –(Interjections)– No let me finish my speech. There many Ugandans who hold such facilities but they are not necessarily citizens of those countries. However, when we get such a law, then we shall give an opportunity to Ugandans who have citizenship in USA or UK to be citizens of Uganda. 

The argument that once we enact this Bill three quarters of Rwandese will take dual citizenship, at a time when we are moving towards the East African political federations, is illogical. 

On the issue of making the Directorate of Immigration a semi-autonomous body, I absolutely support this. This is because that ministry has been suffocated by Ministry of Finance for long. My colleague has talked about the Uganda Police and Prisons, but we need to look at non-tax revenues which the Police collect. Maybe they should retain it at source and appropriate it in aid. 

My only problem with this is that these bodies that we are giving the opportunity to take advantage of appropriation in aid are not complying with the law. So I appeal to the Prime Minister and the Minister of Internal Affairs to take care when this Bill is passed into an Act; make sure that they report appropriately. I say this basing on section 17 of the Budget Act, which states: “A minister responsible for any vote of appropriation in aid shall make quarterly reports to Parliament on the manner in which the funds from that vote are expended”. 

No ministry has been reporting to Parliament. When we put the Prime Minister to task on this issue, he said that he gave a directive to these ministries. However, up to now no ministry has reported to Parliament. The Minister of Finance needs to take note of this because there are a lot of gaps. These ministries that use the funds from appropriation in aid abuse the funds and they do not give adequate accountability. 

I have attended meetings with people from the Diaspora, like the BanyaKigezi and Kacoke Madit and other gatherings. One of the things on top of their agenda is the request to Parliament to pass this law. So if we do this today, we shall have done our part. The issue of fearing some hidden agenda is baseless. I do not see any hidden agenda in this Bill. We do not need to have suspicions on such a good and well-intentioned Bill. Thank you. 

4.00
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, People with Disabilities, Central Region): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion. I thank the Minister of Internal Affairs and the committee for the job well-done in terms of operationalisation of Article 15 and Article 16 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. I have only three requests.

This Bill relates to operationalisation of the Constitution by way of enacting relevant laws. I would like to take this opportunity to remind Parliament that as we speak right now, there are many provisions of the Constitution that remain dormant; they have not been operationalised by way of enacting relevant legislations. I do not want to mention this in details, but let me give three examples.

Parliament is required, under the relevant constitutional provisions, to enact laws that protect the dignity of women and to outlaw cultures that are inconsistent with their dignity. In line with this provision, I am aware that some members have drafted what they call “The Female Genital Mutilation Bill”, but I think right now it is somewhere dormant. We have the Domestic Relations Bill, which is also drafted in the spirit of the Constitution. We also have the Bill on the Equal Opportunities Commission, which was passed but implementation has not taken place. I appeal to our Attorney-General to undertake an audit of what we require as Parliament in terms of enacting relevant laws in line with the Constitution. 

Secondly, on page 2, under Observation No.3 - my colleagues have mentioned this, but I feel I should also add my voice to it – I believe our friends in the committee misunderstood the spirit of the Constitution. Under observation No.3 they say that the registration will also give citizenship to non-Ugandans who are making enormous contributions to our nation and would wish to attain Ugandan citizenship. 

You are now attaching economic value to citizenship. It is like the spirit of buying and selling. You talk of somebody who has made enormous contributions, but how about the man in the village whose name will never be read or seen by us in Parliament? It is not our idea to create people who are more citizen than others. 

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. The information I would like to give my colleague is that it is an internationally recognised practice, which Uganda may not separate itself from. If someone intends to join a country as a citizen, he could be assessed monetarily, and that is a very serious benchmark all over the world. 

We may not bother so much to look at that simple component as a deterrent, but rather look at other things. If the person is a terrorist or the person is feared for other reasons, the board will have the discretion not to accept such a person. However, a person who has got the capacity to develop our country monetarily can be given consideration. 

MR NDEEZI: Alright, thank you for the information. My concern is that you are going against the principle that all are equal under and before the law. When you bring in the concept of enormous contributions, you frighten me. I appeal to the people who are implementing this law and the immigration Bill to ensure that we do not create citizens who are more citizen than others. 

Under observation No.4, the committee says that we need to elevate the level of the Directorate of Immigration within the ministry to ensure that it is at the same level as Uganda Police Force and Uganda Prisons Service. I beg to inform my friends in the committee that if this recommendation is to be implemented, we must bear in mind that Uganda Police Forces and Uganda Prisons Service are a creation of the Constitution. What is therefore required is to amend the Constitution. I would have expected the committee to recommend that we amend the Constitution in line with this proposal.

On page 4, the last paragraph of point No.5, our colleagues have expressed that this Bill is inadequate. It is their considered opinion that the minister starts the process of coming up with a relevant Bill to accommodate the changes. Our colleagues have noted that this Bill is inadequate but they do not give the minister a timeframe in which he should improve this Bill. 

I, therefore, appeal to the minister to interpret the words there in good faith and please hurry to ensure that we have the necessary legislation in place and strengthen the Bill that we are considering today. I support the motion. Thank you.

4.07
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the good report presented. I want to add my voice to support the motion to approve the Citizenship and Immigration Control (Amendment) Bill. 

I want members to appreciate first of all that our country has gone through a lot of political turmoil. During the 1970s and 80s, many of our brothers and sisters went into exile and were forced to relinquish the citizenship of their country. They did this not because they were willing but because of the political atmosphere at that time. I, therefore, want to urge Parliament to support this because this Bill will go a long way in solving that problem. 

Secondly, we know that there is a lot of unemployment in this country, especially for the professionals. So many Ugandans in search of employment found themselves losing their citizenship. So this is an opportunity for Ugandans to regain their citizenship.

Having said that, I have one piece of advice: we all know that of recent, sports is a very lucrative sector. If a Ugandan youth, for example a footballer has citizenship in America and these two countries are going to meet, I would like the committee and Parliament to include something so that such a person should play for their country of origin. If we do not put it there, we cannot afford to pay because we are a developing country, so we shall lose out as far as sports is concerned. Many countries are willing to give good sports talents citizenship. So if we have that clause in our Bill, it will go a long way in empowering our country. Otherwise, I support the motion. 

4.10
MR CHARLES EKEMU (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for presenting this report. I have no problems supporting this motion; first of all, because it simply seeks to operationalise Articles 15 and 16 of our Constitution. However, I have some fears and concerns that I think we should be able to focus on and seek to have addressed. 

My concern is on the aspect of nationalism. When we talk about dual citizenship, we are actually saying that the persons concerned will have to give loyalty to two countries. Citizenship in essence means that you give total loyalty to that country. True, it is in our Constitution to grant dual citizenship, but I do not perceive how that loyalty is going to be maintained. It is definitely going to be divided loyalty. 

We may be guided by our seniors, like the Second Deputy Premier who knows very well that belonging to a nation means you must have a spirit of patriotism for that nation. The foundation of belonging to a nation is the national interest that you show for that nation. So that is greatly questionable in relation to granting dual citizenship.

As far as object No.2 of the Bill is concerned, there is the issue of offices of state which a person holding dual citizenship is not qualified to hold. My concern is, if we are genuinely granting citizenship to these people, why are we hesitating to grant them offices in this country? I know of several Ugandans who went out of this country and are probably very competent and would want to aspire for offices of state. I know of one Olara Otunu, a Ugandan whom I hear is now a citizen of a certain West African country. He may want to aspire for a high office, say for the presidency of this country. We are saying that when we grant such a person dual citizenship, he would not be granted to aspire for an office of state? I see that as a very serious contradiction. 

If we are opening up, why are we not opening up completely? If we are opening up, we should do it without any strings attached. I do not see why Ugandans who have returned and may wish to aspire for such offices should not be allowed to hold such offices of state. Those are some of the concerns that I see in the Bill. Otherwise, there is no problem in the Bill; after all, it is simply trying to operationalise what we already have in the Constitution in Articles 15 and 16. 

4.16
MR JOSEPH BALIKUDDEMBE (DP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am very glad to be on the Floor of Parliament to support this recommendation that has been brought before this Parliament by the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs. However, before I can do this, I want to take members back to what our comrades said when we were in Florida for the UNAA Conference. Our colleagues, brothers and sisters in the US, did come out boldly and asked you, Mr Speaker, to ensure that this Bill comes before Parliament, and it is before us right now. 

Colleagues, our mandate is dully provided for in articles 15 and 16, particularly Article 15(7) where as Parliament we shall prescribe circumstances under which this law should dully operate. I believe that would be our biggest problem as the Bill stands today. The biggest problem is how we are going to see this law operate. 

Very many members have raised the issue of the hon. Minister of Health being an American and yet he is operating as a minister in the government. That is an illegality. For a fact, this law is very good but we surely need to look at these circumstances. 

We also need to look at the circumstances of having national identity cards. Very many non-Ugandans will come up and start masquerading as if they are Ugandans. So our worry is not the gist of this Bill; our worry is the illegalities that will come up subsequent to the operationalisation of this Bill. I believe Members can look at the gist of this Bill as being very good but our biggest problem is seeing how this Bill is going to operate. 

MR KUBEKETERYA: The hon. Mutebi has made a very big statement. He has said that the hon. Minister of Health is an American. I know very well that there are three ministers in the Ministry of Health, so which one exactly is he referring to? 

THE SPEAKER: I think it may not be fair, in the absence of the person concerned, to comment because it may not be true. You can spare that one and make your contribution.

4.19
MR PETER EMIGU (FDC, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for bringing this Bill. However, there are some areas that I want us to look at slightly more closely and make some corrections if this Bill is really to go through. 

On page 2, under the objectives of the Bill, No.2 refers to an office of state which a person holding dual citizenship is not qualified to hold. I think this is an attempt to close a number of people out. If you look at the kind of offices they are talking about in the Bill itself, it is very important positions that if you cannot qualify to attain them, then you wonder why you should think about becoming a citizen of Uganda. 

The first office of state is President, then Vice-President, Prime Minister, Cabinet minister and other ministers, IGG and deputy IGG, technical head of the armed forces, technical heads of branches of the armed forces, commanding officers of the armed forces units of at least battalion strength, officers responsible for heading departments responsible for holding records, personnel in logistics in all branches in the armed forces, the Inspector-General of Police, et cetera. If you cannot qualify to attain any of these positions, why do you think you should really become a citizen of such a country? 

I suspect that this has been brought here particularly to block out some people, just like the 1995 Constitution was tampered with to lift the term limits to protect only one person. When they look at people like us who qualify to be President, they may try to get a way to block us by bringing this kind of thing. Instead of leaving it flat like this I rather we say that after some two or three years, then you qualify for any of these positions. But completely blocking hon. Emigu from becoming a president when I am about to get into things! Thank you. (Laughter) 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give is that even in this country there are some positions among which he has read which are being occupied by non-Ugandans. I do not know whether this is not double standards. We should also criticize and internalize that. My Chief Whip - do not point at me - I have to be protected. It is common knowledge in Uganda that some offices in Uganda are being held by non-Ugandans, therefore they need also to be looked at. I thank you. 

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Beatrice Anywar for giving way. She has made serious assertions and allegations, which need not go unsubstantiated let alone unchallenged. I want your guidance so that the Member could help us with information so that the government side can be in a position to take up this matter. I request, Sir. 

THE SPEAKER: My problem is, in making such statements or naming somebody when you are actually not sure of the facts, you cause embarrassment to that person. So I think we should avoid it because you can mention Ssekandi and yet you are not sure. We rather leave it out other than having people named here. 

MR EMIGU: Thank you. I was still on the Floor. My recommendation for that particular observation is that the committee could go and look at this closely again and say after two or three years, then you would be considered. This is because I consider these positions very significant and it is the reason for which somebody would even wish to apply for citizenship.

Secondly, observation No. 3 says that the legislation will also give citizenship to non Ugandan nationals who are making enormous contributions to our nation and would wish to attain Ugandan citizenship. The weighing scale for measuring enormous contributions has not been mentioned here. I want to leave that because a number of persons have already contributed towards that. 

If I am to become a Ugandan citizen, what guarantee do I have now? We do not even have a national identity card. Is it just going to be by promulgation and then I will think I am already a Ugandan citizen? I think the committee should go and look at this and maybe we would hasten the issue of the national identity card, so that when I become a citizen of Uganda I have the national identity card as my guarantee that I am a Ugandan. Without that, there is still something lacking here.

We are going to join the East African Community and there is this integration they are talking about. Let us do one thing at a time. We may be quick to bring up this instead of going to follow the fast tracking method. Why don’t we just go for one thing - get something for East Africa other than getting one for Uganda and then we begin undoing what we have already done here? This will be a waste of resources. While I support this, I beg the committee to go back and look closely into the areas I have raised. Thank you.

4.27
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me thank the committee for bringing this report to Parliament. Before I support this motion, I want clarification so that Ugandans know the benefits of having this Bill passed into law.

Having citizenship in two countries, like Uganda and Kenya, I feel accelerates the committing of criminal offences. If I am in Uganda and I have citizenship in Kenya, I can commit a crime here and immediately cross the border and I will be safe because I will be controlled by the Kenyan Government.

The other thing is that there should be a bi-lateral agreement that will be binding the people who are getting dual citizenship. In case of committing an offence, they will be able to extradite them to the country where the offence has been committed so that the law will address whatever happens.

Our Constitution is very clear; it does not allow foreigners to own land in Uganda. What is the position now? That is why people are suspicious that when this Bill is passed into law, these foreigners who are applying to be Ugandans will definitely acquire our land and it will be a big problem to the Ugandans. I think that is why this Bill has been brought here.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: What this Bill is doing is to operationalise a constitutional provision, Article 15. That being the case, are we procedurally correct in saying that the Government should not have produced this Bill? I would have expected colleagues to be querying issues that are not clear but not to question the fundamental reason why the Bill is being brought. Are we procedurally correct?

THE SPEAKER: This is to operationalise an already existing constitutional provision, which was made by us as a country in making our Constitution.

MR OPANGE: In the same Constitution, the foreigners are not allowed to acquire and own land in Uganda and we are the ones who made it as well. That is why I am inquiring from you –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I want to give my colleague information. Foreigners can acquire and own land in leasehold but cannot own land in freehold. Foreigners can own land for up to 99 years. That is owning, even if we may call it leasing, but not in freehold.

MR OPANGE: Thank you for that information. This is what we feel we should address before we pass this law. The issue of holding jobs referred to in the fifth schedule is very risky. If we let the Governor Bank of Uganda, permanent secretaries who are accounting officers, Chief Administrative Officers to be dual citizens in this country, the risk here is that money can be remitted out of this country through dubious ways.

Why are we being mean here? If we need this law to be very clear, Members of Parliament should be included in the schedule so that we protect the interests of the local setting. If an Indian becomes a Member of Parliament here and he acquires land in Pallisa, he will make laws that are contrary to the interests of the people of Pallisa. How are you going to support our people? The fifth schedule should include Members of Parliament so that we are not seen to be protecting our interests.

Finally, let me put to rest what Members had intimated here, starting with hon. Johnson Malinga. Dr Mallinga is my brother and he is not an American. I want to categorically state in this Parliament that Dr Mallinga has permanent residence in America but he is not an American. Thank you.

4.33
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for the effort they have put into this Bill.

I would like to first of all raise my concern on the proposed amendment to the Schedule, which talks about excluding some people from certain offices. The Constitution, under Article 17, provides for duties of a citizen. Article 17(e) says: “To defend Uganda and to render national service when necessary.” If we now exclude certain offices, wouldn’t we be moving to amend the Constitution to exclude them from the duties of a citizen? Perhaps the option that we have is to choose whether to make them citizens or not to make them citizens.

THE SPEAKER: It is the Constitution itself, which has the provision which created the dual citizenship, and envisaged that we shall make a law that may make certain prohibitions. It is the Constitution itself.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I do not know whether this law that we are going to make has the capacity to amend the Constitution. If Article 17 provides for the duties of every citizen, then what is this type of citizen whom you are going to exclude when the current law clearly says this is what the citizen is entitled to? It is within the rights of a citizen.

I think the law will catch up with the small law we are moving rather than with the Constitution. That is how I want to proceed -(Prof. Kabwegyere rose_)- let me finish my submission and I will take all the information afterwards. 

The second issue I would like to raise is on observation No. 3.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Alaso, I think let us clear this. If you look at Article 15 of the Constitution, it deals with dual citizenship and 15(7) reads: “Parliament shall, by law, prescribe the offices of State which a person who holds the citizenship of another country in addition to the citizenship of Uganda is not qualified to hold.” This is clear here.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, you people are the lawyers but –(Mr Kasamba rose_)- No, let me just take on what the Speaker has said. You people are the lawyers and you understand law better. What would happen with Article 17 on the duties of the citizen? Under these duties, I could serve my country. However, in my ignorance of the law, I am not able to go into the dimension.

Let me proceed and make my submission by looking at observation No. 3. It says: “The legislation will also give citizenship to non Ugandan nationals who are making enormous contribution ….” Again, I thought the Constitution does not provide this as a condition for acquiring citizenship. I would rather that the committee should have considered the question of Green Cards, work permits, permanent residence and otherwise to those who are making enormous contribution. Maybe again I missed it, but I see that it is not provided that if you make enormous contribution, then you are entitled to citizenship.

The other issue I would like to raise is the question of what this citizenship is. First of all, in a country where you have no national identity card, how do you go into a village, for instance somewhere in Serere in Soroti where I come from, and know this is a citizen and this is a non-citizen? Wouldn’t it have been okay for government first of all to proceed on the matter of national identity cards? 

I also do not understand the capacity of the Ministry of Internal Affairs to undertake verification. Let us assume somebody applying for citizenship in our country is coming from a country probably as far as Austria and he can make enormous contribution and yet this person also has a bad record behind him or her, what is in place? How much capacity does Ministry of Internal Affairs have to undertake verification so that we do not get into problems with our neighbours and ourselves after granting dual citizenship to non-Ugandans?

Another concern that I have, and I would like the help of the Attorney-General, is what will happen in situations where we have international treaties. Uganda is a signatory to the ICC, for example, and the USA is not. If I hold citizenship for those countries, what happens to me? How do you handle the question of that international framework? Isn’t there a contradiction? Isn’t there a challenge to jurisdiction? I would like to be educated on that matter. 

Lastly, I would rather that we, as a country, work towards helping our citizens feel that Uganda is home. The reason people have been keen to relinquish the Uganda citizenship is because the other country offers you an opportunity to have a dignified life, to have a job to yourself, to educate your children. Really, what is this thing called citizenship if I cannot feed myself in that country? What is citizenship if I cannot feel secure? 

Hon. Anywar talked about some of the children and the people of Northern Uganda who have had to flee because of the conflict. We ought to work hard and make sure that Uganda is home to all those who call themselves citizens in this country. We should create an environment where people are comfortable rather than run around trying to be a dual citizen or forfeit your citizenship. Most importantly, I think we need employment opportunities in this country and hon. Kabwegyere knows we need this. 

4.42
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you. Before I make my contribution, I would like to thank the Chief Whip of the Movement party for whipping the Members to come to the House because we were feeling very lonely. I thank him because I know, Mr Speaker, you are very diplomatic. You may not be able to tell him how upset we were when they were not here.

This matter of dual citizenship is very important. The world is now going global and as Ugandans we cannot be strong unless we align ourselves to other countries. That is why regionalisation and globalisation have become a very hot issue. 

The issue of dual citizenship will not engage us as much as it did in the Constituent Assembly. Mr Speaker, you had the benefit of being in the Constituent Assembly to debate this matter. We were very distressed at that time because we felt that we would be invaded by the neighbouring countries either to grab our land or whatever. We were very suspicious of the neighbourhood. We were very suspicious of foreigners who were doing business at that time in Uganda. However, today the scenario has changed and I think it is important that we should move together as Ugandans, influenced by global pressures and global factors.

I am speaking as an elder and maybe at this stage I should thank the Movement Government, which I have opposed throughout my life, for honouring me as an honourable citizen who has contributed so much to this country. This is one of the contributions I want to make. 

We need to be forward looking, pragmatic and dynamic at all times. We should change our method of work at all times. I think the Hansard has recorded Mrs Ogwal as being very opposed to dual citizenship. Today, the situation has changed and I have also changed my position on that matter. 

However, there are two things which the committee did not help us with. First, the committee did not provide for us the cost benefit analysis of dual citizenship. We will want to look at both sides. How have the countries that have practiced dual citizenship benefited? We needed to know that so that we take a decision from an informed position. That is lacking.

I also think the committee should have helped us to highlight a few things on what has happened in other countries. Why is it that some countries do not support dual citizenship despite the fact that they are very advanced? I want to give you the example of Australia, with the vast land they have with a population of only 24 million people. Why? This is because they are very cautious; they match population to their development and resources. 

I would wish to caution Ugandans not to open the floodgates for any Tom, Dick and Harry to invade this country and cause us problems because we are already stressed. I know that we are guided by what has happened in America. Many of us would wonder if the law of America barred Obama from being President, what would be happening in America today. 

If we are making the law, we should also be conscious of the constitutional provisions. The Constitution says all Ugandans are equal before the law. Once we have accepted somebody to be a Ugandan, that person must be treated in the same way that all Ugandans are being treated and must hold any office of calling in Uganda. That is one way of showing how committed that person is to the country which he subscribed to. If that is not done, then there must be some reason which is wrapped up in this –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable, even in the United States you referred to, some American citizens cannot stand as President simply because of place of birth.

MRS OGWAL: I am aware of that, Mr Speaker, but you know how the people of Kisumu celebrated when Obama became President. The people of Kenya generally and even Ugandans – the Luo of Uganda including myself - all celebrated. You cannot rule that out. I still insist that schedule five must be amended as we go through this law. 

I am not happy with clause 3, which talks about amendment to section 14 of the principal Act, which says anybody who legally or voluntarily comes and stays in Uganda for ten years can be considered for dual citizenship. I think we need to look at the softer alternative, which is permanent residence. We never know; as we make the law, we should also make provisions for the future. We can give permanent residence. We should consider that option if it is possible, so that in the future we can always change the status of the citizenship.

Finally, I would like to insist that whoever takes dual citizenship must have an oath of allegiance. That is important. Ugandans already outside Uganda and have gone out for whatever reasons - business or because of political turmoil in Uganda - should automatically be given dual citizenship. They should not be subjected to scrutiny because they are Ugandans by birth. This is their land. Nobody is going to ask me to subject my child who because of political turmoil - I do not want to go into that –(Member timed out)

4.50
MR BENSON OBUA OGWAL (UPC, Moroto County, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity and I would like to thank the committee for their report. I stand to support the motion. 

I would like to start by clarifying something that came from hon. Ekemu of Soroti Municipality. He insinuated that Mr Olara Otunu acquired citizenship of another West African country. I am a member of UPC, which Mr Otunu belongs to and, therefore, I am privy to some of these things. I want to put it on record that Mr Otunu never acquired the citizenship of any other country. 

If I may inform the House, as I speak now Mr Otunu is more or less stateless because he does not hold a passport of any country. The one he has, which is a Ugandan passport, is expired and for some reason he has failed to renew it, so that makes him stateless. What he uses now is some – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Do you want to educate us and say that if I do not have a passport therefore I am stateless?

MR OBUA OGWAL: In my understanding, if a state, which you claim you belong to refuses to renew your passport that in a way makes you stateless, I think. Anyway, he is a Ugandan and wants to remain Ugandan. He wants to come back to Uganda and be part of the citizenry that is developing this country. Mr Speaker, the allegation about him being –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, much as I am an independent member of the House I am the one who cared for the Uganda Peoples’ Congress for over 20 years. I can testify that at no one time did Mr Olara Otunu indicate, in writing, that he is a member of the Uganda Peoples Congress. I did assume that because of the political environment that we went through, none of us was able to renew their membership. I would like to know from hon. Benson Ogwal with whom I share a name, although he is not my son –(Laughter)– how he comes to align Mr Olara Otunu with the Uganda Peoples’ Congress and not with the politics of the independents like myself or with any other political party. What evidence does he have, which I did not get to know of for all the years I looked after that party? Thank you.

MR OBUA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for raising that point of clarification. I would like to say that I am surprised that my mother is denying me today. (Laughter) I am saying this because as far as I know, Mama Cecilia has been my mentor in politics. We have done a lot of things together and she remains my mother.

Anyway, when I said that Olara Otunu is member of the Uganda Peoples Congress, I knew what I was talking about. I would like to inform you that even up to now I do not hold any UPC party card but the allegiance to UPC just flows in my blood and so it is for Olara Otunu. There was a time Mr Otunu aspired to become the Secretary-General of the United Nations. At that time, the whole world was behind Mr Olara Otunu but his country let him down. This prompted one country in West Africa to suggest that he stands on its borrowed citizenship, which he declined. 

I know all this because I was in Ghana at the time. I can authoritatively report that Kofi Annan was nowhere in the picture. However, because Africa had to provide a candidate, Kofi Annan became a compromised candidate after Mr Otunu had been failed by Uganda. This is a very serious matter.

The point that I would like to make is that the world has greatly shrank in the last five years. Actually, the world is becoming flat because of the interconnectivity that has come about due to the developments in the telecommunication sector. Therefore, as long as we are in Uganda, we cannot stop people from interacting with us. We cannot also stop our people from going outside Uganda and becoming citizens of other countries. 

I would like to add that the benefits are quite many. Countries like India, for example, which have allowed free movement of their citizens, have benefited a lot. In Ghana where I was, there was a time a western embassy invited its citizens living in that country for a party, but to their surprise the black Ghanaians out numbered them by a ratio of four to one. This was because these Ghanaians had the citizenship of that country. That means that Ghana has become more accessible because the authorities there have allowed dual citizenship to take root. I must again add that they are doing a lot to develop Ghana.

This law is very good in principle, but it has some weaknesses. I think we have not thought thoroughly about what we are legislating. In my opinion, this law is quite shallow. If we want to make a good law for this country, let us reconsider; let us take this law back to the committee so that all of us can go there to make our contributions –(Interjections)– I am submitting the opinions that I have gathered from members who I have interacted with. We need to reconsider some aspects of this law. Otherwise, we might muddle ourselves in dirty water somewhere. Whereas I support the motion, we should refine the Bill. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Shouldn’t we really end this debate? I had said we shall hear from hon. Butime and the others, but let us only hear from him and one other member and then we go to the Committee Stage.

5.00
COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that I support the motion. I also would like to thank the chairman of the committee for this very thin, four-page report. 

I have noticed that during their consultations, they interacted with the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, Directorate of Citizenship, the people in the Diaspora, but they did not recall that there are foreigners living in Uganda who have been waiting for this law for a long time. They have been waiting for it to enable them start operating with comfort. I would have loved to be told that the committee interacted with foreigners living in Uganda on this law. Maybe that is why the report is very thin.

When this law is passed, there are very many people, for example businessmen, who are going to take advantage of dual citizenship. Many people, as well as the business community, have been waiting. As far as investment is concerned, when they become citizens of Uganda but also keep the citizenship of the countries where they come from, I have no doubt that the economy of this country is going to improve because it will stabilise. There are people who have been living here but were waiting for the law to come into place.

There are people who have lived in this country and are farmers. They are mainly found in the areas of western Uganda. These are the Simpsons and the Johnsons who have got tea estates and are married to Ugandan women. They are English but their wives are from here. The wives are Batoro if you want. (Laughter) The debate has been that the lady does not want to go and live in Britain and the husband also does not want to leave his wife here, but at the same time he does not want to relinquish his citizenship. This solves the problem now. These people can now become citizens, live here with their wives and be happy. Their wives can also visit as citizens of the countries where their husbands originate and come back. This stabilises the situation and I am extremely grateful that this is now going to happen.

There are religious leaders - priests and reverends - who have been here for forty or fifty years. They are Spaniards, Italians, British and Americans. These old religious leaders have baptised us and they will be buried here. However, they have been holding either work permits or permanent residence permits because they did not want to relinquish the citizenship of their countries. They are now going to take advantage of this law. They will relax, knowing very well that they are citizens of Uganda but that they have also remained citizens of the country where they came from like Canada, France, Italy and others. This is going to help us as far as stabilising that community is concerned.

There are Ugandan scientists living outside the country who have been clamouring to be given Ugandan citizenship because they lost it due to the fact that they became citizens of Canada, for example. Now when they get back the citizenship of their country, we are going to see more interaction in terms of science and technology. Ugandans who have lived there have become scientists and they will now return.

Finally, I do not agree that this law is about making the status of the Directorate of Immigration the same as that of the Uganda Police and Uganda Prisons. That is not the argument. The purpose is that the constitutional requirement is fulfilled, but not to make the Directorate of Immigration have the same status as that of Prisons and the Police. I thank you, Sir.

5.06
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister and the committee for this Bill and the report. 

I think this Bill goes a long way to correct some of the injustices that were vetted upon Ugandans, especially of Asian origin, who lost their citizenship during the exodus of 1972. They have been yearning to correct that situation and I think this is cure enough.

I would also like to highlight where it says that enormous contributions shall be considered for citizenship. Once it goes back to the ministerial level, perhaps I would want the word “enormous” defined maybe in a tabulated manner, like it is in the Board of Immigration of Australia or Canada. If you own assets, what kind of assets are they? What is that “enormous” contribution to the nation that we are talking about? I would want that word “enormous” defined clearly.

Several of my colleagues have talked about the Ugandans that live in the Diaspora - their financial contributions and their yearning to contribute intellectually to the development of Uganda today; I think this Bill will address that.

I would like to propose an amendment to the fifth schedule. I strongly support the inclusion of the fifth schedule and disagree with my colleagues who said that somebody with dual citizenship could hold a high office. Their loyalties would not be there. Like you rightly said, even America does not accept it so why would we be the first to accept somebody who holds dual citizenship to hold those offices?

I would like to move that Members of Parliament also be included on that list. It says that ministers cannot be dual citizens and yet the pool of ministers is mainly from Parliament. (Applause) So I would like to add to the list the Members of Parliament, the Chief Justice of Uganda and -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What is the problem with the Chief Justice being an American or an Indian? 

MR TANNA: Mr Speaker, when I hold dual citizenship, my loyalty is automatically divided. 

THE SPEAKER: You mean you cannot have a Chief Justice from Jamaica? 

MR TANNA: Mr Speaker, I would like to suggest that should the appointing authority appoint a dual citizen, or should a dual citizen want to stand as a Member of Parliament, he should renounce his second citizenship.

THE SPEAKER: But you do not need to be a citizen to be the Chief Justice.

MR TANNA: I agree with you, Mr Speaker, and I thank you for that clarification. I would also like to suggest that the national identity card project be expedited to enable the Directorate of Immigration and citizen board implement this law. 

Lastly, I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee on the issue of elevating the directorate to the level of Uganda Police and Uganda Prisons. In my understanding, it is primarily for budget purposes because it goes ahead to say, “…to have an elaborate structure ….” I would like to seek further clarification on that matter. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I was going to stop on him but hon. Butime talked about people living here and they are in charge of refugees and other people. It is justifiable to allow you to make a brief statement, but that will be after hon. Mutuluuza, national cake.

5.11
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (NRM, Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just beg to humbly remind you of my name, maybe you forgot it. I am called Peter Mutuluuza, Member of Parliament for Mawokota North County, Mpigi District.

THE SPEAKER: You don’t like the national cake?

MR MUTULUUZA: Mr Speaker, I stand to support the motion. As far as we are concerned, it is long over due because since we amended the Constitution to allow dual citizenship in the Seventh Parliament, as Members of Parliament we have met people who ask us why we do not implement that constitutional provision.

I have some few clarifications I want from the Minister of Internal Affairs before we think of passing dual citizenship. In the Fifth Schedule of our Constitution, the indigenous tribes of Uganda are about 65. The 24th are the Banyarwanda. When these people apply for a passport and indicate that they are Banyarwanda by tribe, in most cases they are denied a passport. They are put under investigation and our people have been complaining. One time I went to the former Minister of Internal Affairs, hon. Ruhakana Rugunda. We discussed this matter and came to an agreement but the problem is still continuing.

In Uganda, there is a group called the Umubano Group. That group is an umbrella of the Banyarwanda Ugandans in Uganda. The minister had suggested that the moment that group gives you a recommendation; the Ministry of Internal Affairs will have no problem in recommending you for a passport. The problem that we have is that this group is only in Kampala yet we have people in the remote areas of Uganda and they have no knowledge -(Interruption)

MR SEMATIKO: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I represent Mityana North Constituency in this House and I have part of my population falling in the category that the honourable member is talking about. The unfortunate thing is that we do not have national identity cards. The identification that immigration requires is one’s voter’s card, which means that they are allowed to vote but not have a passport. 

That puts them in a dilemma because the statements I get, and they are several, is that they are told, “Go to Rwanda to be given a passport.” I have a few who went to Rwanda but were returned. They were told, “You are Ugandans, go to Uganda and get a passport”, so they are stateless. I think if this motion is turned into law, maybe it will cure the problem but what happens to those who according to the Constitution, are not citizens? This is because we are depending on individuals to determine whether you are a citizen or not. I hope that this body will be empowered to do a thorough job so that our citizens do not suffer.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, honourable member for that information. There are forms, which these applicants fill. They go through LC I, II, III, DISO and then RDC. All these sign and put stamps but in most cases, these people are denied passports. The reason one of the officials from immigration gave was that everywhere in Uganda people are corrupt and therefore it is easy for someone to go, bribe and get these signatures and stamps. However, should they be victimised because of that confusion? I think it is high time, now that we are even allowing those who are not Ugandans to acquire citizenship, we also considered these people. I am tired of recommending people to the passport office. I pray that the moment somebody has all the forms filled, there should be no problem -(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, honourable for giving way. I remember when we were forming that Schedule, we had a big debate and I was one of those opposed saying that Banyarwanda should not be included in the Schedule as a tribe because I was categorising it the way they used to do in Rwanda. I remember hon. Mugenyi was saying that Indians should also be made an indigenous tribe. 

What the Member is saying is actually true because I have had several cases. Some are my friends and my constituency neighbours Kisoro District where there are some Banyarwanda. The kind of torture they go through to get passports is untold of. Now that we are making this submission and I can see some members of the board are here, the minister should take this seriously. Some Ugandans are being denied their rights and passports because somebody comes and says, “I am a Munyarwanda.” Why did we put it in the Constitution first of all? So, the moment we agreed that we put Banyarwanda in the Constitution, that we put the Barundi as a tribe in the Constitution then we should not be saying that go and get clearance form here and there. 

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, hon. Member, for that information. Mr Speaker, I think the point is made.

THE SPEAKER: I think you have made a point because you see if you travel to Mirima Hills that is where there is the boundary between Uganda and Rwanda. Definitely these boundaries came after people had settled in those areas. So there must be Banyarwanda on the Ugandan side and Banyarwanda on the Rwandan side. They are Banyarwanda by tribe but of different nationality. Okay, let us get the Minister of Internal Affairs.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, we absolutely have no intention to discriminate against anybody and I want this House to be assured that the Directorate of Immigration has no intention and will not discriminate any Ugandan. However, as you all know, we have had a problem in the past where some unscrupulous people did issue our travel documents to Rwandese and other nationals without making reference to those countries. 

These non-Ugandans went out of this country and started carrying out subversive activities against their own countries unknown to us. It was discovered that these non-nationals were actually holding Ugandan passports. And this almost created a fracas between us and that particular country. Therefore, we have to be extremely careful and this is not only applicable to Rwandese; it is applicable to Sudanese, to Kenyans when we are looking at who has applied for a passport. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: But honestly, hon. Members, these border cases really cause a problem; we have to look at them.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When you see people rising up to seek some clarification, it is because of the gravity of the statement that the minister has made. On that note, we do know very well that there were some people that we did not know that were foreign nationals. They fought with us in the bush, they came and captured power together with us, we even sent them abroad for further military training; they came back and used our arms and finally relocated themselves their new found land. When they went, did they surrender our passports especially our brothers and sisters from Rwanda when they went back as RPF? Did you as government ask them to surrender our passports? [Ms Mwebaze: “They expired.”] Even if they expired, but they are still there! So, we need to know. 

THE SPEAKER: But I think we should end debate on this issue. It is up to the vigilance of the staff of the directorate to scrutinize this and that but somebody should not be denied a passport simply because he has said that they are a Munyarwanda.  

5.24
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am glad I have had a chance at the end of the debate to say two things. One, as one person who was in exile for six years, there was a time when I did not want to identify myself as a Ugandan because being a Ugandan was almost a shame. But here now we have a citizenship which is so valuable that people want to have it and share it with other citizenship they may have had. 

Secondly, the logic of having dual citizenship is to recognize that Uganda sent out many Ugandans in many instalments and those Ugandans now want to reconnect with Uganda. Because without their own choice, they were children born of Ugandans abroad and acquired citizenship by birth, others were forced to take up citizenship because they could not come back home but now Uganda is their home therefore dual citizenship is the only instrument of reconnecting with their motherland. 

Pressure of Ugandans abroad in the Diaspora has been mounting especially when it was now easy for them to invest back home. As you know, before this global financial crisis, we were approaching a billion dollars coming from Ugandans in the Diaspora, which is an indication of the confidence they have in their country because of a changed image. Therefore, recognition of this demand or change and embedding it in law is the most welcome action this Parliament is undertaking. 

To think that because you have dual citizenship so many people are going to run into Uganda and become citizens is a bit of an exaggeration. If you talk of patriotism, if you talk of national loyalty, I do not know how many of us here are out everyday applying to become citizens of other countries. When you are confident of your country, when you are home, you do not have to seek identity of another country. So, what really is so important rather than fear that some people are going to take advantage of Uganda; they are going to come here, let us make Uganda so good  that nobody has to leave Uganda and any one who comes  has to come respecting Uganda and the relevant body will evaluate him or her and accommodate him. 

Lastly, the issue of a dual citizen having dual loyalty, I think this question of a double mind is not expected. If there is no reason for you being a dual citizen, you don’t become a dual citizen. If there is good reason for you being a dual citizen, you know which citizenship you give high priority. And I, therefore, believe –(Interruption))

MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I am sorry to stand to seek clarification but I think it is necessary since hon. Kabwegyere has never been a Minister of Foreign Affairs and he is also a full Cabinet Minister. When we are discussing this Bill, I think we are looking at one side of the coin, without reference to the other side. Dual citizenship and allegiance actually raise a question and I think Cabinet should help us to answer it because I think many of us support this Bill, but what do you do with allegiance? If Uganda was fighting with America and I have dual citizenship of America and Uganda, this is when the question comes in. on which side do I fall? I remain on the fence? So, Cabinet should help us to come up with a solution as far as this issue is concerned.

THE SPEAKER: I think if Uganda is fighting with America, and you are a dual citizen you act as a Nnalongo; you appeal on Uganda’s side, and you appeal on America’s side. (Laughter)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I conclude by saying that I hope the next time I travel out to meet Ugandans in Diaspora I will have a law in my hands to say, “You can be Ugandan once again”. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Do you have any brief reply on the issue? If they are not there then I put the question. Hon. Members, the motion is that Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control (Amendment) Bill, 2008 be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION CONTROL 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
 
Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR KASAMBA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we delete clause 2(b). The justification is that the provision in the current Act is to cater for the adequate removal of the members of the board. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. In clause 3(b) “Every person who has legally and voluntarily migrated and has been living in Uganda for an aggregate period of 10 years and has spent the last 18 months immediately preceding the application continuously in Uganda …” - I have a problem with this because if we just let whoever has been living here for ten years - in other countries, I will give an example of Great Britain, you can have what we call discretion; the state gives you discretion to remain and then you can be given an indefinite leave to remain or a full citizenship. And here just for somebody who has been here ten years, and you automatically –

THE CHAIRMAN: It does not mean that.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Yes, you are saying - 

THE CHAIRMAN: This is a minimum condition to qualify you to apply. It does not mean that because you have lived here, automatically -

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: But, Mr Chairman, when you apply, you are applying for citizenship. This is what I am opposing.

THE CHAIRMAN: This only applies if your interest is to have a dual citizenship, but it does not mean that you cannot apply for permanent residence, even if there is a provision for that. This only deals with a situation where you want to have a dual citizenship. They say the minimum stay to qualify is this; that is all.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Mr Chairman, I am concerned because when you apply, you are applying for citizenship. But I am requesting the House that we should set benchmarks. For example, all of you have lived outside this country -

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Nsubuga, this does not mean you are not allowed to apply for permanent residence. This is only dealing with dual citizenship in that if you want to make that application, this is the minimum period you ought to have stayed in the country. It is only for that. I do not know whether it is different. The Attorney-General can help us.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, first of all, I thought that the chairperson of the committee had an amendment but assuming that amendment is sustained, I would like him to also be consistent, if he intends to remove the words “an aggregate period”, I would prefer he inserts “at least”, to be consistent with the Constitution.

But what the chairman is saying is that this is the minimum. This is actually provided by the Constitution for at least a period of ten years. It is a period for eligibility; it is not automatic. It gives you an eligibility criterion through which you can then proceed to apply to become a citizen.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I do not have an option to the Attorney-General because it is true what he is saying is in the Constitution but what hon. Nsubuga is saying is first and foremost, we accept you want to become a citizen. But to become a citizen, we must first assess you; we can give you temporary residence, you become a resident then we make an analysis, because we must be able to prescribe a method to help.

Because if we do not prescribe, if it is in the Constitution, then we do not need to bring it here but if we as Parliament want to help the Constitution to operate then we must have some prescriptions here.

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, hon. Nandala, this is the same as the situation where you are recruiting people to join the police force and you say, “For a person to apply or to present himself to be recruited in the police force, he must have a minimum of five feet”. It does not mean that because you are five feet they will not consider other issues. 

This is only to say do not attempt to apply for dual citizenship unless you have stayed for this period. That is all. But the fact that you have applied does not mean that your application will succeed.

MR KYANJO: Mr Chairman, I want your clarification on the issue of an applicant who explicitly stays in his country of origin and wants to become Ugandan. It sounds like everybody who wants to apply for dual citizenship must be here for ten years prior.

MR KASAIJA: Just like in the old law we are trying to amend, if you wanted to apply for citizenship under registration or naturalization, there are certain conditions that are set. The one that is paramount is that you must have lived here for a certain minimum period of time because we want to make sure that you have an interest in the country. We do not want Tom, Dick and Harry to stand in a foreign capital and say I want to become Ugandan. How do we tell that you are a good citizen? We can only tell that you are a good and useful citizen, at that, when you have lived in the country for a minimum period if ten years. Then you can apply for dual citizenship. 

MR KASAMBA: As I progress on clause 3, I had an insertion of another new clause immediately after clause 2 to read as follows: Insertion of section 8(a) to the principal Act. Part 2 of the principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after section 8 the following:
(a) Vote of the board
(i) The board shall have a vote of its own.
(ii) A percentage of non tax revenue collected by or payable to the board shall with the approval of the Ministry responsible for Finance be retained by the board.” 

The justification is to grant the board a vote holding status and to give the board the necessary Appropriation-in-Aid.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thought we have finished clause 2 and we are on clause 3? If so, how do you bring the issue of finance in clause 3 to deal with a person who is supposed to apply for citizenship?

THE CHAIRMAN: So you are taking us back to clause 2?

MR KASAMBA: No, it is a new insertion immediately after clause 2, making it a new clause 3.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: I want the chairperson to advise me. I do not think it is proper to indicate that the board should have a vote. I think it is the prerogative of Ministry of Finance and Parliament when the time arrives to upgrade to have a board.

THE CHAIRMAN: We are making a law and the law is providing for it. What is wrong?

MR KASAMBA: We did consultation with the ministry; we even wrote to the Ministry of Finance and the ministry is in agreement to provide a vote for the board and even to provide for the non tax revenue so that there is efficient functionality of the board. That is why we captured this as an amendment within the Act. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Although I agree with the first one, but we cannot put in the law that non tax revenue would be appropriated because it can vary according to the financial year. What if the income realised increased and it is over and above their budget; what will be the role of Parliament during the budget process?

MR BANYENZAKI: To cure what hon. Nsubuga is asking; if you say a percentage of the non tax revenue collected, you are giving the minister a duty to appropriate that non tax revenue which is the responsibility of Parliament. But to cure this, I propose that we delete this sub-clause and amend it to read, “Non tax revenue collected by the board shall be retained by the board to be appropriated-in-aid.”

The Budget Act, Article 17 provides for how Appropriation-in-Aid report comes to Parliament. I agree with the committee because once the board holds that vote status, it will have necessary facilitation to perform its duties because there are other institutions who appropriate in aid except as I had raised before most of these ministries are not reporting to Parliament. The Minister of Finance and the Prime Minister need to take note of this so that these ministries report to Parliament as provided by the law.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: As hon. Nsubuga said, the responsibility of creating a vote belongs to the Secretary to the Treasury. The issue of a vote here can be created any time if it is necessary. This is a department under Ministry of Internal Affairs. They are free to have their activities budgeted for through that. If they want to be autonomous, then they should come here and seek autonomy. And the moment they become autonomous, they become a self accounting unit and then we can make a law which says, “When you collect your money you can account for it after spending or you can get subversion from government.” What the chairman is bringing here does not work.

THE CHAIRMAN: It has been modified by hon. Banyenzaki and that is what we are dealing with now. 

MR KASAIJA: By having a separate vote, it does not necessarily mean that you are autonomous. For example, the police have a separate vote and the prisons have a separate vote. And, therefore, we thought that even this department should have a separate vote so that they can be able to be more effective; money can be allocated by Parliament separately so that they are not married within the other activities of the ministry. 

I want to inform the House that this department is capable of collecting more than Shs 40 billion a year if it is properly facilitated and organised. As we speak, we are collecting about Shs 8 billion despite the many things that are lacking.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The minister is saying that this department is capable of collecting Shs 40 billion, who is taking it given the fact that now they are not capable? Who is taking the difference?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: It is like saying I am capable of earning Shs 10 million but because I am not facilitated to earn it and I am earning only Shs 2 million, it does not mean that the Shs 8 million is stolen somewhere. It is simply because of your inefficiency and thus you are incapable of collecting and it is not being stolen. I am not accusing my staff, but all I am saying is that because they are not sufficiently facilitated, they cannot put the infrastructure in place that will collect the difference between what they are earning today and what they should be collecting.

THE CHAIRMAN: There was a proposal by the committee which was modified by hon. Banyenzaki. The committee agreed with his formulation and I put the question on that formulation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR KASAMBA: Clause 3 on the amendment of Section 14 of the principal Act, delete the word “aggregate” appearing in the second line. 

The justification is to be consistent with Article 12(2)(b) of the Constitution.

b) Delete the rest of the words appearing immediately after “the period of ten years” and the justification is that the term continuously appearing on the last line is ambiguous and if deleted then the rest of the words appearing after the “ten years” will be redundant.

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you. Before we leave this, when an individual applies, what happens to the members of his family, for example, children, a wife? The law is very silent here; can we know? 

THE CHAIRMAN: You mean which children; grown up or infants?

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: When you apply, you may have dependants on you; what does the law say about your dependants? They may even be outside the country but they are your dependants. What happens?

MR KASAMBA: That is the purpose of dual citizenship. You may have stayed in Uganda for ten years but you have your family in the UK and you are opting to acquire citizenship in this country as an individual. That is why we are saying for a period of ten years you must have stayed in this country.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, he is asking about what happens to his immediate family if his application is successful?

MR KASAMBA: I think they also have to apply. This application is on individual basis and not on family basis.

MR WADRI: I think this is the heart of this amendment. Presently, if I have a child and my child can travel with me on my passport, in such a situation if you are a foreigner, you have complied with the conditions, and successfully applied for dual citizenship and you have got children with you. You are here with your wife and children; what happens? If you give dual citizenship to me, do my children automatically qualify or they will be alienated? We need that clarified in this law.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think they must be dependants but not a grown up person like me and you are my father.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: We are talking of dependants below 18.

COL (RTD) BUTIME: I saw the minister consulting the permanent secretary. I think once you are a citizen of Uganda, you are provided with a passport irrespective of whether you are dual or non dual like me. If I am travelling, I can decide whether the child will be in the mother’s passport or my passport. What the minister can now help us with is: dual citizenship carries what rights of that citizen? Is your wife automatic? Are your children below 16 years automatic? When they become 18 do they apply afresh for them to become dual citizens? What happens? Once that is clarified then we can move on. 

MR KIVEJINJA: If the children are minor, they are treated as dependants but if they are grown up, then they decide themselves. 

THE CHAIRMAN: If they are minor, therefore, they have benefited from your citizenship; they carry citizenship until they denounce it.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, clause 14(ii) reads as follows: “The following persons shall, upon application be registered as citizens of Uganda: a) Every person married to a citizen of Uganda upon proof of a legal and a substantial marriage of five years or more ….” To answer this query, if somebody becomes a citizen of Uganda and wishes his wife or husband to also become a Ugandan, then that person will have to write an application to be registered as a Ugandan citizen with dual citizenship. I thought I should clarify on that.

THE CHAIRMAN: What about the children?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, the law on the children I think remains at the position that was presented by my senior minister. They are treated as minors. The status of a minor is treated as that of the parent(s).

THE CHAIRMAN: But when the child becomes an adult, he/she can denounce it. I think that is very clear. So I put the question to it – okay, hon. Nandala.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the committee is proposing to delete the word “continuous” but in my opinion that word is vital. To prove my position, let me give reference to the wording in some of the laws that are operating. In the Income Tax Act, for tax purposes you can be treated as a resident if you have stayed in Uganda for 183 days continuously. It also makes use of the word “continuously.” It also talks of 122 days or three years continuously. It is on this basis that I suggest that we should not delete the word “continuously.” It will show that the persons must stay here to prove they are interested in Uganda.

THE CHAIRMAN: This is not in respect of the ten years; it is about the last 18 years.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Mr Chairman, we are not talking about – if you have satisfied the ten years’ condition and we know that you qualify, you must have stayed in Uganda for the last 18 months continuously. That is why I am saying that we should not delete the word “continuously.”

THE CHAIRMAN: What would happen if you left for medical treatment in India?

HON. MEMBERS: That is okay.

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, I have reflected on the advice of hon. Kasaija, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs when he made reference to the advice earlier on given by his senior colleague, and realised that the issue of the position of the minors is still not clear. For example, how about if the two parents do not have the same citizenship? What happens? 

Secondly, is there any legal provision anywhere that clearly defines the position of minors in such relationships? 

Thirdly, the definition of minor differs from country to country. What is our situation as a country?

THE CHAIRMAN: In Uganda, a minor is a person below the age of 18 years.

MR WADRI: Yes, I know that but how about a situation where I come and apply for dual citizenship and I am married to say, a Ugandan who probably also has another citizenship in another country? Where do these children belong? We may be assuming but there might be a lot of vagueness in this law and that is my fear. So is there any legal provision in Uganda, which we can rely on as an authority?

MS NALUBEGA: Mr Chairman, recently I applied for a passport for my daughter who is one year and a half. At the time of applying I attached her birth certificate and a copy of my passport. But while there, the officers asked for the consent of the father. I quickly told them that I did not know the father had to consent. In their response, they said they were going to issue the passport to my daughter, which they did. All my children have passports – one is five years, the second one is two years with the last one being one and half years.

Anyway, in reference to what he is questioning – the father of my children did not consent. They did not bother to know whether he had dual citizenship; whether he was a Ugandan or not, they just issued the passport. Much as I told them not to just issue the passport to my daughter because I am a Member of Parliament, they ignored that. That is why I am also saying that we need to clarify on the issue of the minors because they do not go to apply for these passports; it is done by us the adults. 

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Mr Chairman, I must say that she was very lucky maybe because she is a Member of Parliament, to have been allowed to get that passport for her minor daughter without the consent of the husband. I think what the Ministry of Internal Affairs wants to ascertain is whether you are not actually planning to take away the child to Europe or any other country without the consent of the father or mother, either way. But since the Minister of Internal Affairs is here, he has now heard. Isn’t it? That next time should some young ladies like the MP ever come back asking for passports for young children – it is very important that they become rigorous and get confirmation preferably from the LCs and the husband. Even single parents can always have documents that can assist, but that is my advice. Maybe the minister has a better answer.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Chairman, I think Article 11(2) of the Constitution can help us. This Article talks about an adopted child or minor in respect of whom someone can apply for a passport. The child will then be registered as a Ugandan. I think it is the same thing that we are talking about here. The father who maybe having dual citizenship can apply and the children should be issued with passports. If they want to change on attaining majority age, that will be up to them.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Chairman, the issue of minors needs to be clarified. I know of Ugandans who applied to get citizenships both in Europe and America; it should not be automatic that they can fly back to Uganda and take all the children they say are theirs to the countries where they got citizenship. I am saying this because the law is very specific about how to qualify, even for the minors, to become a citizen of America or Iceland. We need to specify it here. How do we manage that process of changing citizenship or becoming a duo citizen, both for the adult applying and for the children? We need to be specific and clear so that we leave no ambiguity in the law.

MR TANNA: Chapter three, Article 11(1) and (2) describe the status of foundlings and adopted children. Clause 1 states, “A child of not more than five years of age found in Uganda, whose parents are not known, shall be presumed to be a citizen of Uganda by birth.”

Clause 2 states, “A child under the age of 18 years neither of whose parents is a citizen of Uganda, or who is adopted by a citizen of Uganda shall, will on application, be registered as a citizen of Uganda.”

So, I think the Constitution is very clear on this -(Interruption)- yes! What I am saying is that if somebody has applied to become a citizen and has been made a Ugandan, then he can apply for his child thereafter and the child shall be accepted.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR KASAMBA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move an amendment to clause 7. On the proposed replacement of section 18 of the principal Act, substitute the word, “deprivation” on the head note with “loss”. The justification is to bring it in harmony with section 17 of the Principal Act. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.
 
Clause 8

MR EUKU: Mr Chairman, clause 8, sub-section 2, I propose that we amend clause 8 by inserting section (k) after section (e) to read -

THE CHAIRMAN: No, you said 8(2)?

MR EUKU: Yes, 8(2)

THE CHAIRMAN: What about (2)?

MR EUKU: 8(2) because it reads: “… in addition to the conditions prescribed in sub-section 1, a non-citizen who wishes to acquire ….”

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you reading what I am reading?

MR EUKU: What I propose is to insert clause (k) after (e) because -

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, for the Bill we are dealing with, clause 8 -

MR EUKU: No, it is clause 9. Sorry, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. So, I propose that clause 8 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR KASIGWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to seek some clarification from you or the Attorney-General. If you look at Article 15(7), it could be a question of semantics, but anyway it reads as follows, “Parliament shall by law prescribe the offices of State which a person who holds the citizenship of another country in addition to the citizenship of Uganda is not qualified to hold.”

How about if you put it the other way round, is it the same? If a Ugandan holds any other citizenship isn’t he entitled to contest for Office of the President in this country? Is that person proscribed from contesting for these offices that have been enumerated?

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes. You see, the provision is saying that the Constitution provided for duo citizenship, saying that that law that will operationalise that provision which allows duo citizenship may prescribe offices to which a person who holds duo citizenship is not entitled to. And this is done -

MR KASIGWA: You see, Mr Chairman, it creates two scenarios. We have got a scenario of me, Kasigwa a Ugandan who is here and who wants to go and acquire American citizenship today and a scenario of an American called Nandala who wants to come to Uganda to acquire Ugandan citizenship. If the law bans a one Nandala who is an American but seeking to acquire Ugandan citizenship from standing, should the same law ban me, Kasigwa who is a Ugandan from contesting for office? 

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes. If there is proof that you are holding duo citizenship -

MR KASIGWA: No, Mr Chairman, then I will want to get the rationale for that because I am a citizen of this country, first and foremost. What happens here is that this provision here -

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Kasigwa, you are a citizen of this country but there is evidence that to that citizenship you have added another citizenship and because you have done so, you are prohibited from holding this office or that office. This is what is being done and this is what is being proposed in the schedule behind the Bill. So, have we finished clause 9? 

MR EUKU: Mr Chairman, I propose that clause 9, 19(b) part II be amended so that we insert section (k) to read as follows: “… has satisfied that he or she has been a temporary citizen for five years ….” That is (a).

And (b) “… he or she has been a permanent residence for 15 years.” 

The justification is (a) to take care of persons who entered and lived in Uganda illegally, and (b) to enforce immigration policies of government.

THE CHAIRMAN: Illegally?

MR EUKU: The persons who entered Uganda illegally. This is because there are people who enter into the country and stay without being noticed and they are very many. After 20 years, according to part (d) of clause 2, that person must have satisfied the board that he has been in Uganda for not less than 20 years but if such persons entered Uganda illegally and stayed for 20 years, they will automatically qualify to be citizens if they applied. The provision that I have given here is to take care of such persons who enter here illegally and after 20 years apply for citizenship and get it.

MR KASAMBA: Mr Chairman, I also have some amendments to clause 9 -

THE CHAIRMAN: Have we explained to him? You see the period you count must have been legal and that is where we started, that one’s stay must have been legal and voluntary. I think we have disposed of his amendment.

Hon. Members, in future I advise that you write down the kind of amendment you want to make.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Mr Chairman, in clause 9, 19(a) sub-section (1), a citizen of Uganda who desires to acquire the citizenship of another country while retaining his or her citizenship of Uganda shall give notice in writing to the board of his or her application for citizenship of another country. The law is silent. When you give notice to the board, what happens? Is the board to give the permission or is it just to give notice that I am a Ugandan?

THE CHAIRMAN: It is for the board to know that in addition to your Ugandan citizenship, you are trying to get - it is for their record instead of you quietly going to Germany and getting citizenship without them knowing. They should know for purposes of saying, “Nsubuga is a Ugandan but he is also …” - it is not for their permission but for information.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Mr Chairman, there are some conditions that they are saying we should fulfil. Another very pertinent issue is (f), to satisfy the board that he or she has not been in Uganda as a refugee or as a diplomat.

Mr Chairman, there are some diplomats who have been in this country and at the end of their service, remain here and even marry Ugandans. Does that mean that this person is not qualified to apply for citizenship even after he has lived here for ten years as a diplomat? We have examples we can give in this House. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the reason they have included refugees is because they are not here voluntarily and neither is a diplomat. He has come on an assignment given by his employer.

MR BYANYIMA: Mr Chairman, I thought that procedurally when we are in the Committee stage members are supposed to come along with their amendments. Some of us wanted to debate but you denied us a chance to do so and you are sticking to particular individuals who stand up and down. Please, let us move in a procedural manner.

THE CHAIRMAN: I said yesterday that that was the last time for me to allow those kinds of amendments because the rules are very clear. Whereas yesterday I tolerated some of these, I am not going to continue because it violates our Rules of Procedure.

MR KASAMBA: Thank you, I beg to move amendments to clause 9 on the proposal of inserting section 19(b) to the principal Act, amend paragraph (d) of sub-section (2) by substituting “20 years” with “ten years” and deleting the rest of the words. The justification is that this is for consistency based on the earlier amendments we carried.

(b) To delete sub-section (h) which reads, “He or she possesses substantial sums of money lawfully acquired.” The justification is that the provision appears to be segregative by catering for only people with money and should not be used as grounds for denying people dual citizenship.

On the proposed insertion of section (d) after 19(c), replace paragraph (d) with sub-section (2) as follows, “She or he does not have a criminal record”. The justification is for the board to delve into the conduct of individuals applying for dual citizenship.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I have a problem with the proposed amendment 19(c).

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don’t we dispose of the first one? I put the question to the first amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, the proposal by the committee widens up this provision to the extent that it can easily be abused. “He or she does not have a criminal record.” What is the yardstick? Criminality must have a benchmark and the benchmark is conviction and that is the record. All laws where such provisions are provided for are awarded in that way: “He or she does not have a criminal record,” may actually end up being abused and we may witch hunt people for no good reason.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I think there must be evidence when you say one has a criminal record; there are records for criminals, which are always produced. If you don’t have that evidence you cannot say somebody has got a criminal record. So the onus will be on that person who wants to exploit this provision. But if you cannot prove it, then it doesn’t make any sense. You cannot say that I have a criminal record when you have no proof of it; there must be proof. You must produce the evidence.   

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, I find us going into some confusion; I tend to buy the idea of the learned Attorney-General. To have a criminal record can be anything. If, for example, I am found moving in the streets of London admiring things in the shops and a Police officer arrests me and probably cautions me or takes me on charge and says he is charging me for being idle and disorderly, that is a criminal record.

THE CHAIRMAN: Not that criminal record! This term as used has a technical meaning and the technical meaning as he has said is a conviction. And, therefore, anybody trying to exploit this one must have the evidence of that record. There is no disagreement; what the Attorney-General is saying is okay.

MR WADRI: I concede, Mr Chairman. (Laughter) We are talking about the same thing. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: So I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I don’t have an objection to what the chairman’s proposals are but under the same clause 9(19)(d) -

THE CHAIRMAN: We have been dealing with 19(c).

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We are first doing (c).

THE CHAIRMAN: The amendment we were dealing with was 19(c).

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, I will wait for (d).

THE CHAIRMAN: But as I have said earlier on, you don’t just stand and say you have an amendment; there is a procedure. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, as you see this law; 19(d) has something about citizenship and it is going to bring in the schedule. And of course even the Constitution has rights of a citizen. That is why I was coming up to say that it may need just a small amendment if it is agreed; it is not a big thing.

THE CHAIRMAN: Which one?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: On 19(d).

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is talking of citizenship -

THE CHAIRMAN: Which 19(d)?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: 19(d)(i).

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, “A person who holds the citizenship of another country in addition to the citizenship of Uganda is not qualified to hold any of the offices of State specified in the fifth Schedule in this Act.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, now I am on the Fifth Schedule. If you deal with it here, it means you have already dealt with the Fifth Schedule. And that is why I wanted to understand as to whether we handle it here or we first go to the Fifth Schedule -(Interjections)- the Fifth Schedule is at the back; you first see it. 

The reason I am standing up on that is that I have dual citizenship. I am Ugandan by descent and a Kenyan by registration. When I am a Ugandan by descent, I have more rights in Uganda than in Kenya because of registration. If by descent I have nothing; I am treated like somebody who has come from another country and registered - I have equal rights with him, I do not think that is right. Because even the Constitution goes further under Article 17 to define the rights and duties of a citizen; one of them is to defend the country, another is to fight. I have fought the war and got the medal to become the Inspector-General of Police; you say I cannot qualify yet I am a citizen by descent? So I want to bring a qualification here that those under the Fifth Schedule are the ones not under descent.

THE CHAIRMAN: No. You see originally the position was that you are either a Ugandan or not. Then the other development came, which is that you can be a Ugandan as well a German. But in case you have two citizenships, your rights are affected in that you may not enjoy all that is given to a citizen that does not have another citizenship. And that is why expressly the Constitution under 7 says: “Parliament shall by law prescribe the offices of state, which a person who holds the citizenship of another country in addition to the citizenship of Uganda is not qualified to hold.” So, when on top of your Ugandan citizenship you decide to have another citizenship, you should know that certain offices of State will not be available to you. You are put on notice but the choice is yours. That is what has happened. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I would like to advise on some principles of constitutional interpretation and particularly in respect to instances where you find two provisions of the Constitution, which apparently conflict with each other. Each provision stands independent of the other in view of that apparent conflict. Where one provision is silent and another one is apparently supplementing that, then you read them together in harmony. Those are the rules of constitutional interpretation. So when you say there is Article 17, which says national service; a person is charged with the responsibility of providing a particular duty and there is another provision which says, “No, that is qualified”, and then you qualify it by that one. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I think it is clear.
 
MR KASIGWA: Mr Chairman, help me understand this clearly. A person who holds citizenship of another country comes first in addition to Uganda. There is a scenario of a Ugandan holding citizenship of another country. Are they treated as the same? Should we treat them as the same; is one and the other the same here?

THE CHAIRMAN: Once you say you are a Ugandan and you have Burundi citizenship, your rights are limited in as far as offices of state are concerned; it is clear. We are not trying to amend the Constitution; we are trying to operationalise the Constitution.

MR KASIGWA: Mr Chairman, I do accept that, but this is English. You are not helping me to understand, honestly Attorney-General.

THE CHAIRMAN: I am telling you as a person who can interpret a legal document. (Laughter)

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: I contacted the chairman of the committee and he has given me leave to move an amendment. The amendment which I would like to move is on Section 19(d)(1). After the Act, at the end of the clause 1 I would like to add, “Unless he or she gives up the citizenship of the other country or state -

THE CHAIRMAN: If you give up then the provision does not apply to you. Once you give up the second citizenship, this does not apply to you at all. Today, if you are Ugandan and Kenyan, they say you cannot become president, but when you denounce Kenya you qualify.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Chairman, I am seeking a small clarification. I know we are trying to operationalise the Constitution, but the Constitution is made for Ugandans, for the people. I am a citizen of Uganda by descent. If I go to Sweden and live there two years, I get their citizenship. When I come back and I am living here, I still hold the passport of the country. We have a Canadian who has come to Uganda with Canadian citizenship. He is living here and has acquired our citizenship. Are the two of us the same?

THE CHAIRMAN: Indeed.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Is that true?

THE CHAIRMAN: Indeed. (Laughter)

MR ODUMAN: Mr Chairman, I need to be assisted. The Constitution says, “Parliament shall prescribe those offices which shall not be occupied by somebody holding a dual citizenship”, does that mean that in prescribing that list, there must be some offices in that list. Can we have a zero -

THE CHAIRMAN: It is up to us. If it was in our wisdom that we do not see any office, we do not. But now the proposals being made here in the Fifth Schedule, it is now up to you today to reduce or increase. I should put the question -(Interjections)- I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

The Schedule

MR KASAMBA: Mr Chairman, on the Fifth Schedule, the committee thought it wise and proposed to introduce a new paragraph 12 to increase members of the board. The justification is to avoid conflict of interest. The board will be the one to determine the question of dual citizenship. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think it is clear. This means that if you have double citizenship, you do not sit on this board. I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Chairman, I propose that the list also includes a Member of Parliament.

THE CHAIRMAN: Why? What is the justification?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Chairman, I actually had the same proposal and the justification is that in our country -

THE CHAIRMAN: Let me put it to vote. I put the question to it.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR KASAMBA: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose on No. 5 that we include the Commissioner for Prisons and the Deputy Commissioner.

THE CHAIRMAN: Mr Khan was here during Independence times. What harm did he receive from here? He was the Commissioner of Prisons. Let me put it on vote. I put the question to it.

(Question put and negatived.)

MS BINTU: Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification. In this schedule especially when they point out the heads of armed forces and they leave out the men, officers and women of the armed forces, in case they have dual citizenship, can’t they collaborate with those ones from other countries where they have the second citizenship and fail to protect the sovereignty of this country?

THE CHAIRMAN: You wanted to bring in a new category?

MS BINTU: Yes, Mr Chairman. That is why I wanted to propose that officers, men and women of the armed and security forces should also be among these officers.

THE CHAIRMAN: When you can have the “bacuba”?

MR KYANJO: Mr Chairman, I am on the schedule and my proposal is that we go as far as 4, President, Vice-President, Prime Minister and government minister. We leave out 5 up to 11 because the justification is that these people do not occupy these positions automatically. It is out of vetting, they will come to Parliament and we will know what they are.

We are looking at individuals who have acquired expertise in different countries. When they come here, this is what they will have to offer. He is fit to be a police chief; you are hunting for an army man to put him in police responsibility, when you have an already trained police chief? What is wrong with this person being vetted in Parliament, if he passes through he serves the nation.

THE CHAIRMAN: But here in the armed forces I see sometimes many instructors -  

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Chairman, although you put a vote before I gave the explanation, I just want Parliament – I just have an issue -

THE CHAIRMAN: The proposal you are making is what my friend hon. Banyenzaki had brought and we knew what it was about. Hon. Members, there is a proposal here that we stop at 4. 

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: I beg that we do not stop at 4. You know the history of our country and what the gun can do. If you put all those senior persons controlling arms and you stop at people who are staying in Kampala, we will not be serious. We need to think about the history of our country.

MR KASAMBA: Most of these offices which we have put in this schedule are critical offices as far as the security of the country is concerned and the occupancy of these offices will be privy to information, which is so critical to this country. Letting the holders of these offices have dual citizenship means they will have divided loyalty and if anybody opts to occupy this office, he/she should relinquish the second citizenship so that he is entrusted with these critical offices. Thank you.

MR KYANJO: Let us not take away the discretion of the appointing authority and the vetting powers. Why do we think we shall not be able to say no to a person who has been recommended – you have just said that you have seen foreign officers training Ugandans - what is wrong with that? I strongly propose that we stop at 4 and leave other offices to be occupied.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that we stop at 4 and leave the rest.

(Question put and negatived.)

The Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Title 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am not trying to say I want to amend the Title but our Constitution, Article 13 says, “Parliament shall by law provide for the acquisition and loss of citizenship by naturalisation.” I want to find out why we did not put this issue in this law or when is it coming – because it is important?

MR KASAMBA: My colleague is referring to that Article but it is being captured under clause 6, section 17; loss of citizenship by registration and clause 7 where I changed deprivation to loss of citizenship by naturalisation, which we captured earlier on.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the Title.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.46
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.47
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House considered the Bill entitled “The Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control (Amendment) Bill, 2008”, and passed it with some amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.47
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): I beg to move that the report be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to it.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE UGANDA CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION CONTROL 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008

6.48
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control (Amendment) Bill, 2008”, be read the third time and do pass.

MS MUGERWA NAMAGGWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I heard what hon. Okello-Okello said and I have been looking at clause 19(b) in respect to sub-section (d) and I think we are having a problem. I would like that sub-clause to be recommitted.

THE SPEAKER: For what?

MS MUGERWA NAMAGGWA: Because the purpose of bringing up this law was to help our brothers and sisters who are away. Now if I was working abroad and you asked me to come and get citizenship in Uganda and I have to stay here for ten years before I apply for that, I think this is going to be a problem –(Interruption) 

MR WADRI: Right now you see the size of Parliament dwindling in terms of numbers and the few who are here are those who attach very great importance to their legislative duties and this particular Bill that we are about to pass. We have toiled and exchanged ideas on this Bill but I am surprised at the repeated interference and insistence to hold Floor when nothing substantial is coming out to direct us on where to go. And this insistence has been by none other than hon. Sauda Mugerwa whom I always refer to as “Munnamasaka” because she represents Masaka District. Is the honourable member in order to go in circus and institute confusion when actually the House has already agreed on where to go and is about to pass this important Bill? Is she in order to waste our time?

THE SPEAKER: Apparently the honourable member wanted to recommit clause 19(b)(d); I put the question to the proposal for recommittal.

(Question put and negatived.)

MS MUGERWA NAMAGGWA: Mr Speaker, as a representative of Masaka District, I would like to be assisted as far as -

THE SPEAKER: We have already taken the decision; we are not recommitting it. We have adopted the report of the committee. The motion, hon. Members, is that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control (Amendment) Bill, 2008”, be read for the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED THE UGANDA CITIZENSHIP 
AND IMMIGRATION CONTROL (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2009

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to thank you for what you have done. It looked to be a very small Bill but it has taken a lot of our time. However, we have done it. This is a Bill, which has been with us for almost a year. Let us see the impact it will make. I thank you very much.

As I indicated to you, Parliament will be prorogued next week. Can I ask you whether we can sit on Monday afternoon to conduct some business? 

HON. MEMBERS: Okay.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, Monday afternoon. That is when we shall deal with that NEMA thing. We shall start with it. The House is adjourned until Monday, at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.53 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 18 May 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)
