Thursday, 19 May 2005

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like you to join me in welcoming students from the Constitutional and Stability Class of the Department of Political Science at Makerere University.  You are welcome! (Applause)

There is something hon. Akwero wanted to say before we proceed.

2.35
MRS JANE AKWERO (Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for according me this opportunity to raise issues and other matters of national importance. 

Yesterday we did get copies of the report from Uganda Bureau of Statistics containing the 2004 National Service Delivery Survey.  Looking at page 119, Table b(2.7) with the heading: “Percentage distribution of households by distance to the nearest Government health facility and district.”  It is said Kitgum District seems to be leading all the districts in Uganda and they put us at a percentage of 98. That is 98 per cent of the population of Kitgum District have access to a health facility of a distance of below five kilometres.  This information is very erroneous; posterity will judge us harshly and we will forever be blamed and condemned.

I raised this as a matter of national importance because already this information has been taken far. It is even on the –(Mr Banyenzaki rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is your problem, hon. Banyenzaki?

MR BANYENZAKI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  This is a report we just received yesterday and I have also perused that report, and actually, if you go to what she is referring to, there is an explanation as to why they came up with such results.  If we start debating the results of this report now, I think every member will have something to say about that report.  

So, would it be procedurally right for us to start debating this report of Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) when actually I think if anybody has a grievance with the findings of the researchers, could table his problems with UBOS so that he gets an explanation or it is rectified.  So my procedural concern is, how are we going to start debating this report that has been tabled before this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is given to you so that you can read it, understand it, appreciate it and relate it to your areas.  The member read it last night and she is says it is not saying the truth about her area, so it is okay for her to raise it.  Why do you want her to drive to Entebbe?  

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the honourable member for being so inquisitive on this matter.  But the information I want to give is that it is the format which changed, but these facts are correct.  They started with naming the districts then ended with the region. It is not the normal way of starting with, say, the central region then naming the districts.  So that was the alteration, it is not a mistake as such. 

MRS ODWONG: Madam Speaker, I know time is really against all of us, but allow me put these facts correct because this information is not only for us. This information has gone out worldwide and people will take the pieces of information that we have on the different pages on face value.  

So, I just want to make a correction that in Kitgum we do have one Government hospital, one NGO hospital, one maternity centre, three Health Centre IVs –(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I do not think that by her putting the issues of concern to Parliament is actually going to change much, and many people are going to raise concerns. I have also concerns to raise.  I would request her to go to the committee when we have such an important issue, like the two bills that we have. I also know that her concerns are right, but we are not going to do much by listening to her here.  These are statistics of a bureau, so it is only the bureau that can take the concerns and get a feedback through the Minister of Finance.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think she is raising it so that the Minister of Finance can instruct the bureau to re-examine that matter. That is why she is raising it; the bureau does not come here.

MRS ODWONG: I just want to say that there are three Health Centre IVs in Kitgum in Padibe, Namokora, Madi Opei; eight Health Centre IIIs and 12 Health Centre IIs.  So, in total, with the 19 sub-counties, when you look at the access of the population to health centres that are below five kilometres, it is not true that 98 per cent of the district is covered.  So, I just want to put these facts right, honourable colleagues; that this information is used even for planning purposes.  

It will be erroneous for these facts to go down and they say Kitgum is already covered. This is really an ideal situation. We would wish to have even 100 per cent coverage, but the fact of the matter is we are below 50 per cent or 40 per cent coverage by the whole population.  

I also wish to raise another matter of national importance, which yesterday was ruled upon by you very wisely, on the issue of the cattle rustling in Karamoja.  The Acholi sub-region is seriously affected, the districts of Pader and Kitgum, particularly areas of Namokora, Madi Opei, and Omiya Anyima; almost half of Kitgum and the whole of Pader. 

I even have a letter from the LCI Lubangariti in Kotido acknowledging that 20 heads of cattle were - this is office of the LC I of Lubangariti Central, Lubangariti Parish, Karenga Sub-county, Kotido District, P.O.—— Kaabong, from the Chairman, Okello Severino Pianaki, LCI, Lubangariti Central. 

I am raising it so that when the Minister of Defence brings information about the disarmament programme, the Acholi sub-region should not be left out on the basis that cattle rustling does not affect them. If anything, we are equally bearing the brunt of the cattle rustlers.  

I also wish to raise the issue of the bridge on river Aswa between Gulu and Kitgum.  May be, it would only be wise for the Minister for Works to buy a ferry because the bridge is already broken.  Sooner or later we will not have a passage if Government is still taking long to construct a bridge. They may contemplate buying a ferry so that the people in that area can cross that river using a ferry.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members. The Minister of Defence, can you include Acholi when you are reporting on disarmament and the issue of cattle rustling, because we are expecting a statement from you next week. The Minister of Finance, could you please take note of the issue raised by the honourable member on the statistics of Kitgum district?

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE  CONSTITUTION 
(AMENDMENT  NO.2) BILL, 2005

(Debate continued)

2.45
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: (Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me stand and be counted among those who were sceptical originally, but readjusted my position to support this item, the regional tier.  But it should be put on record that this could be a process leading us to federalism. But as the Chinese say, even a displacement of so many kilometres begins with a single footstep.  Madam Speaker, protect me from honourable Wopuwa.  When I look at the Constitution Amendment Bill, 2005. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the honourable member has not even started making his contribution. Allow him to –(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Wait, I will give you - On page 9, regional government, the fifth schedule.  I was wondering why they never included- when you look at the composition of the regional assembly - they never included members of Parliament to be ex-officials on the regional tier. It left them out and we are very conscious of matters pertaining to areas where we come from. 

Secondly, when I look again at pages 11 and 12, where it talks about functions. I think the Government should come clear on this, especially where they agreed with the people whom they were dealing with in Mengo. 

On function nine, where they say one of the functions was regional roads. Here they put maintenance of regional roads. They should have been clear when coining out this statement. If you look at, for instance, forests, they include another thing other than national parks and forests managed by the Government. 

What am I trying to arrive at, Madam Speaker. When these agreements are coming in they should tally with whatever was agreed on such that we can have goodwill from all people concerned.  That is why the other time when it appeared in the newspapers that the Katikiro made new demands; it was out of the fact that what they agreed on was totally different from this one. 

I refer you to page 14 where they talk about the take over of regional governments by the President.  This one I am worried; there should be a clear spelt out mechanism. Why Madam Speaker?  I can refer this august House to one of the agreements made on the 15th September that was around 1954/55. This was known as the Namirembe Conference. That is the time when Governor Cohen was around; people like Hakooko, who  was the Chairperson of that committee and the secretaries of course, we had the Kulubyas and the rest, plus other people from Buganda who constituted the committee.  

I am going to read verbatim, because I fear the President has not resorted to a clearly spelt out mechanism. Using court things may again boomerang and we go back to the crisis we had using the excuse of a regional tier.  

Allow me to read to this House what the people during that time suggested when they had a similar situation that confronted them. I refer to chapter two of that Conference. It was on the relationship of Buganda with the Protectorate. I refer to Article 32.  This is what they said, “There shall be established consultative committees on education, medical and health questions, natural resources, local governments and so forth. Then they add on to say, “The functions of the consultative committees shall be: 
(a) To enable the Buganda government to express their views on protectorate policies.” Protectorate can substitute for Government policy. 

“(b) To secure that, that Protectorate and Buganda policy are not in conflict, and to discuss matters of conflict.”

They go on further to say, “If upon any disagreement arising between the two governments the differences cannot be resolved by use of the machinery of a consultative committee, the matter shall be referred to a joint meeting under the Chairmanship of the governors of members of the executive council and the ministers of Buganda there and then”.  There should be a mechanism to that one. It should not be a matter of Government coming in to takeover. They are going to appoint a Minister for all the regional tiers.  Otherwise, if you do not put out these mechanism to sort out these conflicts –(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. The cabinet position is as follows: “Where a court of law determines that there is failure to comply with the requirement-(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, the way I know Government operates, you are forbidden to read the minutes of the Cabinet outside the Cabinet. It is an established fact that anybody found reading such material shall be liable to prosecution. (Laughter) 

Is it in order for my honourable colleague, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, who occasionally chairs the Cabinet to read the minutes of the Cabinet outside the Cabinet? Who gave him such permission? Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, honourable members, my recollection of the Cabinet oath is that you can only disclose if you have the authority of the appointing authority. So, I suspect that the Prime Minister has secured the permission of the appointing authority to disclose what was discussed in the Cabinet. Proceed.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have full authority to inform this august body –(Laughter)- and I must proceed with your permission without any further interruption. It reads, “Where a court of law determines that there is failure to comply with the requirement of the recognition and respect of cultural diversity and equitable distribution of the resources of the region, the regional Government shall be liable to take over its administration in a manner to be prescribed by an Act of Parliament”. And that the court had specifically to be the high court; so, there is to be evidence for a court of law and that the paragraph should therefore be recast as I have indicated. So, your point is very well taken. I thank you.

MR MUTUMBA: Thank you, Rt. hon. Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business. Let me hope that we are going to have it in full and everybody will have copies of this so that it does not remain as it is. Otherwise, I was just submitting it before Members of Parliament so that they can also take it. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, regarding the regional tier. I would have liked a situation where the districts report to the regional tier and the regional tier reports to the Government. But the way it is, my worry is that we may have a conflict somewhere because most of these centers you are creating are corporate areas. The districts are corporate entities, a regional tier is also a corporate one, and then you have got the central government.  Somewhere, I see these power centers may conflict. 

We have had so many of these agreements and I would feel today that the principle of goodwill should be around. To me that will make more viable these economies of scales we are talking about rather than the district reporting directly to Kampala and then the regional tier reporting to the President and then we have got also people who report to the President. To me, that is my worry.

I would feel and I appeal to the august House that this should be streamlined when funds are released from the central government. Let there be a formula worked out by all of us or Parliament or whoever is concerned, where the funds are channeled through the regional tiers, then the regional tiers channel it down on agreed policies which reflect those of the government. Otherwise, we may have a lot of duplications, a lot of extra expenditures and at the same time we may have a lot of –(Interruption) 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you Madam Speaker and I thank my honourable colleague for giving way even in the protest of hon. Aggrey Awori. I just want to give information that the creation of a regional government does not impact on the powers that have already been decentralized to the district. The districts continue to exercise the powers and the functions which they had. And to the best of Government’s knowledge, this is a system that has worked well so far. The districts have been reporting directly to the center and so far it is has been going on well and that will continue.

Now the regional tier is going to carry out functions, which are going to be taken away from the center to the regional government level. And the regional government level will be reporting to the center on those functions that are currently being handled by the center. So, there is likely not to be any duplication at all.

MR MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am just seeking a small clarification from the Minister. What are those functions which are going to be removed from the center and be given to the region? I have read a bill; because what you are mentioning here are the functions being carried out at districts already. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sebuliba please conclude.

MR BAGALANA: Further clarification, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From the Minister?

MR BAGALANA: From the Minister. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When His Excellency the President was giving his Address to the Nation to this House, he mentioned one of the things which are standing in the way of the aid to this country as being the cost of public administration. I do not know whether this regional tier will lessen or cut down the cost of public expenditure. Can I be clarified?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Further clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, the other day the Minister spoke at length and you had opportunity really to get these matters from him. Now you are interfering with honourable member’s time. You have already contributed, now you are eating into other people’s time.

MR LUKYAMUZI: A clarification of substance.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I believe my brother hon. Mafabi has been answered by his colleagues. When you look at the functions in the bill and you look at the Constitution, the schedule, which states out the functions of districts, you will see the difference.

Yes, this question of cost of public administration has been dully considered and there may be some additional cost because we will obviously be creating a structure which did not exist. But the functions as I said are already being performed by the center. It is a question of shifting the function from the center to the regional level. So, the cost is going to be minimal in terms of budgetary implications. However, the benefits are enormous compared to the costs. There is no doubt where Uganda gains from; it is establishing a regional government. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR MUTUMBA: Yes, I am concluding. I am yet to be really convinced. Because, Madam Speaker, we have been operating the district as the units and we have had sub-counties. The functions are clearly spelt out in the Local Government Act. 

If you look at the fifth schedule of the Local Government Act, you find a situation where some tend to overlap, but in cases where the sub-counties have failed, they have to take on the district. 

But the district if it really fails to account for the failure of the Local Government, where does it go? Because everything was left hanging. The district has even failed to comply with the formula of sharing out the monies. Likewise, even the sub-counties have failed to follow the formula for sharing at the parish level the monies that are supposed to be sent down. 

So, I am just asking for that harmony. Why can’t everything pass? In case they have failed, they pass through the regional tier? Otherwise, the regional tier will end up becoming tiers themselves because they may be sidelined by the sub-counties, which are corporate bodies; they report to the President and at the same time - we are going to have conflicts.  

All in all, like I said at the beginning –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information from The Minister of Agriculture. You have concluded?  Yes, you have.

MRS JANAT MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I just want to comfort my brother that unlike Article 178(1)(c) which was talking about the charters and the powers, we are moving from the district to the top. This time around, Government has recognized that it still has a lot of work that it does not discharge effectively.  This is the work that is going to the regional tier, but at the same time, money that was for monitoring and evaluation, which has been done from the center, is going to facilitate this regional tier.  So, the functions for the district government and the regional tier are distinct.

MR MUTUMBA:  So, as I said earlier, we are going to look at all the mechanisms to see how this thing is going to be adjusted to fit in place.  But as I end, I will support the motion when it comes, but this is the walk towards federo.  Let it be on record that this one is not federalism, but the regional tier and it is the way that is taking us there.   

3.00
MR VINCENT NYANZI (Busujju County, Mubende): I thank you Madam Speaker.  Before I start, may I be guided, because as we are deliberating now, we do not have the Chairman of the Committee?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The Chairman of the committee is here.  I know he is a bit tall, but he is here. (Laughter)

MR NYANZI:  Now I have seen him.  I rise to support the motion and strongly oppose those against the motion.  In fact, before we were sent to our constituencies to consult on the White Paper, I tried to hold 36 meetings with my people.   Now, within all those meetings people were raising the question of federo and they went as far as asking me that, “Where does the Katikiro stand?”  Then I told them, “I do not know, because I am not one of the team which is negotiating with Mengo.”  

But when we came back here, I learnt that Katikiro’s team had already agreed with the central government and they agreed on the regional tier.  So, I have no alternative, but to support what Mengo Government had already agreed with the central government.

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I thank the honourable for giving way.  When he went to his people as a representative, the people told him they wanted federo and when he heard the Katikiro who is appointed by the Kabaka, not a representative, had agreed on the regional tier.  This is wrong; you as a representative giving way to a person who is not a representative; there is a big problem.  May I be clarified? (Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker is honourable Kibanzanga from Kasese who is advocating for their a kingdom – Obusinga, in order to insinuate that the Katikiro of Buganda is not a representative of the people of Buganda especially when they are demanding for what they want concerning their kingdom. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  He is out of order, because he wants the same powers. (Laughter)

MR NYANZI: For that matter, for us we respect our Katikiro.  On Clause 9, I want clarification from the Attorney General, because this is the issue of deeming.  Now they are saying, subject to clause 178(1), the districts of Buganda shall be deemed to have agreed to form a regional agreement.  Now, for the others, if their proposal is to be supported or to be approved, there should be a resolution from the district council.  The question is, did you receive resolutions from the districts of Buganda in order to deem the regional tier of Buganda?  

I am suggesting, if at all you never received resolutions from Buganda districts, why don’t we deem all regions that had kings?  For instance, Tooro, Bunyoro, Busoga, even Lango had a king; and deem all of them and we leave the other option for only those regions –(Interruption)

MR KAYONGO: Thank you honourable Nyanzi for giving way.  The information I would like to give honourable Nyanzi is that, this deeming of Buganda is already in the Constitution. If all of us went to the canteen up there to eat, and some eat and some do not, we might be deemed to have eaten even if others did not eat.  So, you cannot now deem people who have already eaten; you just cannot; that will be duplication. So, you can only now talk of deeming -(Interruption)

MS TUBWITA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on the point of order. Is honourable Kayongo in order to start giving information to honourable Nyanzi that those other regions should not advocate for deeming because Buganda was already deemed in the Constitution when we are aware that right now we are amending a Constitution?  

We are working on provisions, which are already in a Constitution and trying to amend them and someone is bringing a proposal and then you start insinuating against it. Is he in order when we are right now trying to put things right so that all our interests are catered for?  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are out of order for trying to close the doors- (Laughter)- Hon.Nyanzi please, conclude. Okay, information from the Minister of Justice.

MR ADOLF MWESIGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The idea of deeming Buganda has a historical dimension.  Buganda was deemed in the Constitution and the wording of Article 178 is very clear. The deeming was on the basis of resolutions, which were presented to the Constituent Assembly in 1994/1995 by the districts of Buganda then.  

Following those resolutions, the districts of Buganda were deemed in the Constitution.  Other districts, we were not deemed, because a request to that effect was not made.  We have now proposed that since Buganda had been deemed, in the first place, let it remain deemed as proposed in the bill, and districts which happen to be in Buganda which were not districts at that time. Negotiations with those districts to be deemed as districts of Buganda are going on. 

Yesterday we got a report from honourable Muruli Mukasa that negotiations are going on between those districts, especially the districts of Nakasongola with Government.  That is the status of the deeming on Nakasongola that we have today.  

Now, the question of deeming districts that have not been deemed. Government position is that for a district deemed to be in a regional tier, it is important that it obtains a resolution from its District Council supported by two-thirds majority in accordance with what we proposed in the bill.  

The rationale of this recommendation is, this is a special bill, because this Parliament alone cannot pass this bill.  After you have passed it by two thirds at the Second and Third Reading, this bill, in accordance with Article 260, must be ratified by two thirds of all the district councils of Uganda, because this bill will be presented to district councils ultimately.  

It is, therefore, important that before you deem the districts - it is political prudence that before the districts are deemed, these districts are consulted because after all, we will all go to appeal to them to ratify the bill which this Parliament will have ratified.  That is why Government recommends – (Interjection) 

MS AMONGI:  Thank you very much honourable Minister for giving way.  I want the Minister to clarify to me, because we are making an amendment based on the Sempebwa Commission Report and the White Paper. That is the basis for this particular amendment.  

The deeming of Buganda was on the basis of the Odoki Report.  Now, the concept and the principle of deeming Buganda, then in the Constitution, was based on the principle of cooperation in Article 178. But even further, it went on to give an option for districts in Buganda that do not want to be deemed to opt out in one 178 (iv). 

Therefore, honourable Minister, it means that the deeming in the present Constitution of Buganda is based on the principle of cooperation. What we are amending now is based on the principle of a regional tier, which is something new, based on the new arrangement.  

Therefore, my clarification is, honourable Minister, did Buganda bring a resolution at this time to be deemed in the new concept of the regional tier, not the concept of cooperation based on the current Article 178?  That is the clarification I want.

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I am one of the 53 survivors of the Constituent Assembly in this House. I want to give information to my Sister Betty Amongi, that whilst her interpretation of Article 178 may be true, but the basis of the deeming which took place and which is reflected in the Constitution was based on the fact that in the First Schedule, those districts, from district 29 to district 36, had actually wished to be together as Buganda and that is where even the concept of grouping them, came from.  It did not arise out of Article 178 as you indicate; it had come as a request from the various districts. So, I wanted to put that on record.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable Minister, are you satisfied with the explanation, or you are going to give her clarification?  Has she satisfactorily answered honourable Amongi?  That is what I want to know.

MR BAGALANA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I have listened attentively to a lawyer deputizing as Attorney General and the other members of Parliament. As a presidential candidate in this country - (Laughter) – you must listen to me attentively. I am listening and concluding that, we are debating as though we do not know the history of this country.   

The origin of the 1966 crisis between Obote and Kabaka was the privileged position of Buganda and it is the very thing people are insisting on. The privileged position of Buganda crushed this country to pieces and it is the very thing you are trying to bring back.  

The information I want to give is that, whoever wants to give Buganda a privileged position in this country is digging a grave for this country. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like to thank the Presidential contender for that advice. But let me ask the Attorney General to respond to the concerns by hon. Amongi.

MR MWESIGE: Well, Madam Speaker, constitution making is a process; it is a continuous transaction. We are not making the Constitution now. This Constitution was promulgated in 1995. We are not a Constituent Assembly, we are a Parliament, which was mandated by the Constituent Assembly to amend the Constitution and we are doing exactly that. We are beginning from where the Constituent Assembly stopped.  

So, if we have found that the districts of Buganda were deemed by the Constituent Assembly and apart from Nakasongola, which I said with whom negotiations are going on, we have not heard dissenting voices from the districts of Buganda.  Therefore, as Government, we do not see compelling reasons to ask the districts of Buganda to repeat the production of resolutions which in fact they submitted to the Constituent Assembly. 

It is only fair that since there is already the current Constitution which deems Buganda, it is only fair, unless there are very fundamental objections which I have not seen, that we begin from there, we continue to deem the districts of Buganda, and in fact the door for those districts which would like to be deemed is not closed.  

All that I have said is that districts should produce resolutions endorsed by their speakers and clerks stating that they wish to be deemed and this Parliament will be persuaded in its wisdom to deem those districts.

 MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I do not know in which country hon. Bagalana is a candidate.   

MR BAGALANA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the a whole Minister of Defence who is in charge of the security of the country not to have known that I went to the media and addressed the nation that come 2006 we are there on the battle ground. Is it in order for the honorable Minister to deny me the opportunity as if it is privileged to a certain few people? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, the Minister of Defence is a very busy person, sometimes he is in Sudan and other places, so he might have missed that small article about your presidential candidature.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to give information about this point hon. Bagalana has made.  I want to say that Buganda in the proposals, which are in the bill, is not being treated differently from any other part of Uganda. 

The idea of creating a regional government or a regional tier is for any two districts or more which want to have it. This is not for Buganda alone; it is for any part of Uganda that is interested in taking advantage of this law if this Parliament passes it.  

I would like to answer this question which came yesterday as well, that the functions, which are being taken to the regional government level, are functions already being performed by the Central Government.  So, even those districts which do not enter a regional tier arrangement, will continue to enjoy the services of the Central Government vis-a-vis these functions and they will not necessarily be at a disadvantage. So, I wanted to make this point very clearly to say –(Interruption)

MR KIWAGAMA: Thank you for giving way Mr Minister and thank you Madam Speaker.  I was in the Constituent Assembly at the same time as the Minister was.  Buganda was deemed to have agreed to the Charter arrangement. It was the Charter arrangement, which they even never took up and Busoga took the opportunity. The districts of Busoga passed resolutions that they wanted to form a charter and they did.  

This deeming now is new. Buganda districts have not passed resolutions asking to be deemed for a regional tier. They were deemed for a charter arrangement not a regional tier. In any case, we are here to amend the Constitution and we want to include in that deeming clause, Busoga and Lango and any other grouping which - but I am only surprised when Baganda are resisting other districts to be deemed –(Interjections)- yes; that is what hon. Bagalana is talking about.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order members, honorable members, please cool down. Can I ask honorable Nyanzi to conclude. Conclude your statement, please?

 MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, there is a statement that the honorable member who has been holding the Floor has made which has prompted so many Members of Parliament representing districts and constituencies from Buganda to stand up and raise points of order. 

The honorable member mentioned in his contribution that the Baganda Members of Parliament are resisting the deeming of other regions. Is he in order to insinuate that the Baganda Members of Parliament do not want other regions to get what they themselves have got? Is he in order to insinuate so, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, I think the honorable member wants you to speak very loudly for other members as well.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Kiwagama for the information he was giving me but I want to make these points very clearly. The point I am making is a repetition of the point hon. Adolf Mwesige has already made, that in fact, because even after he had made that point, then hon. Kiwagama raised it. Therefore, I must answer it.  

Now, the point is that Busoga as far as we are concerned has indicated its desire to be deemed and as hon. Mwesigye said, the Government has sent a message to Busoga that, “Please show evidence that you want to be deemed.” Once it is received I can assure you there is absolute sympathy for deeming that area”.  So, we have no problem at all – (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The concern I have now as we proceed is from what the Minister is giving us. It appears the negotiations for deeming and for not deeming are still going on and I am prompted to ask you, Madam Speaker, how are we going to conclude?  

I am imagining now may be an envoy should be dispatched to Teso also to consult and another one to Karamoja. So, how are we going to conclude – (Interjection) - Madam Speaker, I seek your protection. I would like to appeal to my colleagues that you have to be tolerant and make us understand what is going on. If you keep on shouting at us we will not be on board – (Interjection)- please excuse me it is just a procedural concern- (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let her ask.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, it is a procedural concern. I get the impression consultations are still going on. How do you expect me when this business is being concluded to take a position?  That is the type of thing I want to understand. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we shall ask the Government to explain to us with whom they are still negotiating and give them time.  However, for my purposes here, this debate goes in two phases. We are discussing the principles now, and then we shall have a break during which you can either go back and consult or conclude the negotiations and then come back.  

So, there will be a break during which you can do that.  But I think the Government must come out clearly and tell us who they are negotiating with, how much time they are giving them, and we finish this matter. Otherwise, every day, a new group wants to negotiate with us.  

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much, honourable Minister for giving way.  The information I wanted to give to hon. Mbabazi and perhaps also to hon. Kiwagama concerning the Charter arrangement. In the 1962 Constitution, it was not a pigeonhole Constitution that was the Lancaster Constitution. There was a schedule of the Buganda Constitution and other constitutions in that schedule. 

When this article concerning the Charter arrangement was put in the Constitution, it was meant to give opportunity for those people who would like to co-operate to enlist or list out the arrangement in which they would like to co-operate.  As for Buganda, it had already got a way; it was co-operating and that was known so they did not want to make any other Charter.  

So, I want to say that Buganda wishes well every region that would wish to co-operate or who wish to be deemed. It is very important that what is perceived as a privileged position for Buganda is also of benefit to others who wish to.  

So, for this matter, we should be able to be together and negotiate or bargain or legislate to deem every region, which wants to get deemed.  But I think it is not for any bad reason that Buganda is deemed, we people from Buganda think we should be deemed and we have already supported this arrangement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the Minister of Defence please respond to my question?

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As was evidenced in yesterday’s sitting of this Parliament – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable Members.

MR MBABAZI: Nakasongola District did raise points as they are entitled to do especially on the question of deeming.  As you can see, every member is raising a point of interest on the bill and Government responds either on the Floor of the House or we talk about it.  What hon. Adolf Mwesige said earlier on is that the Government is in contact with Nakasongola representatives and is discussing the issues they raised.

Secondly, the question of deeming generally, which has been raised. Hon. Kabakumba Masiko did raise this point passionately the other day and obviously we take notice of what people say and the Cabinet - not only Bunyoro but Busoga as well and Toro. There are areas, which have expressed interest to Government. Once they do that, this is a people’s Government, it will respond to the people’s demands.  

Therefore, we are responding to those particular issues, but these have nothing to do with what hon. Alaso was raising. Because even as we debate the principles, you know very well that once we adopt this bill, Second Reading then the next stage is the Committee of the Whole House, and we are going to be receiving amendments, we may even change the things that are in the bill.  

So, I do not think what is happening, when people raise points of difference on what is being proposed in the bill, it necessarily means that the bill is not ready. It is ready and proposed, as we have presented it.  But, of course, what is expected is that we will discuss it in detail and through stages we may even change it.  But this should not stop us from concluding this stage of the debate. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Nyanzi, please conclude your statement.

MR NYANZI: Madam Speaker, I think I am starting afresh because I have been interrupted too much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Two minutes.

MR NYANZI: Madam Speaker, you very well know that I am Vincent Nyanzi representing Busunjju of Buganda – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have two minutes, hon. Nyanzi.

MR NYANZI: I am the one who suggested that let us deem even other areas.  So, hon. Kiwagama is not right to say Baganda are against the move of deeming – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have ruled on that matter, just proceed.

MR NYANZI: My people are happy that Kampala is now part of Buganda, they are very happy –(Interjection)– it is already in the bill and I know we are going to approve it – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can you cut down on those small meetings!

MR NYANZI: The chairman of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs; here in the Bill you have the composition of the regional assembly and we talk of the one-third of the women to represent the regional tier on the assembly and 15 percent of cultural leaders. How many representatives are we going to get from each district? In fact, my people were asking me, how are we going to elect these people, how many are they supposed to be from each district so that we can come to the number of the one-third of women and then the 15 percent of cultural leaders. 

Madam Speaker, I had prepared a very long paper, but as you have given me two minutes, I shall continue with it when we are debating other Bills. But I support the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. You can continue in the committee stage. 

MR EMMANUEL DOMBO: Madam Speaker, the Attorney General stood up and gave counsel to this House. He said that Buganda’s issue was actually deemed in the past Constitution, and he said he does not prevent other districts that wish to be deemed to bring forward resolutions of their district councils so that they could also be deemed. I want to seek clarification whether the districts that so wish to be deemed have already been given guidelines on how they could proceed on this fact so that we could proceed with the debate or decision on the debate awaiting the districts which the Attorney General has said are free to bring their resolutions so that they can be deemed. Can I be clarified whether the districts have already been given the guidelines?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is exactly what I asked the chief negotiator to tell us. How are the other districts going to be treated, how will they get the information?

MR MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, I have sent a circular to all the districts of Uganda, which I issued today -(Interjections)- Yes, I issued the circular today because the debate on this Bill has just began, and as far as I am concerned, this Bill will take some time to be passed. The circular is asking the districts which wish to be deemed to convene their district councils and pass resolutions to that effect and submit them by two thirds to government and to the Speaker so that at an appropriate time, Members of Parliament from those districts, or government, whichever case, we shall agree, can move amendments at the committee stage and if the House is pleased by those proposals, the House can deem them. 

So the deeming is not really being done by government, and as far as I am concerned, no districts have so far been deemed. What is in the Bill is a proposal; the deeming will be done by this Parliament with the ratification of district councils. So, if those resolutions have been presented to this House, the House will discuss them, and in the wisdom of the House, those districts will be deemed and the district council will have to ratify them. 

So I have done that, and I would advise Members of Parliament who wish their districts to be deemed to consult their district councils and help them to explain the Bill so that those resolutions can find their way to this House.  The appropriate time for presenting those resolutions is the committee stage, which, Madam Speaker, you have rightly explained, will come after the lapse of the 14 sitting days after the vote on the second reading has been taken.  

3.44
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the job, which they tried technically to present to this House. I would like to appeal to the Members of Parliament, especially from Buganda region, to tolerate others and to give them opportunity to debate without much interference. I also appeal to government to allow Members to debate without too much interruption.  

Madam Speaker, I am saying this because of what happened to hon. Nyanzi’s presentation; it almost took 45 minutes with a lot of interruptions. We are ready to support good proposals that will promote peace, security and development in this country. We should be aware that this country will only develop if we look at the Constitution that we are making that will bring harmony and will not increase cost of public administration. High cost of public administration will create an increased level of poverty. 

Two; government should take very, very seriously the recommendation of the committee. Hon Oulanyah’s committee made pertinent recommendations one, the issue of voting, two-thirds. In this Bill, there are certain clauses which should not have been here, we are still omnibus and if we pass this Bill the way it is without taking the recommendation of the committee, it will be challenged in court. I have done consultations; it can be challenged and be withdrawn. What am I saying, Madam Speaker? As the chairman of the committee stated, the schedules here cannot be integrated with other clauses, which deal with regional government, and I leave that to government; if they do it like that, the Constitutional Court is there.  

Two; I would like to appeal to government and all of us to be honest to avoid -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Ekanya, what is it you are objecting to, you have said something and stopped somewhere; I want to understand what it is.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, in his report on page 4, the committee chairman says that the Bill presents four articles and three schedules. These articles are like tomatoes while the schedules are like mangoes; you cannot put them together when we are voting during committee stage. If you request the districts to ratify, they are different, and this is what the committee has said; that they should have been separated in the amendment, if I understood them very well. But the chairman can clarify later on when I conclude. I want to proceed uninterrupted.

MR WAMBUZI: I am sorry; I did not want to interrupt hon. Ekanya, but when I sit in this Parliament and listen to my colleague from Tororo and he starts submitting that creating districts and regional governments is an increase in cost of administration of the government of Uganda, yet he really knows that the people of Tororo even ate rats to get the point across that districts must be created so that they are able to live, I get shocked and frightened. 

If the people of Buganda cannot live without getting the regional government, it is only sensible and prudent to listen to their cries. And if the people of Tororo seriously think that they can only breathe happily if they have a district, the cost of administration should never be something, which should make people to be governed like slaves in their own country. 

Is the hon. Ekanya in order to derail this House and start saying that let us not increase the cost of administration yet actually it is what the people want, which should be first listened to? Is he in order when he knows he comes from a constituency of people who want a district so much that they ate a rat, and to start suggesting that it is not good for the cost of administration to be increased when people want to be governed the way they want? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it would appear that hon. Ekanya’s interests and those of the other people are not moving in tandem.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I had not explained why I said when we are making or reviewing the Constitution we should not increase the cost of public administration. I would like to explain that the people of Tororo County very much want a district and I am ready to support them whether it costs me my parliamentary seat here, I will stand with them and fight for them to get a district.

Madam Speaker, when I say we should not increase the cost of public administration when we are reviewing the Constitution, I mean that Government must be honest, create regional or federal governments. Government should be able to decentralize capital account, and not just create an institution, which is powerless. I have seen the functions that the Government is proposing, some of which as put in the Constitution are already being handled by the district. 

We would like the centre to be very honest and clear and outline – when you say education, are you surrendering the whole education policy, university, secondary, technical, or you are just saying secondary education only? If you talk of health, are you talking of regional hospital, which is currently under the districts or you are talking of new health arrangements? Government must be honest and clear instead of saying regional roads, regional land boards. The land boards are being handled by the districts, so are you shifting it from the districts? 

So, we would like Government to be very clear and say, out of the 100 percent total budget, the centre will remain with 20 percent, the region will take 40 percent, the district will take 40 percent; we want that clear and to be put in the law. Do not devolve responsibility without money; money is power and it is on that basis that the people of Tororo County would have supported federalism because we would get all the money from the border, 35 percent, and we would really develop our region.  

Madam Speaker, what Government is proposing does not answer –(Interruption)

MR MUZOORA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. The amendments are going to be made on the Constitution, and what hon. Ekanya is going into is enactment of other enabling laws. Is it procedurally correct for hon. Ekanya to take us out of the amendment of the Constitution and instead takes us to the enactment of enabling laws? I want to know the procedure.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think he is trying to understand how the regional tier really is going to work vis-à-vis the local governments.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I did not have opportunity to contribute during the report on the White Paper and the Speaker then said we shall have opportunity, that is when I would have said this kind of thing. I would appeal to Government to instead of just proposing in the law, to also include a Regional Secretariat just like we have a Decentralization Secretariat for proper implementation of this regional tier. That will express a level of honesty. 

Two, we need to have a timeframe for implementation. 

Three, we really need to outline the power that we are devolving and the resource and how it will be used, and size. You cannot say even two districts can form a region; this is a bluff. Government must be serious, when you have Buganda region we should have other bigger districts otherwise there is lack of seriousness. If two districts can form a region, we shall have 20 regions, what are the mechanisms?  

Four, how will this decongestion help us to save money or increase cost of public administration?  

Five, the issue of Busoga charter, let Government be honest. The Basoga came here, presented their charter, and Government up to now has not been showing seriousness in this matter –(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, I have listened to hon. Ekanya several times calling on Government to be honest, insinuating that Government is not honest. Is it in order for the honourable member to make such a serious allegation against a respected Government without an iota of substantiation of his allegation? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, under what circumstances has the Government been dishonest on which you are basing?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, the Constitution states in Article 178 that districts that are interested would move and present their interest if they wanted to form a charter. The people of Busoga mobilized - and I was a Youth Member of Parliament for Eastern Uganda - we mobilized, presented here a resolution for a proposal for implementation of Busoga charter. Parliament received it, noted it, it is on the shelf. To me that was an expression of dishonesty. Up to this very day the proposed amendment does not include deeming of Busoga; that is an expression of lack of seriousness, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker, on the question of Mengo Municipality, let us have a standard. All municipalities in this country are created by the Ministry of Local Government. Let us have Mengo Municipality created like we have other municipalities because to give special status will not be good for Uganda. Pallisa may need a municipality, Kisoro may need a municipality, will it require us to have a constitutional amendment?

Finally, I want to quote Julius Ihonvbere, “The politics of constitutional reform and democratization in Africa.”  It states that, “Any Constitution that does not emerge from wide consultation with all nationalities and interest groups cannot be regarded as legitimate.” 

Madam Speaker, let us ensure that this constitutional amendment and review we are doing has views and interests of the whole country. 

Julius Ihonvbere continues to state that, “The mere existence of a Constitution, however comprehensive it will be, will do little to create a stable environment for democracy –(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I have read what has been submitted, but it is not relevant to what we are discussing, because the honourable member received the report of the Sempebwa Commission. If you go into that report, Madam Speaker, those people who wanted regional governments appeared before that commission and I do not think that his district was not visited by the Sempebwa Commission.  

So, is he in order, having received the report of the commission, and having internalised it and the submission I suspect he internalised, to quote what he is quoting?  There was a report, there was a White Paper and his district was visited. What he is reading insinuates that the Commission did not do enough consultation on the issue that we are discussing. If he does not substantiate is he in order to submit as he has submitted?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Ekanya; did the Commission visit or not visit Tororo District, and did you attend the hearings?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, that is a close-ended question and I find it difficult to respond to it. Nonetheless the Commission visited Tororo; the terms and references of the Commission did not include regional tier and therefore, Madam Speaker, the people of Tororo did not have opportunity. What the people of Buganda have been demanding is federalism, and I support them and I wish Government brought it here. This is a new concept, which has been negotiated and the people of Tororo have not been consulted on it, Madam Speaker.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like to –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up. 

MR EKANYA: I would like to appeal to Government that the country belongs to all of us and in reviewing this Constitution let us - The people of Tororo, Pallisa, Busia, Bugisu, Kapchorwa are consulting very seriously in order to enter the new arrangement. I would like Government to really engage these people like it has engaged other people; that will show that you respect all other tribes, all other communities equally. Do not engage one community; it will cause us problems, engage the people of West Nile, engage the people of Acholi, engage the people of Lango, engage the people of Busoga; spend time in State house find another venue, meet them, ask them what arrangement they want. You have spent a lot of time engaging Buganda; engage other regions too, that will show honesty. Thank you very much. 

4.01
MR IGNATIUS BESISIRA (Buyaga County, Kibale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When the 1995 Constitution was promulgated the people of Kibale, if they had the powers, would have matched into Kampala to protest because that Constitution was saying Kibale of Buganda and yet all of us in Kibale we agreed that we were Kibale of Bunyoro.  So, this is an opportunity for us to have some of the errors corrected. I know somebody is about to inform me that we had delegates, but we do not want to open old wounds. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you taking information from the NPC?

MR BESISIRA: No, because he will tell me you had delegates and the rest. But I know they were here and I do not want to open old wounds, but since the opportunity has availed itself, Madam Speaker, now we are taking it up. We are already saying, as my colleagues have already submitted, that we should be deemed to have formed a regional tier for all the reasons. 

Madam Speaker, the reservations we have are because of our historical past. You will realize that the in history of Bunyoro we have been hit left, centre, forward, the back, the buttocks - everywhere –(Laughter)- we have really been hit. We are a tribe that is currently really endangered. The 1900 agreement left us out; it eroded Bunyoro. 

When the colonialists came and wanted to form Government in this part of the country, I think after all this Nyangire rebellion and the rest of it, which is history today, but which history is really important to this country; when the first constitution for this country was made, we were promised that our problems would be addressed. 

In 1964, Madam Speaker, there was a referendum in this part of the country but what we received, I can comfortably say was “byoya bya’nswa”; we got nothing.  It was only saying Bugagaizi, Buyaga, you are now part of Bunyoro, that was all; there was no land for you. Actually up today I am a squatter, all the people are squatters. So, these are some of the pertinent issues. On top of all the others, all the land that was grabbed from us, all the counties that were grabbed from Bunyoro. 

Now, when the NRM Government came into power in 1986 among the cardinal principles was redressing the past errors. We have been waiting for redressing these past errors - someone is telling me they are about to go - They are not going; they are still around. So, we have been waiting for this redress and it is for this reason that we are still bringing up the issues that we feel are pertinent to us as Bunyoro; we are not bringing them out because we are sectarian. No, we are saying that we have got wrongs that were meted out on to us which should really be put right; that is all we are saying; we are not saying anymore than that. 

Can we be accorded when we say we were not consulted and someone is hitting us you were consulted, you are what, we are saying no we want that opportunity to discuss with whoever is in Government to tell them that in 1995, we felt hurt; our problems were not addressed. Now is our opportunity to have our problems addressed. 

So, Madam Speaker, we support the issue of regional tier but with all those reservations that we expect that Government will address. Madam Speaker there is something in this law that I feel should really have been included. We have got the Local Government in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda; how are they going to be related? While I support the motion, there is a question of how are they going to be related? 


The law is very - I do not want to use this word because I do not want someone to accuse me of under rating; can I say shallow? The law is very shallow. For example when you look at chapter 11 of the Constitution, it talks about local governments and how they are going to be managed.  Who is going to head it politically and administratively? It is not shown here. Who is going to be the CAO there? What is he going to be? It is not shown here. How are they going to share all these resources? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information from the former Minister of Justice.

MRS JANET MUKWAYA: I just wanted to give information to my grandparent that –(Interjection)- Yes, the Banyoro are our grandparents. Yes, I recognize that. I just want to inform him that this is a constitutional amendment. After we have amended the Constitution, the respective minister will bring here amendments to the substantive subsidiary legislation that will help you get those points done. 

MR BESISIRA: Madam Speaker, I take the information, but I feel that since the issues of Local Government are well detailed in the Constitution, I would be very comfortable if the details of how regional governments are going to operate are also detailed in the Constitution. Not in subsequent laws and statutory instruments. I will be more comfortable if they are all well put together here. 

Madam Speaker, people were saying that other regions did not form charters. Yes, you know, we looked at it like the Luganda ”semufu”. It was as if someone was telling us there is a charter, but what is a charter? Everybody was wondering, when you form a charter, what happens? What do you do with a charter? You have a charter “semufu” like that to scare you? Banyoro charter, Basoga charter, so people say I think there should be something more tangible and in the regional tier I think we are seeing something more tangible because the government is saying it is going to give the regions some power to do certain things like the roads. 

So, that is where we are all running. We are all coming to say let us support regional governments, because now I know my secondary schools in Buyaga are going to be handled at that level. You see? But the old thing, the charter, it was there. So, what do you do with the charter?  Charter of understanding? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you please wind up?

MR BESISIRA: I am really winding up. There was a charter; that is why most people did not form these charters because there was substantially nothing to show for it. I would like to restate my support for the regional tier and ask my colleagues to support it. But also as I wind up, Madam Speaker, I request that most seats of these regional tiers and kingships have got municipalities. Likewise Hoima should be made into a municipality since it is the seed of one of the big regions of this country. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

4.10
MR JOHN WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Uganda has come a long way. Right from the days of the Lancaster House Constitution, which made provisions, which made exceptions in favour of certain areas. We are now discussing constitutional provisions for regional governments. I am irked by the use of the term “regional tier”. I would have been happier to call it regional government. And indeed this would have eliminated some of the prejudices. 

When I was making consultations with my people over the White Paper, by then they were talking about federo and the people I represent said they did not understand federo, they need more time to understand it. But my people understand regional government because regional governments are not a new phenomenon. We had regional governments even during colonial time. We had –(Interruption)  

MR BENIGNA MUKIIBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and my colleague for giving way. The information I want to give is that even in this Bill this regional tier is also called a regional government. We are not even using the word “tier”. It is a popular version, but in the Bill it is regional governments. 

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Speaker, I was making a comparison between regional government and federo. And the point I am making here is that whereas my people had reservations about federo, which they did not understand very well, they understand the concept of regional governments because they have been there before. Okay? So, I should be understood properly. 

Madam Speaker, it is very well known that government policy should be introduced unequivocally. The moment a policy is brought in an equivocal manner, you land into the type of problems that we are running into with this Bill. I am sure if the proposal was to have, for example, Buganda Region, Eastern Region, Western Region and Northern Region, the debate would have been very different. 

The problem we are running into is even when the Rt. hon. Prime Minister alluded that a regional government could be headed by a cultural leader. We would be going to a situation like that of the ’60s where areas had to manufacture cultural leaders to become heads of the then creatures like the Rutakirwa of Kigezi, when Kigezi had never had even a king; the Unyachi of Lango, the Senkulu of Bukedea, these could not be sustainable. I am sure we would like to have structures that will be sustainable. 

I have been very well persuaded by colleagues who have hailed the benefits, cost effectiveness and economies of scale, but Madam Speaker, how do we reconcile these good perceptions of economies of scale of larger units with the creation of smaller units of districts? 

Right now they are making proposals to sub-divide a district, which unconstitutionally passed a resolution to reduce the emoluments of the chairperson simply because the district could not raise funds to pay such emoluments. How do you reconcile that? If you want to build a castle, do you have to first build huts then break them down, and then rebuild them into a castle? Why don’t you build a castle immediately and save yourself the problems of demolition? I would invite our colleagues in government to consider very seriously the issue of creating districts, which are not viable.

I would also like to invite government to consider making the districts organic to the provincial or to the regional governments. The parallel reporting arrangement for the regional governments and governments to the centre are a bit awkward and could easily lead to conflict in as who has power over who.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Try to wind up.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: I would have been much happier, Madam Speaker, if the creation of regional governments was to make them supervisory bodies to ensure coordination within the districts. 

Madam Speaker, if indeed there is need to transfer the functions proposed for the regions from the central government, I am of the view that this should not be a discretionary matter. Every district of Uganda should belong to a regional government as a matter of policy so that we do not have a situation where some districts are reporting directly while others are working through regional arrangements. I think that is rather clumsy. 

Lastly -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, I want to go to hon. Sebalu now, please.

4.16
MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I do appreciate that the idea of creating a regional tier or regional government is timely, necessary, desirable and welcome at this point in time of our political development. Besides, I do appreciate the fact that the regional tier as provided in the bill is meant for whichever region that is interested in having it, which then makes it national in character.

Madam Speaker, the arrangement as provided for is inclusive and not exclusive and that is a very good departure from the problems that we had. It is flexible and not restrictive, and it is national in character and not sectarian. That is my understanding and we should appreciate each one’s perception. 

The constitutional amendment process that we are engaged in now provides us with an opportunity to make our Constitution more reflective of the diverse interests that we have in this country.  We were talking about a referendum to ensure that we go multiparty, that is an interest that is going to be reflected; the regional government is another interest that will be accommodated. So this opportunity comes in handy and we need to use it appropriately.  

Furthermore, this arrangement underscores the commitment of the Movement government to systematically share power, responsibilities and resources at different levels. It is clearly well articulated in the Bill and the formula will definitely be worked out. We will appreciate that different levels of government require specific functions and this has been taken care of by specifically highlighting the functions, which will then make it easy for the different levels to operate without clashing in terms of the functions.  

By creating a regional tier, government is furthering its accommodative and participatory democracy where more people are availed more opportunity of participating in the governance of their country. We are going to have different levels, and different people will participate at different levels and this is at the local, regional and national. This will reduce the pressure on government. Everyone is clamouring for the centre, so will reduce the pressure and it will create some degree of stability in governance.

The regional tier should also be appreciated in light of the fact that there are issues for which a district maybe too small, while the country maybe too big to handle certain issues. So, for purposes of taking advantage of economies of scale, then larger units can come in handy and assist in handling certain issues. 

For that matter, a regional tier can be of advantage in terms of exploring economies of scale, in human and financial resources, in optimal and effective utilisation of resources especially at inter-district level, and in generating regional capacity for development and creation of a critical mass in leadership. When we give chances to many people to engage in leadership, we can create a critical mass that we badly need. Indeed, South Africa has perfected this at their provincial governments, and they are doing a good job in harmonizing the operations of government. So, we need to take a leaf from South Africa as well.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MR MIKE SEBALU: Furthermore, it is incumbent on us as leaders to enrich this arrangement with a view of perfecting it for the mutual benefit of all Ugandans collectively. Since the provision is available for all of us, I do request the honourable members to have a positive outlook for it so that we build the necessary energy to translate this concept into a reality with the win-win situation for all of us.

For that matter Madam Speaker, the process of assuming a regional government status should be made easy, convenient for all the interested stakeholders. All regions that want to be deemed should be facilitated to do so with minimum difficulty. Implementation should be open ended for purposes of taking on board regions, as they are ready for it. 

Madam Speaker, for purposes of harmony, accommodation –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order on my honourable Member of Parliament to the African Parliament. He seems to be reading notes, which he could lay on table and we read later; I do not think he is debating! (Laughter) Is he in order to come and give a lecture and to read notes? I am worried, that is what he is doing at the African Parliament. Is he in order therefore, to behave in such a manner in such a diligent debate?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The honourable member was only consulting his notes. (Laughter) Please wind up.

MR SEBALU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for your wise ruling. Definitely my brother always wants to capture the attention of the cameras.  

Madam Speaker, for purposes of harmony, accommodation, and mutual respect we should support this bill so that we create another level of governance and be able to move along. We should also take a leaf from other countries that have applied and benefited from this arrangement. With these remarks, I beg to support and request all my colleagues to support the same so that we benefit from what it provides. I thank you.

4.26
MR UMAR LULE MAWIYA (Kalungu County East, Masaka): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for a good report, though short, but precise. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for allotting ample time for this debate when you said that all those who want to contribute to this debate will do so. This gives it the due consideration it deserves.  

Madam Speaker, this is a historical event because ever since we started, all of us are speaking with the same voice. Today, we all know the fringe benefits that will accrue to those districts that will form co-operation. The history of this country as far as regional governments are concerned is very clear since 1962, 1967, 1995 till now 2005. I would like to thank the Members of Parliament from all regions for moving in a positive direction.  The regions of Buganda, Lango, Acholi, Busoga, Ankole, Teso, name them, today are in favour of regional governments. Madam Speaker, I - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: I have heard hon. Mawiya talking of Teso being in favour of the regional tier.  We have not yet made a statement as regards this matter. In a few minutes time, our caution is going to be put in this House by the Chairman, Teso Parliamentary Group. Is he in order to speculate carelessly that Teso is in support of the regional tier?
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you are violating Rule 60. Do not anticipate what members are going to say. 

MR MAWIYA: Thank you Madam Speaker. Surely hon Okupa had not made a submission yet but those people from his region had actually supported the regional tier. So I think hon. Okupa and the rest of the Teso region should support the regional tier because today, you understand the fringe benefits that accrue to a region that is –(Interruption)

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and honourable colleague for giving way. I just want to give you some information concerning the western region that time. We have ever had regions in the western region. We were under governors and I want to tell you that the backwardness of Kasese and Bundibugyo has originated from having regions. We have remained backward, and up today Government has failed to give us just a border. So it is because of having a government very far from the district that we have remained backward, thank you.

MR ALINTUMA: Madam Speaker, I want to inform the honourable member on the Floor that the backwardness in politics and all the chaos that arose was actually created by party politics, but today we are ready to go into party politics. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mawiya, please make your submission; leave the other members out. Just sell your ideas, and stop naming areas.

MR WAGONDA: Madam Speaker, I have nothing personal against hon. Alintuma but for purposes of record, is he in order to insinuate that parties were the creators of backwardness? When actually hon. Alintuma is a member of National Resistance Movement, which is a political party? Is he also in order to try and malign parties when actually he belongs to a political party as well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think he misunderstood the message from hon. Alisemera. Please proceed.

MR MAWIYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It takes the government of the people to correct the mistakes that were committed by past governments.  I thank the Executive here and Members of Parliament seated in this august House; today we are correcting those imbalances and injustices.

 Madam speaker, there is a whole clause about those regions or areas, which feel that probably they should be out of a regional tier. That is clause 12. Therefore, there would not be any cause for alarm as far as this is concerned. I therefore appeal to the committee to reconsider its recommendation, especially recommendation No.3 when it says that it received representations from the people of Acholi, especially hon. Mao, and Busoga from hon. Kizige.  

Madam Speaker, today all of us have actually expressed our willingness to join the regional governments. Therefore, we should all move as a team. We are speaking with the same voice and we should move as a team, therefore I request the committee chairperson and the members that all of us should actually be deemed if there are no legal impediments.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to ask the committee to reconsider its recommendation No.5 when it says that Mengo should be treated like any other municipality as far as the creation of the municipality is concerned. Madam Speaker, like I said, today we are trying to correct the historical errors. Mengo existed before and I think this one must also be looked at in the same line.

MR LUKYAMUZI: I would like to thank hon. Mawiya for giving way. The information I would like to give him in regard to the matter he has alluded to is that Uganda is a nation of many nations, with a rich mosaic of cultures and traditions perhaps existing nowhere in Africa. That implies that the uniqueness of those cultures makes every culture unique and therefore, cannot be expected to be uniform. 

MR LULE MAWIYA: Madam Speaker, lastly I would to give respect to my colleague hon. Mukasa Muruli from Nakasongola. Why should I do so? - Because of his consistency even where his concerns have been addressed. Even the committee report said it did not see any strong reason for saying that Buganda cannot be deemed, therefore we should all move in a positive direction especially where a solution has actually been given. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.36
PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA (Rubabo County, Rukungiri): Thank you Madam Speaker and honourable members. I stand here to support the motion for adoption of the report and the Bill. 

Madam Speaker, at first I had thought it would not be necessary for me to contribute to this debate but afterwards I thought it would be unfair of me not to share my own experience with my colleagues.  

I was a young man when Uganda became independent and I am still young at heart and I am experienced. Therefore, I thought I should share my views with my colleagues like a mulokole, shares his experience with his people –(Interjection)- I am advised by hon. Okot Ogong that I am bearing testimony. I am not going to say anything completely new. As you know, preachers say nearly the same thing over and over again. If we did not want repetition we might have stopped long ago from going to churches and mosques because they say the same thing all the time. So, there is nothing unusual about me saying what my colleagues have already said if for nothing but for emphasis.

The first thing I want to do really is to commend the committee under the chairmanship of hon. Jacob Oulanyah for having written a very good report. This is a report of international quality and standard in my own opinion. It is so carefully written, every problem we have, the aspirations of the various peoples of Uganda, and it recognizes the vision to which all of us should focus and propel our country.

Uganda historically is a very young and fragile country. We are in the stage of state building and therefore the task we have as leaders is much more difficult than many people would have us believe. That is why I hear some people from certain corners over-simplifying the problems of this country. If you put them in charge of Uganda they would fail by that day. I have never seen a situation as complex as this. By listening to my colleague’s debate, and Madam Speaker, it is proper that Members of this House genuinely express themselves, because as a scientist, I am aware that unless you make a correct diagnosis, the treatment may not be proper. But I would like my colleagues to recognize that we are dealing with a young fragile state and of necessity likely to be unstable and that is why we must be very careful.

I want to compare this country to an effort at building a house. But this builder has not got regular size bricks, has not got the right sand and maybe the cement is adulterated. You are using a stones of varying sizes and even the materials which these stones are made of are different. Therefore your job is much more difficult than someone who has standard bricks and all he needs is to put them together. That is why for example federations of countries like the United States are much easier federations to think about.

I heard a colleague say that you cannot build – (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much.  Madam Speaker, I am standing on a point of order in very serious terms. The honourable member holding the Floor has stated that we are living in a young, fragile state. As far as I know, Uganda is now 44 years old politically since we got our independence. The implications of “young, fragile” are very dangerous because you tend to create fear among those who are governed so that you can do anything as governors.  

Is it in order for the honourable minister in charge of General Duties, very close to the Prime Minister, and Leader of Government Business, to make such a statement that we are young and fragile? We are able to do anything, any Nation in the world can do and any implications related to what you have stated makes us believe that we are marginalised as a State, which is already represented in the United Nations. Is he in order to make such a statement?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I think even countries that are older than us continue to change situations and constitutions so none of us has matured.  Proceed.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Obviously the submission by hon. Ken Lukyamuzi is one of the classical examples of the usefulness of this country. (Applause). 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, you have made a ruling, and in accordance with our rules of procedure, your word is final after a ruling. Is it in order for the honourable minister holding the Floor to continue pursuing the matter after you have pronounced yourself?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is emphasizing your usefulness. Please proceed.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Hon. Lukyamuzi was of the wrong view that I had been ruled out of order, I was not.  You need your ears. So Madam Speaker, and honourable members let me continue with my serious submission, which was rudely interrupted by my Colleague hon. Lukyamuzi. I was comparing building the nation Uganda to building a House when you have materials of different sizes quality and so forth. And what are these materials? They are the kingdoms we have, the districts big and small, the tribal groups we belong to, the religious beliefs we hold, the culture we carry with us; and all of them are so different that we have an ominous task of building a good house out of these materials. 

I heard a colleague say that you cannot build these regional tiers from materials of different sizes, but I ought to know the United States of America has states as big as California with over 30 million people and twice as big as Uganda and small ones like Rod Island which has only 600,000 inhabitants; you can do that.  But these people are slightly different because the materials are pretty much of the same, they speak the same language they have the same technology advantage and so on and so forth. So, we have a big task.

Now, Madam Speaker, if I am advised - Is that the end or - You see because of the nature of our differences, we have a very huge task, and if I can remind my colleagues of a statement by a certain famous politician in America, he said that politics was about three things and the first one, Madam Speaker, was compromise and the second one was compromise and the third one was compromise. In other words, he said politics was about compromise.  Compromise, compromise, compromise.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you very much Professor for giving way.  Professor I want you to tell this House whether you know any building structure in Uganda made up of different stones that is still standing, and you know where it is.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, hon. Byabagambi is an engineer, all I want him to do when he walks out of this House is to move around with his eyes open; he will see a number of walls that have been built out of irregular blocks. They are there; if he does not know I will take him and show him and I have observed that it takes much longer to build those walls than those you build out of regular shaped bricks. It is as simple and straight-forward as that.

DR KASIRIVU:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, and hon. Prof. Kagonyera my former Professor for giving way. Madam Speaker, I want to support the professor for saying and advocating for compromise. I know he really means his word of compromise. However, in the spirit of compromise, when is he bringing the resolution from Rukungiri that the districts of Kigezi should be deemed to cooperate? 

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Madam Speaker, I thank the hon Kasirivu for reminding me. In fact I was going to say that generally in that part of the world we tend to “enda pole pole”. But very soon this House should not be surprised if Kisoro, Kabale, Rukungiri, Kanungu, Bushenyi, Mbarara, and Ntungamo, come here and ask you to deem them. Yes. (Applause). We are busy working on that and we are consulting the people; we will come because it is important that people be creative.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, an honourable member was saying that not enough study made. First of all, this report itself shows you how many people made presentations to this committee. These presentations are a formidable method of studying situations by listening directly to people who are concerned. I have also taken some time to read so many documents submitted about what we are trying to do. So it is not correct to say that no studies, which have been done. Very many studies were done, consultations have been made, and people have expressed their views. 

Even in Rukungiri people have made some expressions for and against, and what have you. But what we should agree on is that not everybody can always have what they want when and how they want it. That is why that politician said that there must always be compromise; and the compromise is about building a peaceful united Uganda albeit with some diversity. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I want to appeal to my colleagues, the honourables members of this House, to rise to the occasion and support this motion. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.52
MR FRED BADDA (Bujumba County, Kalangala): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion, but I also request all the honourable members of Parliament to support it. (Applause) I support this Bill because it is addressing long time concerns, long time aspirations of a number of people in this country, and this is the time to deal with these aspirations conclusively and positively. 

Sections of Ugandans have been requesting for this kind of arrangement. One member said at one time that we should delay dealing with it. I do not agree with the idea of postponing solving problems or hiding away from them. So the time is now. We should deal with this arrangement conclusively and positively.  

The report explains the spirit in which this Bill was made. The report says the Bill was made in good faith. I would like to request Members of Parliament that in the same spirit we should debate this Bill, and it is in the same spirit that we should decide on it. As we take decisions we should use the same good spirit in which the Bill has been brought before Parliament. One Member of Parliament said that this phenomenon is not a new arrangement; “It has ever happened in Uganda, it has ever happened elsewhere”. What we are doing today is polishing the arrangement so that it fits the current times and our Ugandan situation. 

It is not something new; we are not making a new discovery; it is not an invention so we should look at it as something that has been happening elsewhere. It is something that has ever happened here but we are just polishing it to fit our times, and the situation.  

Some Members of Parliament - when debating - have been concerned about the cost of administration for regional governments. I look at the cost as a very relevant cost, which we should incur because this cost is going to buy values that are visible and those that are invisible. Some of these values that we are buying include promotion of participation of a number of Ugandans in their affairs. It is buying the value of harmony and creating harmony in our country; it is buying the value of accelerating development in this country and it is also buying the value of close monitoring of operations in our country. 

It is also going to promote co-existence of our societies in their diversity. The previous speaker who was holding the Floor gave an example of a building. The example I would like to give is the organs within a body. We have different organs in the body all functioning in unity to make sure that the body develops. This arrangement is going to recognize different institutions so that as one group in their diversity we form a unity that will develop much faster. 

If we agree to deal conclusively with this regional arrangement, it is going to also diffuse a number of tensions that have been in our country for so many years. The tensions of politics, the tensions of economics and some social tensions are going to be dealt with when we deal with these regional governments.  

The report properly explains that the districts are not going to be touched. The powers that they have now are going to be left and a few powers from the center are going to be descended on to regional levels. So we should not worry that the powers of the districts are going to be tampered with. What I see as the only role of the central government now is to disperse powers and disperse some resources to regional governments and they do the co-ordination role. The central government is going to co-ordinate –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, honorable colleague for giving way. You have made a statement that people should not worry because the powers of the districts would not be tampered with by the regional government. Would you want to consider the idea that we dissolve the entire district governments and have one regional government so that we avoid duplication of services?  

MR BADDA: Hon. Odonga Otto, thank you for that question. I would like to tell you that I do not buy that idea because the districts have got their roles and they have functioned well but we are just adding the regional level so that we have a regional government. That will cater for regional issues, as the districts will also be looking after issues of district centers.  

About deeming, I am one person who, with all my heart, fully support that all regions that want deeming should be deemed. They should be deemed as soon as they fulfill what is required. One concern that I would like to raise with the Bill concerns clause 11(4). I would like the Bill to be very specific. Clause 11(4) says, “There shall also be a mechanism to resort to in case Central Government deliberately fails to remit funds to regional governments.” I feel it still has a gap. In the Bill I would like to see something that is very clear and definite, so I think we should consider it.

About the position of Mengo Municipality, I do not agree with the committee. I would like Mengo Municipality to be indicated in the Constitution because it is not ordinary to have a municipality within a city. This is something special because if you say that this municipality should be created under the normal laws, which create municipalities, it is as if this one is also ordinary. But it is not usual to have a municipality within a city, so this one is a special situation and should be indicated in the Bill.

Lastly, if we pass this Bill I would request government to expeditiously bring subsidiary laws so that we quickly implement these regional governments. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.01
MR HENRY OBBO (West Budama County North, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I thank you. This is a very good Bill and, therefore, I stand here to support it. It is a good Bill because it is answering to the aspirations and to the many requests that the people of Uganda had hitherto put across to the Government, which they also had put to the Ssempebwa Commission. It is a good Bill because it is going to empower the people to manage their own affairs at the regional level. 

It is also aiming at treating all the people of Uganda equally; offering them the opportunities to decide how they want to be governed at the local level in a bigger geographic area. 

Here the matter of deeming has been referred to as being specific to Buganda; the reasons have been explained, but it does not mean that Buganda alone will be the area of this country that could be grouped under regional administration. Other areas are also going to be permitted by this law to come under the regional administration framework. 

I am encouraged by the response Members of this Parliament have already put forward because it does indicate that the people of their constituencies are supporting the idea of regionalism. In my own area once the Bill has been passed if by that time the Eastern region districts of Tororo, Busia and the Bugisu ones will not have yet come out with resolutions for regionalization of their area, they will subsequently do so. 

The people of my constituency asked me to support this Bill. (Applause) They told me that since they are Ugandans and I am their representative I should fall in line with the rest of this country in coming out with the framework of administration that will be bringing order and peace to Uganda for a very long time to come. 

This Bill has many principles. It is going to address one of cementing the relationship, in a stronger way, amongst people of similar neighbourhoods. You get districts of the same area coming together to pool resources and to provide services to their communities with greater efficiency in a manner that brings satisfaction to the community. It will give a quicker way of providing services to the communities. When regionalization is in place and government cedes some of the responsibilities it is currently carrying out, the services will be brought closer to the people. 

As a matter of fact, Madam Speaker, the principles of the Bill once accepted and promulgated into law will bring an element of positive competition. Let me give an example of development. When we look at the results of primary leaving examinations, O’ Level examinations and A’ Level examinations, we see that certain areas of this country are not doing very well academically. When regionalization comes to being and senior secondary education is ceded to the regional governments, then it will yield a competitive spirit in the regions. It will enhance the service in the area for imparting knowledge to the students and so competitions will emerge in a very positive area and standards will rise. 

Besides, regionalization will bring with it harmony throughout Uganda and there is nothing as important as harmony. Harmony has a lot of benefits. It reduces costs of administration. I am talking about the cost of administration here because some people tend to think that when we introduce a regional tier system of government in this country the cost of administration will rise. It is not so. The cost of supervision of the services, which will be ceded to the regions, will be reduced. Hitherto, supervision of these services is being done by the center. You pay a lot of money to the officers going up to the peripheries of the country to supervise and monitor service delivery. This will cease when regionalization comes to be because supervision will be done from the center.  

And with harmony in place the cost of maintenance of law and order will reduce and the amount of money that will be saved will be a positive element in the exercise of regional administration. The Bill provides a win-win situation to all interest groups. The districts will remain with services they are carrying out presently. They will continue to receive money form the Government to run those services. The regional government, likewise, will have new services that they will administer and they too –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, try to wind up, Mr Minister.

MR OBBO: And they too will be receiving money to finance those services. The districts will not be worse off because of the introduction of regional administration. Meanwhile, those districts that will cluster together to form a regional government will have something additional for them to benefit from in the form of new services and new responsibilities that they will be called upon to shoulder. 

However, there is one thing I would like to advise about. Our experience about running these services has shown that whereas it is a good thing to decentralize services, it might have been that the decentralization of personnel had been done prematurely. In this case I suggest that while we are going to regionalize some services from the center, we may not need - at the same time as we regionalize some services - to also regionalize the personnel who are going to administer those services. The personnel could be retained at the center and –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable minister, please, wind up.

MR OBBO: Finally, the personnel could be retained at the center and be loaned to the regions to carry out those functions that the regions are supposed to carry out. After the regions have acquired some experience -(Member timed out)

5.12
MRS SYLVIA SINABULYA (Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to begin by thanking government for bringing this long awaited Bill to this Parliament, and also thank the committee for the report. I support the proposals in this Bill for the establishment of regional governments in this country. The proposals as put in this Bill are very positive because first of all they try to address the mistakes, which were committed in the past. The proposals offer an equal opportunity to all areas of this country, which want to come together as regions to do so without discrimination. So, I support the proposal for the regional governments.

Regional governments as proposed in the Bill will act as a means of securing peace and harmony in this country. In the past, armed rebellion has found support in regions with strong cultural institutions and regions that felt marginalized by government. Regionalism accommodates Uganda’s ethnic and cultural diversity. It affords the people more control over their political and economic affairs and with regionalism it is possible that political and armed rebellion for capture of state power could be prevented. 

Many of our colleagues have talked about the issue of ethnicity but I want to say that ethnicity is an African reality. I want to urge my colleagues that other than looking at ethnicity as a negative force, we should look at it as a positive building block that can provide a sound foundation for sustainable political and social economic development.  

Traditional leaders throughout Uganda have played an important role in mobilizing their respective communities to support government programmes. They have acted as a strong link between the central government and their people. And in many cases they have helped government to change people’s attitudes where they have been negative towards certain government programmes. We need to support them by constitutionally recognizing them and providing financial support for their initiatives. 

I also want to add that if regional governments are supported, they can act as a potential and stimulant for development. Regional governments in themselves hold the key to reducing economic disparities. Now and again we have heard colleagues talking about marginalisation of some regions. I believe that the proposals in this Bill - for example there is a proposal of financing regional governments depending on social and economic conditions. I also saw a proposal, which allows regional governments to some extent to collect revenue in form of cess tax and surcharge. I believe that if these resources and revenue are well used, they will lead to a minimization of economic disparities, thereby promoting equitable development.

I also believe that regional governments will enable regional blocks to plan and prioritize their regional needs. It is a common fact that different regions partake different economic activities. Some regions are cattle or goat keeping communities while others are coffee growers. I believe that each region will sit and look at the best way to promote its economic potential and thereby lead to more economic development.

I also believe that regionalism will create employment opportunities; employment opportunities at regional assemblies and regional governments, as NGOs could come and work in regional governments and more likely the jobs in those governments will be taken by people in those particular areas.

I know that decentralization has worked well, but there are instances where one feels that we could do better if we created bigger political units and build synergies to handle more complex issues, which have failed for example rural roads, and poverty. The center has not handled this problem of poverty well and neither have local governments. I have a lot of hope that with regional governments the problem of poverty could be addressed.

I know that regional governments have worked well elsewhere and I believe that even in Uganda it will happen because Uganda has been a success story in many endeavors. I hope even with regionalism we shall be a success story.

Finally –(Interjection)- yes, this is the final submission. I have been listening to a number of colleagues from Bunyoro, from Busoga and from other regions talking about the need to consider their districts to be deemed. I support these sentiments and I would urge government if possible to enable our colleagues to go and consult their people and bring resolutions from their districts such that when we finally pass this Bill into law there will be many regions, which are being deemed to be corporate. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.19
MS ANIFA KAWOYA (Woman Representative, Sembabule): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Indeed as you have said I am Anifa Kawoya, Woman Representative of Sembabule District –(Interruptions)- I am saying, –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please, let us not waste time. Just go to the substance. Please, move on. 

MS KAWOYA: Madam Speaker, I am building up my point. (Laughter) I am saying I am the Woman Representative of Sembabule District of Buganda. I want to say that when in the Constitution making process the districts of Buganda were deemed, Sembabule was not yet a district. I am here to say that the people of Sembabule District are happy to have been deemed together with Buganda. (Applause) That is where I am moving to. I stand here to support the motion and strongly appreciate the committee’s report.

Extensive consultations went on. The Government’s position given by the Leader of Government Business is here, and he told us they consulted widely. The problem seems to have been the word “deeming”. But it goes into the Bill that those districts, which wish or desire to be deemed - I want to refer the House to the constitution, the First Schedule, page 173, and say that it was not only districts of Buganda, which were deemed. Kapchorwa of Sebei, Moyo for Madi, Gulu-Kitgum of Acholi, Apac of Lango, Iganga-Jinja-Kamuli of Busoga, Hoima of Masindi, the rest of the districts of Buganda, and Bushenyi-Mbarara of Ntungamo. 

What am I saying, Madam Speaker? I am saying this is the right time for those districts, which were not deemed at that time. This is the chance for them to be included and be deemed. That is why I am saying I am happy with all my colleagues who have shown interest in having their regions deemed.

Prof. Kagonyera has told us of the wise man and the word compromise. A regional government came about as a compromise. It is true many people in Buganda region supported a federo arrangement but by compromising and by being accommodative - you can imagine they have accommodated me for 23 years and I have lived with them. I am testifying that the arrangement that brings all of us together, our different ethnicity, our different cultures, our different values, can only be enhanced by coming together, living together and learning from each other for the sake of development. That is why we are supporting this: for unity, and to live in unity. 

The regional government arrangement is not taking away power from the center. In actual fact it disperses the evolutions of power from the center to the lower units. Article 176 of the Constitution protects the district and their powers. It is going to be the bridge between the center and the lower units and that is why the people of Sembabule are happy with that and sharing economically, politically and socially where some regions felt they were being left out.

After saying that, we are looking at equitable sharing of resources, and equitable development. This is a chance for the districts to come together. For example when you look at the districts of Mpigi, the districts of Mukono and Sembabule, you will find Sembabule is still a small district but when they come together under this regional arrangement, we are going to benefit. We are going to develop together. That is why we are saying, my colleagues, it is high time we supported this and we came together. We shall have to grow together. Development cannot go at the same stage but at the same time we shall have shares within this.

Madam Speaker, the regional government allows chairpersons of districts to sit at regional government councils. In sitting there, they will be sharing experiences. They will be planning together and the districts will benefit from that. The policies of government will be strengthened and enhanced. We will be together in harmony with the planning of the regional government, with the planning and support of the districts.

Finally, I wish to ask my colleagues and implore them to support this regional tier for the sake of living together in harmony. It is something that brings us together. We are looking at the future and the country moving together. This is the beginning. The Baganda say, “nyama ntono, okayana eri mu nkwawa”. If it is little, we have it and we move on. We shall work together and prosper together. I thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the regional government. I support the cause of those ones who have supported and I stand for that. I thank you.

5.27
MR SAMUEL ANYOLO (Soroti County, Soroti): I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want also thank the committee for the report. 

There is nothing as unpleasant as breaking the unpleasant news itself. I stand here to give you a position, after consulting amongst ourselves, the Members of Parliament from Teso, we also consulted with our constituencies. I have also consulted Emorimor, a few minutes ago I was on line with him. So, what I may say is fully the substance in Teso. 

They have no problem with granting whatever region wants a tier; they have no problem but for them when Emorimor was consulted for example, he said Article 178 is adequate for them. Let the freedom be left to the districts at their convenience and will. The similar matter was tabled in ICU council and the – it is the Iteso Cultural Union - they have a council with ministers, and the same position prevails. We, therefore, find it difficult to support this motion at this point in time. I find it difficult too. 

In 1960, similar consultations were carried out in Teso on a similar arrangement and it was widely rejected. In 1995, during the Constituent Assembly consultations, consultations were carried out and the arrangement was rejected.

DR OSCAR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank hon. Anyolo from Soroti for giving way. I would like to clarify on one thing. Hon. Anyolo has used Emorimor, it so happens that in Pallisa where I come from there are some Iteso who owe allegiance to Emorimor and I would like to separate the two. Those of us in Pallisa would not - even if Soroti wanted to form a tier - participate because we have never been part of Teso although we are Iteso. Our direction would be different. It would be Bukedi; maybe with Mbale. Unfortunately, we have never held consultations. When we consulted last time it was about federalism. So, as far as this motion is concerned, we would like to have consultations before we committed ourselves. Thank you very much.

MR ANYOLO: I thank hon. Mallinga for that information. Madam Speaker, as you can see, in simple terms, that is the situation obtaining. I wish my colleagues who are dying for this thing well. As for me, ignore my vote and I have got this from the people. I do not want to spend much time. I thank you. Let us work together as one nation but for this, it is unpleasant. That is the position.  

5.36
MR OTHMAN ALONGA (Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this very comprehensive report. I know it was not easy since these are very contentious issues, but I am sure they will sail through. They have started it with the Domestic Relations Bill –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you use the microphone, please?

MR ALONGA: They will also go through this one and the next one. 

I stand to support this Bill, with reservations. I say with reservations because when we were consulting people on the Government White Paper, my people completely misunderstood this new phenomenon of the regional tier or whatever you call it and, therefore, they rejected it. Perhaps they rejected it because some who had very negative historical experiences of similar systems in the past, more so in Buganda, Busoga and Bunyoro. It is these very historic reasons that are even giving problems to the Bill. 

You remember the Bill started as ebyaffe, then the kingdom, then it went to federo and now it is a regional tier. That is why sometimes it is raising a lot of hullabaloo and a lot of discussion. 

As I was trying to explain that this thing might not be bad for all Ugandans, I also had a lot of questions in my mind. Those are still lingering at the back of my mind. “What is this regional government”? At one time we were told it is the regional tier, that two or more districts can corporate, therefore, a regional corporation. Now it is regional governance. Up to now we have not yet even grasped what we are going to call these regional arrangements but let us assume that they are going to be called regional governments or provinces. So, this was another question: “why are they referred to as regions not states and not provinces? Why this enthusiasm from sections of the community of Uganda about this issue? Is it nationalistic, tribalistic or whatever?” 

These questions are still lingering but let me say that since the committee said that this Bill is in good spirit, let me support it. It can only be good if it is also debated and handled in the same spirit. I told my people, as I was consoling them, that this thing is not going to be bad for you. Therefore, I will support it on condition that it is not going to affect our people; that it is not going to affect my people in Buganda, in Luwero, Mukono and those areas or those who are in Busoga or Bunyoro. Therefore, I will support it because of that.

On the deeming, it is unfortunate that certain districts were deemed in the 1994-95 Constitution making process but perhaps this was because of certain reasons and circumstances. The whole idea of deeming, I do not support it like my colleague said here. Article 178(1) really suffices for the establishment of such regional arrangements and, therefore, I will not support the deeming of Acholi, Lango, West Nile, and so on. I think Article 178 is enough and it can cater for all such cases. 

If I even had the powers I would say, “Let us even scrap the deeming that was done in the Constituent Assembly so that districts can come up voluntarily to corporate and form that sort of system. That is because one person’s sense of belonging should not deprive another of the same sense of belonging. For example, if you deemed that Nakasongola is part of Buganda and they are saying we want to belong differently, why should we force them to belong where they do not want to belong? This can also happen to any other area.

Madam Speaker, this equitable distribution and what not, I am not going to talk about it but the committee is saying that courts should be evolved in evaluating the evidence of persistence failure to comply. Why is this so in regional government yet in districts and local governments this was not a condition? Why should we bring in the courts? Why can it not be like taking over of a district and we make it as simple as that? And it raises another question: are these regional governments local governments or are they central governments?

Even the Minister for Local Government was asking: are these regional governments going to be local governments? So there is still a problem here. I do not know the answer. Madam Speaker, thank you very much.

5.38
MR KULE MURANGA (Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion, with some reservations. I was in the Constituent Assembly when we made this Constitution we are debating now. I was under instructions from Busongora North not to accept federalism, yes, but what we are doing now is different from what we did in the Constituent Assembly. There was the famous John Eresu Motion in the Constituent Assembly, which demanded that every part of Uganda should fall under federalism and we defeated it for reasons that this motion was not polished the way this is polished now. (Applause)

At that time we had to think about decentralization, then there was this federalism. We took decentralization to be the best and the unit was a district. So we felt that we should have to test this one first and for eight years we have been moving smoothly. It is now time that we also try the regional tier combining several districts so I do not see any harm in this one. 

Our brothers and sisters in Buganda have always been crying to have their districts together and I believe it is high time we allowed them to enjoy what they have been missing. (Applause) I believe there will be great harmony for them since they have the same culture throughout. Yes, I believe even those other districts, which maybe having some commonality, they can go ahead so that nobody is deprived of what he or she wants. 

However, in Kasese we still have some reservations because there are some factors we have not yet resolved, for example the Businga. Eighty-five percent want it and yet it is not resolved. So, our priority now is the Businga case. After that then we shall see with whom to federate because in the Bill they are talking of titular heads being the cultural leaders. In our case who will be our titular head in case we go in for federation with somebody we do not know? So, why can we not resolve this thing first then we see how we federate with somebody? It is very important to us.

As I was moving around our people were saying, “Let us first solve the obusinga issue, which has the majority support, and then we see how to federate”. So, if you can allow us that one, we shall be able to federate with any district be it Bushenyi, Kabarole or Bundibugyo. We have no problem, but let us first solve that one.  

Three, I have a problem with the deeming. In our view we believe that somebody should be free to enter and to exit but if you deem them it means he has no free exit. That is dangerous because it should be through free will.  

Lastly, there should be a study of the merits and demerits before you enter the regional tier. We welcome the regional tier but we shall first study the merits and demerits so that we see what we enter into and how we shall get out in case of anything. Otherwise, in principle we support the Bill and we shall vote for it, but more so to help our brothers and sisters in Buganda. Thank you very much.

5.44
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu county, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for this opportunity. I want to talk in two capacities, one as a national MP and two, as a Member of Parliament from Acholi, which I am proud to be anyway.  

I want to thank government for having struck such a deal with Buganda, 40 years after other governments used guns to do the same thing. I think this is a healthy process of nation development. I also want to thank the Baganda MPs, especially hon. Tim Lwanga, because negotiations means giving in and taking what you can get. If we were to go with traditional demands for federo, I think by now the negotiations with government would have still failed. So, the spirit of giving and receiving I think is a good kind of spirit.

I am aware if I went to Kalangala Islands and told people that you have brought the regional tier and not federo, I can cause you there would be political problems. But the onus should be on all of us to explain that negotiation is a process. Let us first see how it works at a regional level then we may think of federo, that is what politics is all about.

I really want to say this because one of the recommendations is that each regional Parliament would have powers to make laws on issues within their jurisdiction. I do not want a situation where if I leave Aruu County in Pader I come and get arrested in Kampala because we are operating under different laws in different jurisdictions and yet we presume to be in the same country. So, I am advocating for uniformity. We have not had a 100 percent majority. If this Parliament can resolve and deem all regions of Uganda by a simple two-thirds majority, so be it. What we call law and order is government capacity to force other people to follow a law, which they would not have wanted anyway. So, I really want a uniform system.

As an MP from Acholi I know that we have no problems with being deemed as the districts of Gulu, Kitgum and Pader, but we want a sense of uniformity. We do not want preferential treatment to be given to specific people because they were produced here, yet they even did not apply to do so. Let us make laws for the entire country. We can borrow from the Nigerian experience. We shall say that Uganda shall compromise 12 regions mentioned below and Parliament shall make a law on how these regions shall operate so that we do not bother ourselves on unnecessary details, which we do not have time to do. Even in six months – (Interruption)

MRS AKWERO: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I would like to give this to the august House that the Acholi sub-region does not have a problem with the principle but the deeming process for us will be in consultation with the district councils and even the sub-counties. We do not have a problem with the principle.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Otto Odonga for giving way. The issue hon. Otto Odonga is articulating at this point in time is very important for the continent of Africa and should not be left in the air. The uniqueness of traditions and cultures in Uganda perhaps existing nowhere else in Africa does not necessarily mean or give a special status. Once a culture is spectacular and unique, it does not necessarily mean that it is treated with a special status. So is the case with Buganda. The uniqueness of the culture of Buganda does not necessarily mean that Buganda must be looked at differently with reference to the rest. That is the information I wanted to give you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, I think you had better leave other people to debate. You are pouring bad soup into the food. You keep quiet.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, in law they say he who demands for equity must come with clean hands. I am not ready to be mixed up in issues I do not understand. I now want to raise three concerns, briefly.

One is that this idea of regional governments will not work unless this Parliament can sit down to think hard to dissolve all district units. I am just seeing a situation where the districts of Gulu, Kitgum and Pader will have three chairpersons and three district councils and then one overall chairperson and then one overall council; which is still duplication of services. 

I know it is a very painful experience, we cannot do it in a hurry but I am suggesting as hon. Otto Odonga that even in seven to ten years we must think of one county sending one representative to Parliament and one representative to the regional Parliament and we get rid of the district units. That is unnecessary duplication of services. This can still be gradual but I am giving it as a point for thought and this school of thought can be led by the Rt hon. Prime Minister who has produced a paper on this subject.

The second area I want to caution us over is that this seems to be one of the last nails into the coffin of what we call national unity. We seem to have accepted that national unity is impossible. Let us not deceive ourselves that we are different so we should think differently. By default we are hitting the last nail into the coffin of national unity to the extent that Baganda want to behave like Baganda, Acholi want to behave like Acholi yet they are in one small area called Uganda.  

If we want that - for me in life I am always an extremist - let us go in for full blast federo so that we do not get civil wars, fighting for Plot 1, Nakasero. This might really see an end to people carrying guns and walking towards Kampala in the name of democracy. We want the bush war that my honourable colleagues at the front bench participated in, we want it to be the last in Uganda. We do want to see more people walking through blood into State House. So we should really think much of devolving powers and coming with extreme federo states and we have about 17 federo states in Uganda, and we just give up on national unity. The general rule would be that we either live together as enemies or perish as fools. 

Lastly, I want to say that I am not about to raise any mechanical argument for the benefits of regional governments. Those arguments cannot even stand the scientific test of economies of scale. Are you talking about merging factories, about unity, harmony, law and order? Are you trying to say we should close all police posts now because we are going in for regional governments? What will you do about the thieves in Ndeeba and in Katwe? Are you still waiting for regional governments before you can stop such unwanted behaviour? 

To my colleagues from Buganda, I really thank you for being good negotiators but I also want to caution you in a prophetic manner that this might be one of the most democratic ways you have brought to Parliament to kill the monarchism in Buganda. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, debate on this matter will continue tomorrow. The House is adjourned to 10.00 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 5.53 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 20 May 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)

