Thursday, 14 May 2015

Parliament met at 2.03 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We have a lot of business to accomplish but I am getting a bit worried about the inflow of the reports from the sectoral committees. We need to speed this up to help us finish this process. If we do not, we will end up in a big problem.

I urge chairpersons and members of committees and the Office of the Clerk to facilitate the committees to move faster so that we can have this report ready to allow us move from that. Thank you.

2.05
MS HELLEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance regarding the Uganda Petroleum Institute, Kiryandongo. The Uganda Petroleum Institute is situated in Kigumba, Kiryandongo District. This institute was set up by the Government of Uganda to train Ugandans in the various technical courses related to the oil and gas sector.

An interim taskforce was put in place to kick-start the institution for a specific period of time and thereafter, it was supposed to handover the institute to a substantive governing council and also an accounting officer and a principal to run the affairs of the institute. However, the interim taskforce’s term of office has since expired and has never been renewed. The government simply placed a governing council but the interim taskforce has never allowed it to perform its duties. 

Mr Speaker, also the government appointed acting principal who is ordinarily supposed to be the accounting officer of this institute but this principal has never done anything because the interim taskforce has refused to allow him run the affairs of the institution. This is because the interim taskforce runs all the affairs of the institution. 

Mr Speaker, the students who were admitted in the last academic year have since never started because of the above confusion. They are stranded with their admission letters and as I speak, the students are preparing to apply for this academic year. Everybody is in confusion on whether the institution will continue with the already admitted students or is going to admit the fresh students who completed A-level and senior four last year.

My prayer is that the minister should come up with a detailed roadmap and tell the country how the institute was put in place or how it started, what the current status quo is and the future plan of this institute. The minister should also outline clearly the issues of the governance structure and admissions, among others. It is also my prayer that the Committee on Education interests itself in the affairs of this institution. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

2.08
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter raised by my colleague is a very serious one. I am the Vice Chairperson of the Parliamentary Forum on Oil and Gas. We visited this institute last year. This institute was specifically set up to give a complete edge to Ugandans in respect to training so that they can compete for jobs within the oil and gas sector. However, the confusion we found at the institute meant that if the investment that Government has put there is not well checked, it will be go to waste.

Therefore, I really urge you to request Government to urgently come out with a statement and a way forward as far as this institute is concerned. This is because the institute was supposed to admit both private and government sponsored students. There is confusion now. Even people with admission letters for last year and this year do not know what to do and yet Government did invest in a lot of money. 

We request that the minister comes with a clear statement and if possible, we debate it as members of Parliament and work out the way forward for this institute. I thank you very much.

2.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We will come with a statement as requested by the member next week so that members of Parliament can be able to have some input in this and we find the way forward over this issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us wait for next week. On Wednesday, please come with this report so that we can have a short discussion on this matter.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, whenever we are given a promise that a report will come to Parliament the following week, it does not come. It is because on Thursday, 30th April, there was a hot debate on how the Registration of Persons Project became the main driver of updating the voters’ register. This was a very interesting debate which attracted interest from both sides of the House and it was agreed that day that come Tuesday this week, the government would come and explain why the Electoral Commission abandoned its responsibility to update the voters’ register and instead took over the register which did not belong to the Electoral Commission. However, up to now, the report has not come and nobody has stood on this Floor of Parliament to explain why it has not come. There are several other promises which have been made.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I think you need to have a track to monitor some of these commitments that the government keeps making. They keep promising us that they are bringing statements and yet this is just to calm us down to forget about the promises. By next week, other issues will have come up. I think this is unfair on our part. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Clerk is directed to keep extracting those undertakings and communicate to respective ministers and copy in the Speaker so that we know where we stand on those matters. 

Please, Clerk, extract this particular one and even the previous ones. Let them be brought to the attention of the ministers and also copy the Government Chief Whip so that we can all follow up these issues properly.

PRESENTATION OF PETITION AGAINST TRADE BARRIERS AND DISADVANTAGEOUS TAX REGIMES BY MEMBERS OF THE CABLE INDUSTRY IN UGANDA


2.13
MR PETER MUGEMA (NRM, Iganga Municipality, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am moving under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, just give me a moment. In the gallery this afternoon, we have scouts from St Paul’s Church Mukono. They are represented by hon. Betty Nambooze and hon. Peace Kusasira, who is the Woman Representative of Mukono. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome –(Applause) Proceed please. 

MR MUGEMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. 
Your humble petitioners are manufactures of aluminium stranded conductors under permit number 007, domestic and building cables under power cables under permit number 001010 among other products. 

The petitioners are aggrieved that they are facing several structural disadvantages in the market including but not limited to the Uganda Rural Electrification Agency’s tendering and procurement policies and Kenya’s systematic erection of non-tariff barriers to Ugandan cables. 

The petitioners are aware that other countries, for instance Kenya, are active in supporting and protecting their cable industries through specific requests or supplies from local manufacturers while excluding other importers. This is also done through framework contracts with escalation and price variation clauses which enable the manufacturers to plan and implement capacity enhancement and procurement cycles. 

The humble petitioners are further aggrieved that Kenya’s cable industry has un-fatidic access to the Ugandan market and yet on the other hand the Ugandan cable industry has very limited access to the Kenyan market. The end result is that the Uganda local market is flooded with Kenyan cables causing unfair competition to the Ugandan products. 

Their prayers resolve that stipulated Government policies and industrial guidelines have a preference and consideration for local manufacturers and that Government exploits policy energies and provides mechanism for standardisation and service delivery geared towards promoting healthy competitiveness and quality assurance for instance through implementation of the BUBU Policy- Buy Uganda Build Uganda Policy. 

Deliberate effort is made towards the rationalisation of the taxation policy and duty structure with the view to stimulate the growth of the local industry so as to enhance global competitiveness -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, which petition are you presenting? 

MR MUGEMA: It is the Uganda Cable Industry, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The copy I have is not what you are going through. 

MR MUGEMA: It could be a problem with the clerk. 

MR MUGEMA: Mr Speaker, your humble petitioners are duty bound and will ever pray and thereto, the humble petitioners have appended their signatures. I beg to lay it on the Table. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. That petition stands referred to the committee responsible for this sector of Trade. It should handle this expeditiously and advise the House on how to proceed. The Clerk is directed to extract these minutes and forward to the committee accordingly. 




LAYING OF PAPERS

2.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the corrigenda on the Budget for the financial year 2015/2016.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate committee for handling within the framework of the law. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Minister of Finance for laying corrigenda. Under what rule is the minister now laying corrigenda? Does it match the calendar of the budget process? 

This is because committees yesterday started presenting the reports here. They have made analysis of the procurement plan, the work plan and the recruitment plan. The Public Finance Act is categorical that every resource must be aligned to the National Development Plan, the recruitment plan, the procurement plan, sectoral policy and sectoral investment.

Hon. Kakooza is much grounded on this thing. We have discussed this matter. I am seeking for your guidance, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, corrigenda to the Budget for Financial Year 2015/2015 - What we have started receiving are reports on the ministerial policy statements. I am sure we would be properly guided on how we handle this when this matter is with the committee. The committee should come back and tell us what we should do with it. I think it would be better when it comes from there and then we know how to handle this. The document has been laid and the records have captured it; so, let us proceed. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: This is a critical matter. What is it a corrigenda to? Is there any particular relation to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or is it to the entire sector of the budget? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No; that is for the committee to advise us. I have not opened it. You see, I am seated here; it is laid the other side. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Then they would have told us under what rule they are moving. This is so that the House would proceed in a proper manner right now. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They have proceeded under the rule of laying of papers (Laughter). That is why it is for the committee to open and advise us.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

2.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): I move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read for the second time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that motion seconded? It is seconded by the Minister in charge of Bunyoro but he represents Masindi. It is also seconded by the Minister of State for Trade, the Government Chief Whip and the honourable Member for Kioga. Would you like to speak to your motion? 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. This Bill is aimed at categorising the businesses and specifying the amount of tax payable to disallow the expenditure incurred by taxpayers, who fail to provide tax payers’ identification numbers of their suppliers of goods and services. It is also aimed at raising revenue to be able to finance our budgetary requirements as we have laid it in the budget estimates. 

It is in line with our tax policy and meets the fundamentals of a sound tax policy, which looks at the fairness of the tax, the burden of who pays the tax and also making sure that it balances and contributes to our development objectives. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, this Bill was sent to the committee to examine and advise us on how to proceed. The committee is ready to report and let the Chair proceed. 

2.22
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule): Mr Speaker, here is a report of the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2015. According to rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure, Parliament permits me to present this report. It was referred to the committee after being read for the first time, on 2 April 2015.

The object of the Bill Mr Speaker and the members is to amend the Income Tax Act, cap 340.
    a) To categorise business and to satisfy the amount payable.
    b) To disallow expenditure incurred by taxpayers who fail to provide a taxpayer identification number of their suppliers of goods and services.
    c) To define re-organisation and other terms used in the Act.
    d) To require payment of income tax in respect of all passenger service vehicles and goods, motor vehicles before  renewal of annual licenses.
    e) To make tax identification numbers a mandatory requirement for issuances of licenses or permit.
    f) To provide for special provision for taxation of mining and petroleum operations.
    g) To expand the scope of withholding tax.
    h) To impose tax on each commerce provided by on-line platforms.
    i) To reduce the rate of withholding on re-insurance services.
    j) To amend the first schedule, second schedule and third schedule.
    k) Provide for other related matters.

Observations of the Committee

Clause No.3 of the Bill seeks to amend section 4 and 5 of the principal Act to increase the threshold, below which a presumptive tax is charged from Shs 50,000,000 to 150,000,000.

The committee therefore recommends that the clause be passed as proposed in the Bill. Mr Speaker, I would like to be as brief as possible. I will read the main purpose of the clause.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, your report is assessing the clauses of the Bill at this stage.

MR SSEBUNYA: That is the reason I am going to read -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just go to your last page, last paragraph. What you are doing here is committee stage matter.

MR SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As guided by the Speaker, the report is assessing clause by clause but we shall reach this stage when we get to the committee stage. 

The committee scrutinised the Bill and agreed that the proposal in the Bill will widen the tax base and increase Uganda’s tax ration that has stagnated at about 13 per cent for over a decade.

These measures have been proposed, cognisant of the potential impact on the economy, consumption and investment. It should be noted that we are in the final year of the National Development Plan - NP 1 and under this plan, Government committed to raise a tax base ratio to 15 per cent by the end if financial year 2015/2016.

The committee recommends that the Bill be passed subject to the proposed amendment. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this has been one of the very serious reports; one paragraph and it is finished. That is how business should be done. 

Mr Chairman, can you advise us on the status of any other issues that might not have been agreed upon.

MR SSEBUNYA: As it has become the procedure, hon. Ekanya Geoffrey has signed a minority report and has a few propose amendment differing from the committee’s proposals. I beg to move.

2.18
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Chairperson. I have a minority report. We dissent to clauses 4, 5 and several others. The justification is that the proposed introduction of the new taxes will impoverish local farmers and the peasant.

A farmer selling matooke, coffee, tomatoes, Irish potatoes, cattle or even sand - if it is above Shs 1,000,000 - will now be assessed for income tax. He is required to have a TIN number, short of which he will not be in position to trade. 

This is good because it brings everybody aboard but very dangerous in that as we speak, we do not have a system and a structure. These people do not keep books. There is already provision for presumptive tax for people who earn and therefore these can be taken care of. This provision will create middlemen who will rob our people because no trader that earns Shs 1,000,000 and keeps his books of accounts can be able to trade with local producers.

Uganda Revenue Authority should carry out massive education on TIN registration throughout the country at sub-county level. The principle behind this provision is good but there is need for massive registration exercise to be conducted by URA before it implements this provision. We propose that URA should establish tax registration centre in every sub-county, throughout the country. 

We also dissent from Section 89 of the law. The minister submitted that the revision is to limit exorbitant deduction from interest re-payment that tends to reduce the taxable income. We propose that the thin capitalisation ratio of 1:5 be moved to 3:1. The justification is that this is in line with best international practice. It makes it easy to do business. The company can re-invest and recover from loss of pounded and fluctuation in foreign exchange.

We also object to clause 135 of the Bill. The committee proposes that it will ensure that every person that transacts business in Uganda is registered. They are expected to widen the tax base but we propose that this clause be deleted.  The justification is that it will lock out the majority of the youth and women from business. This clause proposes that every person in the district who would like to do business with Government – assuming on Women’s Day or the Youth Day, you would like to supply the sub-county with chairs and you must be having a TIN number, this will lock out everybody including those selling water and the like. 

Clause 16 of the Bill proposes to amend the schedule to revise the rate payable on presumptive tax and also takes care of that. We dissent from the main report based on several clauses and justification we have attached to our minority report. The rest will be handled at committee stage. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have now received the report of the committee on this Bill and also the minority opinion on this particular report of the committee. I now propose the question that the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2015 be read the second time. That is the motion that I now propose for your debate and debate should start now.

Honourable members, looking at both the majority and minority reports, they are all dealing with sections and are not raising any issue of principle. I do not know whether the House would like to debate principle when both reports have not raised any issue of principle but dealing with sections as proposed. Can we go straight and deal with those sections as they have also done?

2.33
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yes, both reports may not have gone into the principles but Mr Speaker, I would like to invite you to look at clause 2 of the Bill particularly on the definition of goods, where goods are now defined to include immovable property. Definitely, this is a principle that some of us are objectionable to. How do you start subjecting land, especially for the rural people, yet it is the only resource they have which at times is not even put to maximum use to include it as a good. This is objectionable because it tends to go against the well-known principles of the definition of goods. I will be objecting to this particular definition.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I think it still comes to the same thing that substantially, matters of principles are not raised in this Bill. We might have to go to committee stage to deal with those particular provisions.

2.34
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What hon. Niwagaba has raised is very fundamental, concerning the issues in this Bill. This is an Income Tax Bill; it means you are supposed to tax income earned. This is a direct tax and a direct tax has a lot of issues to be raised because it means that whatever you earn after removing expenses is what is taxable. However, if you look at this current Bill in its form, it means that you are going to tax even gross income which is very dangerous.

Mr Speaker, I would plead with you that even if we are going to committee level, we should have a look at both the majority and minority reports for a few minutes so that our colleagues who may not have understood can helped to understand. 

I will go to part three of the Bill; it says, “…advance tax payment…” meaning you are paying tax in advance before you have earned. More so, in this Bill, you see that they are saying that pick-ups, lorries, salon cars and so forth are going to be taxed in advance.

I would like to give an example. In 1(a), they are saying every tonne will pay 25 currency points. Assuming you have a two-tonne pickup - all members have pickups that you use to go to your constituencies - for that pickup to be on the road and especially if it is a two-tonne, you pay 50 currency points.  For the 50 currency points, you multiply 50 by 20,000 every year.

When you come to salon cars or station wagons - all of us have Pajeros, Nissan Patrols and so on - they are going to count that and tax you. This is called advance payment meaning you can only claim at the end. If we want to raise taxes, we should not put systems arbitrary. This Income Tax Act, in its current form is very dangerous for the wanaichi including Members of Parliament. If you have not read, I would advise you to get the Bill and go through it and you will understand what I am saying.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I am a Vice-Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. As far as I am concerned, hon. Nandala-Mafabi is a member of my committee and the submission he has just made is to the effect that he is debating the Bill before the House. I wonder whether hon. Nandala-Mafabi, a member of the committee, is right to debate this Bill at this stage.

MR NANDALA- MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I would like to plead before you rule. Just one minute - (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable Member for Budadiri wanted to make the ruling against his own case. (Laughter) Hon. Nandala-Mafabi is a member of the committee. It is precluded for your engaging in a debate on a matter that has been before his committee; he cannot debate. The honourable member has a right to raise information and give information where that debate needs to be advised on what has to go on but he cannot debate. I am assuming that he was attempting to give information to the House but it exceeded the ambit of information. However, if you are rising to give information, that will be entertained but you cannot debate especially if you start using “if”, “but” - those ones violate the rules. Please, conclude your information.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I apologise. As you are aware, colleagues, I lost a very close relative and I thought my chairperson was getting up to condole with me yet he was coming to bash with me. Besides, they are all aware that I have not been in the House because I lost an uncle who was a father and very dear to me. If you cannot even console me - (Interjection) - it becomes unfair. 

The reason I was rose is that if I had been in the committee, I would have dealt with it. I knew the rules but I only made a mistakes; I would have said “if”.  I am sorry; and the next time when I am given an opportunity, I will say “if.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the use of “if” makes it a debate. The words “if” and “but” imply debate. If you are giving information, you cannot say “if.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The other information I was trying to raise is – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I think there is a lacuna in our rules on where a member is absent, officially - I remember the matter of hon. Nandala-Mafabi losing this uncle was even raised on the Floor – especially when a member goes for an assignment and cannot attend the committee meetings. Our rules sometimes deny a member their rights because he would have raised all those issues but he was officially absent. Therefore, I am seeking your guidance because the rules give the Speaker latitude and you are very much well buttressed. This morning when you were opening the training, everybody admired and prayed for, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member shall not blackmail the Speaker. (Laughter) Honourable members, it should have been in the wisdom of the member who stood to have advanced that issue first. However, he made the Speaker to believe that he was not a member from the committee and therefore he was proceeding to debate. If he had first declared his interest - that is why it is important; if he had first declared his interest that I am member of this committee but I am going seek leave to say the following things because of this circumstance, it would have been very probable that the Speaker would have considered looking at it again and seeing what was possible and what was not possible. However, now that he has jumped the card, I am going to limit him to just giving information along those areas.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The information that I would like to give is in relation to hon. Niwagaba’s. Land is clearly defined, buildings are clearly defined and all immovable properties are well known. In the Income Tax Act, how they are treated is well-known. If we try to call them goods, we are making a terrible error. It is like you are saying it is tradable item. If people are dealing in properties of buildings and lands they are called real estate’s persons and that is clearly know.

The other information that I would like to give is that under clause 4, the national Id is being issued yet you are saying that everybody who is doing business - for instance, I am a businessman; assuming somebody came and bought fuel worth Shs 1,000,000 from me for lorry that take about 500 litres, it means that if I come and claim it as an expense, the taxman will disallow it because I must declare that person who took the fuel of over Shs 1,000,000.

In the Income Tax Act, it is clear; there is what we call the IT4A where by every year, you must file and name the people you have supplied, your major suppliers and pass it to the revenue authority. Now, if you want me, as a taxpayer, to incur another expense of trying to do that and if I do not do it you will disallow, I think it is going to be unfortunate.

I would also like to give information about financial institutions. All of you will agree with us that the biggest problems we have in Uganda are the financial institutions. If you read their balanced sheets, Shs 30 billion has been made as profit by Standard Chartered Bank; Stanbic has made Shs 100 billion and all this money is externalised because the shareholders are non-residents. 

Therefore, if you are trying to say foreign-owned companies, you cannot leave out financial institutions. They should be part and parcel of the group of thinning capitalisation because they come with briefcases and they take away our money. We should deal with all of them and reduce the ratio so that they are also captured in the lower group.

Finally, on the issue of tax revenue, many of you have drivers and the maximum money you pay your driver is between Shs 250,000 and Shs 300,000. They are saying that a driver will now pay tax of Shs 10,000 as per the threshold and all of you know that if a driver will work for 25 days and if he is paid Shs 10,000 that is 250,000 which is already below the threshold, which is tax free. Why should we bring the taxi drivers in the bracket and the conductors of matatus and leave the other groups. In fact what we should be talking about are other things not these matatu or lorry drivers.

Mr Speaker, there are clauses which have been here, which I will plead as I have said; that at an appropriate time during committee stage, we will be moving amendments to delete or to amend to make them better as far as the thresholds are concerned. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go to committee stage; let us not debate because those issues are going to come up again when we go clause by clause. I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 1 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, I to move that the definition of goods under clause 2 be amended by deleting the words “immovable property”.

The justification is twofold: (i) the definition of immovable property is known in law and indeed does not include goods; (ii) including immovable property under the definition of goods will render all Ugandans, especially the poor people we represent, subject to payment of income when they have not even earned it from this property. I beg to move.

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. This issue of immovable property is a catch22 situation and we have got to think about it very seriously. You have got land but under land you have minerals, oil - you remember the Tullow Oil case where we had a problem on taxing Tullow Oil. We eventually won it, which was wonderful but in future we might not. Therefore, when looking at immovable property, you are not only looking at land but what is under it –(Mr Niwagaba rose_) - hold on; let me finish my argument, please. We have got to do is -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But he is the one who has allowed you. Are you debating?

MR LWANGA: Yes, Mr chairman. We have to look at what is under the ground and not necessarily the land and once we find a solution to that; maybe we might just have to say probably, land is excluded. However, if you are looking at immovable property, as a lawyer –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, let me give you information, after all you are my brother in-law. Mr Chairman, it is known that mineral wealth, which is under the land, substantially belongs to Government. If you have land or mineral wealth and there is oil under it, it belongs to Government; any mineral wealth belongs to Government. When you are talking about land, yes it is physical land and the developments there.

MR LWANGA: You did not wait for me to finish; if you have knowledge about the oil, you can just fly over Uganda and get it, go to Nairobi, prepare your papers and sell that knowledge. How do you classify that? Isn’t that immovable property? Mr Chairman, I would like – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, hon. Tim Lwanga. Mr Chairman, under section 20 of the Income Tax Act, it clearly talks about property income and if you read it, they say, natural resource payment and rates or loyalties. Therefore, even oil which is a natural resource is covered under property income. You cannot use oil, which even has other laws - actually hon. Tim Lwanga, if you agree, we would even delete movable. If I am selling furniture in my shop, as far as I am concerned, it has a name but it is my trading stock. That will be movable. 

For property income, it is for that asset you use to generate money and one of them is land which you use as property to drill oil as a natural resource payment. Hon. Tim Lwanga, I plead with you that at an appropriate time, we should even delete “movable” because it is also properly covered.

MR LWANGA: Thank you, for the information. Mr Chairman, this issue of “immovable” must be considered in its entirety. Do not just think about land. You have talked about the oil but talk about the knowledge as well because it is the knowledge that you are trying to tap. I can gather knowledge and go and sell it. I come here prospecting and after that, I work out the figures –(Interruption)

MR SSEBUNYA: Thank you, hon. Tim Lwanga, for yielding the Floor. Honourable members, as I give information to hon. Tim Lwanga, I have a book here called International Tax Glossary. I would like to read what “immovable property” means in terms of tax administration. The International Bureau of Fiscal Documentation is the author. It says, “Immovable property in general comprises land, houses, buildings as well as rights relating to such property. And in an international context, including treaties the concept maybe extended to cover indirect interests such as shareholdings in companies owning immovable property.” That is the definition.

MR LWANGA: Mr Chairman, I rest my case; that is the information thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we are defining goods; the fact that the immovable property is defined does not define goods. Can somebody find a definition of goods from there?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, the definition of goods is not meant to tax land of peasants as has been - (Interjection) - hon. Nandala-Mafabi, if you could listen.  What was and what is the intention of this? It was to clarify what constitutes goods because we have got some few examples here and examples which are very serious and have implications to the tax policy of our country. For example the licence right; somebody comes and gets a licence to mine, keeps it and then sells it to another person handsomely and that has been happening. 

We have been having problems recovering tax from such immovable rights or immovable goods. Therefore that is the reason we are proposing this definition to make it very clear so that there is no problem when we are looking at this. Therefore, the rights in immovable goods –(Interruption)
 
MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I am just seeking clarification based on the information which was given to us in the committee and from what I know happens in the economy. I was convinced. I am seeking clarification from the minister on why we do not define those items. 

We have investors who use GPRS planes. They come and go to the villages and do surveys research on medicine, technology and so forth and then sell it, including licences. Hon. Minister, why don’t you bring those specific items so that it is clear? The cardinal principle of taxation is clarity. I know that it happens and it has happened in so many parts of the country and it is happening as we speak. People use GPS planes and go to our forests. There are patent rights and so forth and this what the government wants to tax. 

Therefore, kindly be clear because they go and trade in stocks in Europe but the way you put it here, you will not achieve that objective. Why don’t we define those issues that we want to capture?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I was hoping the minister would be able to pay attention. The minister has alluded to the licensing rights in regard to immovable property. Mr Chairman, you are well aware that we have Capital Gains Tax and it has been contested and that is what is clearly defined. One of the canons of taxation is certainty; what does the minister want in this? How certain are we so that the taxpayer can know exactly what is imbedded in the immovable property? Short of that, by us taking it as intellectual property as my superior, hon. Tim Lwanga, has alluded is farfetched. 

Can the minister break it down into certain terms so that we know exactly what we are talking about? However, by hiding it under licensing rights, it does not apply here because this country has been charging Capital Gains Tax from the farm down that has been under taken by several oil companies. It is way within our statute book and it is nothing new to put it here the way it is being put.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think what the minister and the team need to help us understand; under what circumstances can immovable property be defined to be goods? Explain that to us how immovable property becomes goods; that is the only issue. A licence is not an immovable property.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, can you allow us two minutes of consultation as we move to other sections?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Clause 2 is stood over.

Clause 3

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, clause 3 is about revising the threshold. I concede.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, clause 3 means that you do not need to file a return unless you apply. If you get a certain gross income, you must pay taxes at such a level. Under the Company Act, it is very clear that if you are a company, you must prepare accounts; is the minister saying that he is also amending the Company Act that companies which get gross income to those levels should not prepare returns? 

If they are supposed to prepare returns, that would be the basis on which to tax; either you have made a loss or a profit. Therefore, does this apply to companies or individuals? If it is individuals, we can allow but if it applies to companies, then are you telling me that you are amending the Company Act?

MR LWANGA: Mr Chairman, as we stand today, if you earn up to 50 million, you have a presumptive tax; you just pay a certain amount authorised by law. What actually this section is doing is moving this from Shs 50 million to Shs 150 million. The idea is that anybody who earns up to Shs 150 million will have a presumptive tax because many of our people within that bracket at the moment cannot prepare books of accounts and it is very difficult to work out the various figures. However, I think this is also in line with the VAT where again it is moving from Shs 50 million to Shs 150 million.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, this is the section they are amending; let me read it; sub section 7 from the revised laws. It could be the same thing there; this is under the red volume. Section 4(5) “Subject to sub section 7, where the gross turnover of a resident taxpayer for the year of income derived from carrying on business or in businesses is less than Shs 50 million…” Therefore now they are saying instead of Shs 50 million, it is less than Shs 150 million; that is all it is doing, nothing more than that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have no objection to that so long as it means an individual because under the Company Act, every company is supposed to file a return.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, o hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the provision is there; whether it is an individual or not does not arise now. This is just the figure - Shs 50 to Shs 150 million.

MR KAKOOZA: I would like to supplement what the minister provided to us and what is in this section. When was this 50 million put? It is almost 10 to 15 years in the law. Why this threshold was revised to Shs 150 million because of the cost of operating business and the people who can prepare books of accounts are finding it difficult that when it is at a threshold of Shs 50 million; suppose you are operating in Kikuubo or in matooke business or Owino, people find it very difficult and costly to employ an accountant to file those books of accounts. 

Therefore, what we request is that the value of money from now up to 10 years when it was passed – it is very important to raise the threshold from Shs 50 million to Shs 150 million.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think it is clear, Members. I put the question that clause 3 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Clause 4 - any expenditure above Shs 1 million. I have a strong belief that this threshold is too low. Look at the majority of the people in the villages who supply most of these things. Assuming you have a wedding, the cheapest cow you can purchase is about Shs 1.5 million. If I would like to host a wedding and I buy a cow at Shs 1.5 million, when I am filling my tax returns to show that this poor peasant whom I helped to pay school fees by buying his cow at Shs 1.5 million, if he does not have a Tax Identification Number does it mean you penalise me for that? 

I believe we will make this very difficult for our poor people to sell goods to those who have the money. I would like to move a motion that this threshold should be raised to at least Shs 10 million.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can the honourable member make a more discussable proposal.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, my argument is based on these suppliers especially of the foodstuffs and locally grown food. Surely, subjecting them to this threshold of Shs 1 million - I believe Shs 10 million would be adequate, after all you are looking at big taxpayers like contractors on roads who would be buying on a daily basis food stuffs. Shs 10 million to me would be reasonable.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, the logic behind this is two-fold; the first one, which everybody should understand, is that the TIN is free; you do not pay for it, it is at zero cost and you just go to URA offices, register and they give you the TIN.

Secondly, we have been having a problem and we have talked about this several times that the tax to GDP ratio of Uganda is the lowest in the Sub-Saharan region. The reason is that the base is narrow; this is meant to widen the base so that we can collect more money and many people can be in the tax – (Interruption) 

MR ODO TAYEBWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We have said that we should put it at a minimum of Shs 1 million because we want to increase more members to register and have TINs because we have found that most members do not have TIN numbers and for that purpose, you can track the business of a person. Thank you.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Yesterday when we were debating the policy statement on Local Government and Public Service, the argument was to increase money because we need money here and there. This preamble is necessary because the proposal that Government is bringing is intended towards bringing more people onto the tax register and once you have more people on the tax register, you will be able to collect more taxes.

Mr Chairman, I have listened to the argument by hon. Niwagaba and unless you are in a business of hotel and events management, if you buy a cow from a peasant in Rubanda for personal use to donate to hon. Timothy Lwanga, I do not think this is unallowable expenditure because it has not arisen as a result of making business; this is a personal expenditure.

When making these arguments, our target is if a person has a business in Kikuubo trading in general merchandise but he is not registered for tax purposes and I buy from him goods and I want to claim a refund because I am tax registered, I am unable because I bought from someone who is not on the register. Therefore, if we say we are putting a minimum of Shs 1 million and above, this person I buy from must be registered for tax purposes. Mr Chairman, the intention is not bad. We have to make sure that the majority of Ugandans are on the register so that we can collect tax from them and this is the intention of this proposal.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, the principle is accepted but the problem is on the threshold; for example in town councils, if you have land and somebody comes to buy two trips of murram, if you do not have a TIN, you are out of business and these are small people. Most of the people with TINs are in business. What it means in this law is that if you do not have a TIN, I will not trade with you and whether in murram or sand.

The principle is acceptable that we want to widen the tax base but you have to know the impact on the other local small traders and if this threshold is amended to Shs 3 million, I can accept it. We have to think otherwise that these small traders that we have in Owino and other places, you are forcing them to come into the tax bracket but the cost of it - and it will be rigorous for a person. Therefore, my suggestion is that the principle is acceptable but the threshold should be amended to a reasonable amount.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The honourable minister said that to register for a TIN is free but a TIN is not given for its own sake; it is given for the purposes of tax assessment. If a TIN has been given or you want the TINs to be given, is the infrastructure in place to make sure that all Ugandans have registered for tax?

Secondly, Ugandans are more or less in the informal sector including the people we represent. Even those ones who will be supplying firewood to an institution for that matter, for that one who will be selling either bunches of matooke or millet above Shs 1 million, even for the trader who has gone in that market place in Kacumbala, Mbale, Mutufu to go and buy goods from that particular farmer above Shs 1 million, it will mean that farmer supplying that item must be registered and have a TIN. 

I do not think that at this stage we could be ready for that; that is why much as the principle is good but there must be adequate sensitisation and infrastructure in place to register Ugandans for the TINs. I think we may not be ready for now.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The minister made a point that our ratio of tax to GDP is lowest in Sub-Saharan Africa and my honourable colleague has probably stated the underlying reason in a majorly large informal sector. As policy makers and legislators, we cannot be comfortable with an extremely large informal sector. They are doing business informally and are not captured anyway in the database of the taxpayers. That is not an acceptable position and if we want to - (Interruption)

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I rise on the point of order. Nobody in this House and I believe not even the authors of the minority report are opposed to the threshold but what we are looking at is the timing; the level of sensitisation and the infrastructure in place because the cost of this tax administration will definitely be very high for that matter. Is the honourable member in order to state that we are against the principle and we are also against transforming from the informal sector to the formal sector?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the member for Budadiri East said the big population are in the informal sector and the honourable member for West Budama North is saying that that size of people being in the informal sector is not right because they are trading without being captured within the formal operations of how things are organised in the country. In other words, both of you have agreed on the subject except he is now picking from you and moving it to the next level, which you are now very uncomfortable with. Your conclusion says, “so they should not be taxed, they should be left in the informal sector” but he is saying no, they should not be left in the informal sector; they should be brought into the formal sector by registering for tax identification so that they are captured in the database. That is what he is saying; please proceed. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you for your wise ruling, Mr Chairman. To modernise Uganda, we need to capture every citizen above the age of 18 who is not a student in our tax database. This process has already begun. 

A couple of months ago, Mr Chairperson, you will recall that we passed a law entitled, “The Registration of Persons Bill” and I am sure the members still remember that one of the objects of the Bill was to streamline tax administration. Therefore, we have already started this process. You all read this in the objects of that Bill. There is already infrastructure in place. We have a database of citizens above the age of 16. It is now the duty of URA to look for citizens above the age of 18 who are not students and engaged in productive business, capture them, issue Tax Identification Numbers to them so that we deal with this large informal sector. –(Interruption)

MS ABIA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. Every Ugandan would agree that paying taxes is a good thing but the target of this specific clause is looking at the agricultural sector and this is a sector that is being fed at only 3 per cent of GDP and is generating 30 per cent of our GDP. 

Now if we injected resources into this very sector that we want to tax, which is largely informal, what that means is that we will therefore multiply the gains and therefore it would be prudent to bring everybody on board to pay this kind of tax. Unfortunately, this is not the prevailing situation. 

You are sucking from what you do not invest in and that is the trauma that we are having here; that someone who is in your constituency and is growing cabbages at an extremely high cost comparable to what is invested in the region -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you rose on information. (Laughter)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I thank my honourable colleague for smuggling in her debate. Mr Chairman, the argument then is that the threshold of Shs 1,000,000 is way too low. But what are we looking at here? The Shs 1,000,000 is for a single transaction and for heaven sake; you are doing business with a person who can sale property worthy Shs 1,000,000. He has sold his products worthy Shs 1,000,000 to you and probably to several other people. Why shouldn’t that person be registered to have a TIN? The fundamental question is, why should any able bodied Ugandan not have a TIN anyway even if you do not talk about the threshold? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. I do not want us to make a law which will contradict itself. You have just passed clause 3 which talks about increasing the threshold of people who will not file returns. If you go to schedule 2, it is clear that where the gross turnover of a taxpayer does not exceed Shs 20 million, a person pays Shs 100,000. In that relation, this should match in the same line. If you are talking of a threshold, for example what is that income which is exempt in a year? If multiply 250 by 12 months, already Shs 3 million is taxed under the tax free; that is where you begin from.

Secondly, when you talk about a single transaction, I want you to read section 22. It says that if you make any transaction, one, in gross total of one million, that means on average of 60,000 per month, you must have a TIN –(Interjection)– Yes, I want you to read the section then you will relate it to what they are saying. In this Bill, they are not saying a single transaction. 

Let me read for you, it says, “…any expenditure above one million on goods and services from a supplier who does not have a Tax Identification Number…” Then it goes on in clause 22 that the moment URA finds that I have talked of anybody’s expenditure and it is over one million and I never I identified him, that would be disallowed. That is what it means. 

MR SSEBUNYA: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Honourable members, just for the sake of having information, we have sub counties and that is the last mile where Government sends money. Imagine those accountants at sub counties do purchase things for service delivery and they are at Shs 1,000,000; what we are saying is that he can go and falsify receipts and at the same time come to the district and account that he bout things Shs at 1,000,000 here and there and you cannot identify these people. So, this is for administration. If the accountant at the sub county is going to buy things for service delivery, let him buy from people who have tax identification numbers. That is good for administration and good for accountability. Therefore, why are we refusing?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I think the chairman of the committee has not read section 22 which talks about a taxpayer. It does not talk about a sub-county –(Interjections)– please, listen to me. It says, “Expenses of deriving income…” – the deductions are allowed. (2) Says, “Except as otherwise provided in this Act, no deduction is allowed for…” They are now saying that no deduction will be allowed for any supply when the total is Shs 1 million and that person has no TIN. You have brought Shs 50,000 this month, Shs 200,000 next month. When I total it at the end of the year, it is Shs 2 million – (Interruption)

MR LWANGA: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving way. Honourable members, when you are doing tax administration, you cast a net like in fishing and you try to catch as many as possible using all the possible means. Therefore, yes, there is section 22 but there is nothing wrong with having another section which is going to bring in more fish. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, wind up.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, let me make my case now. If this is aimed at Government supplies, let us be clear and say, for all Government supplies above Shs 1 million, you must have a Tax Identification Number”. We shall agree on that but not every trader. In fact, we are going for national IDs, which is again where I want to agree with my brother, Fox Odoi. We should use the national IDs - when they are out - that we pin in your ID that you brought me two cows at this amount so that they can come together but not for TIN purposes. 

Here, we can only amend for Government supplies. If you are going for everybody - I will give an example, I have a farmers’ cooperative society called Busamaga GCS. Mr Chairman, every farmer brings coffee there of between Shs 200,000 to Shs 500,000. When you collect from 2,000 farmers, you are talking about over a billion shillings. However, there are members of less than a million shillings. According to this law, it would mean the Busamaga GCS must be registered for PIN and must answer for the billion shillings which is for the 2,000 farmers.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no; that is not what it is saying, hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

MR KAKOOZA: Can I give you information? The principle is that everybody, wherever you supply goods, you must be registered. However, even if you are supplying just seven crates of beer, you must have a TIN. Even if you are supplying just two trips of sand or murram in the village, you must have a TIN.

What we are saying is that the principle is accepted that everybody must be - we want to widen the tax base. However, the threshold should be from somewhere as we change the other law. You cannot say that everybody, after supplying goods of Shs 1 million - the principle is accepted – (Interjection). Let me finish my point.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us have some order, honourable members, please.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, let me conclude.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, please wait. Let us make some progress here. What this law is saying is this; it is imposing an obligation on people who buy. For you to justify your purchases and also later on when you are filing your returns make meaningful claims, whoever supplies you must be somebody who is registered. Whoever supplies you something which is Shs 1 million, you must look for somebody who is registered by URA – has a Tax Identification Number. In other words, do not go and buy from somebody who is not registered. That is what it is saying. 

Therefore, it is not even talking about whoever is going to supply yet. It is now calling upon whoever is going to buy please to buy from a registered person. If you buy from somebody who is not registered, you are responsible that is all it is saying. The question that we are debating now is, is the Shs 1 million a proper threshold? 

MS NANTUME: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Considering the fact that Uganda is a developing country and that people are just coming up from the poverty, considering the fact that Government of Uganda cannot accommodate all people in Government jobs more so those ones who are completing studies; and also considering the fact that we have very many businesspeople – very many big companies – who can approach some big people and they get tax holidays, I am of the view that at least the threshold goes to Shs 5 million so that these small businesspeople who are coming up are also given chance to operate business and earn some income.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I would like the Member for Ndorwa to speak to that Shs 5 million.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, I withdraw my earlier recommendation of Shs 10 million and support the Shs 5 million.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, we are making progress now.

MR LWANGA: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose that the threshold be put at Shs 5 million. I am speaking as somebody who comes from the islands where we actually have one of the highest per capita incomes in the country. I am telling you – (Interruption)

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Yesterday, we were discussing tax Bills and when it came to those vessels from the water areas, hon. Tim Lwanga stood here and confessed to this House how those people are very poor and they cannot even pay the tax - (Laughter) - to the tune of Shs 500,000 per year. Is he in order to say that for them from the island, they have better income per capita when he was telling us they were very poor?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I am sure it is only a stone that cannot change its mind; 24 hours is a long time for a human being. (Laughter).

MR LWANGA: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose the Shs 2 million and the reason is the idea -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, you have just proposed Shs 2 million. There is no justification now. Honourable minister, please help us with this.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, the honourable member from Ndorwa West proposed Shs 10 million -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, he has withdrawn. 

MR BAHATI: Has he withdrawn it? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, it is now Shs 5 million.

MR BAHATI: My sister proposed Shs 5 million. My brother has proposed Shs 2 million. Can we have a win-win situation that we have Shs 3 million as a threshold and then move forward?

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, the minority report proposes deletion. Colleagues, we were not given too much opportunity to explain it. We have cattle traders from Kampala who go to the west, who go to Teso to buy two or three cows. Just two or three cows is Shs 3 million. Or you may buy milk or matooke. Every cattle owner in the village or person who owns matooke, who has maize or milk must have a TIN; that is what we are saying. 

The point is, colleagues, to get a TIN is not free like the minister said. There are internet cafes. For you to get a TIN, you have to pay for it. There are internet cafes where people are giving TINs. In the villages, we need to have this infrastructure in every sub-county for people to have – (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: I want to inform hon. Ekanya that the information you are giving the House has actually been given. We have moved on already and we are now on the issue of the threshold because we have been able to get all these debates. It will help to move forward on the threshold.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I want to thank the minister. I have been very attentive. When I said that they are agitating for TINs, the minister said it is not free because you have to pay for the infrastructure and the internet café where people go. 

Uganda Revenue Authority does not have offices in every village, for example. It happens in internet cafés and you have to pay for power and the infrastructure. This will lock out the youth, the women and our local people who want to sell their products and will create middlemen. In Tororo for example, we have women who sell cassava and trucks move from Kampala. For those people to claim their expenditure that they bought and they are trading, they must buy from registered people; that is why we requested - Mr Chairperson, hon. Kakooza is a brother of mine who likes giving -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the honourable member first finish, please. Please, wind up.

MR EKANYA: That is why we requested - as we speak, Mr Chairperson, URA has unfunded items -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, what are you talking about?

MR EKANYA: I am proposing that clause 4 should be deleted so that –(Interruption)

MR SSASAGA: The information I want to give hon. Ekanya is that he is on the right track. It needs to be deleted because currently speaking, the identity cards are soon to be released and it is in consensus of everybody that the identity cards information which Ugandans are going to get will be the one to be used even to tax everybody who is 18 and above years old with TINs for that matter. I agree with you that it could be better to even defer it to the next Financial Year as identity cards information is given out. That is the information.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I think members should give a hearing to hon. Ekanya. We are coming up with a drastic measure so soon and so urgently that we want to turn around the subsistence economy overnight. It should go with adequate preparation including sensitisation and other things.

For us to say that we are wiping off the subsistence economy overnight - I am talking about my people. Schools are about to open and people are going to be taking their cows to the market. I know there are many highlanders who are fishermen who supply fish to the fish processing plants and they are not registered. Mr Chairman, whereas I agree in principle that indeed we need to widen the tax base, we are attempting to doing it overnight and we are now using the fiscal policy to clamp down on unfortunately the subsistence farmers. Our people, the poor of the poor, are the ones to be locked out of this monetary economy. 

To that extent, I propose that since it is starting now, my colleague would leave the threshold at Shs 10,000,000 because this is an entry point. You cannot begin by turning around; you will close the tap. Honourable colleagues, I would then read to you - this is the new measure and for those who are referring to the recent identity cards registration - these are two different things. We are talking about Tax Identification Numbers and colleagues are bringing in-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you now debating, honourable member?

MR SSEKIKUBO: The information I would like to give to hon. Ekanya is that my first option would be to delete; but in view of the spirited defence the minister is putting up, we can go for the Shs 10,000,000 as a start-up.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman and honourable colleagues, tax must be fair. What we are exactly doing will lead to a very serious impact on VAT. If the local people do not have a disposable income, there will be rise in disease infections and quality of education will drop down. It is because even Shs 10,000,000 is low. Assume you sell a cow or chicken by the end of 12 months in a year; that is Shs 10,000,000. Our local people need to have disposable income and this is captured under VAT.

What is going to happen is that the traders are going to tell these people - (Interruption) - let me make this point and then I rest my case and the House votes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, please.

MR MUSINGUZI: Mr Chairman, this is very serious. The other time when we were passing here loans, hon. Ekanya stood where he is standing, blaming Government for borrowing a thousand loans from the African Development Bank, EXIM Bank of China and other banks.

Now Government is planning to raise its own money, regardless of the implications. Everyone knows the Ugandan citizen’s obligation to pay tax for Uganda. We are looking for money.  Is hon. Ekanya in order to tell Government not to raise taxes to look for money? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: One of the cardinal provisions relating to taxation is that there shall be no taxation without representation. Hon. Ekanya is heeding representation.

MR EKANYA: Honourable colleagues, let me conclude. Even Shs 10,000,000 is going to discourage and create middlemen to cheat our people. For example, when I am going to buy a cow and Wamakuyu is trading in cows or goats in the village, you will tell this man selling three goats at Shs 500,000 that- but I have to file income tax returns and it is always 30 per cent, I have to lower the price of your items by 30 per cent. It is going to be fraudulent. It is because you are not listening. I am saying it is going to create fraud.

Mr Chairman, I have made my representation as you have ruled. The rule of natural justice says the minority will have their say and the majority will have their way. Personally, the option is either to delete and if we cannot delete, I do not agree on any threshold. I rest my case and May God bless the people of Uganda.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Leader of the Opposition.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Chairperson, I just want to plead with the Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the Opposition has put its case. The opportunity we wanted to give this country is to allow the Uganda Revenue Authority to carry out massive education so that we can register massively. That is why we are lobbying the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to allow us this year to carry out this massive sensitisation and registration so that next year when we are talking about this threshold, it will be understood. 

Therefore, Mr Chairperson, we have put our case and we still insist that the e-tax registration should be adopted and I hope the minister will take this up. Then we do not need to argue because when we talk about taxation, we are all interested in that money. However, the manner in which we do it is our concern; some people seem to misunderstand the argument of the Shadow Minister. 

In view of that, I think let us reach a consensus. There is no reason as to why we should disagree on this thing. A proposal has been made for Shs 5,000,000. We can start from that humble Shs 5,000,000 but we should do it hand in hand with massive sensitisation of the population. 

The position of my Shadow Minister is to delete. As a Whip to the Shadow Minister, I am saying that in all these matters, we must lobby and understand. We should not polarise the House over very minor issues. We want to go to the countryside and explain to the people why you are taxing a tomato seller; that is now up to you to go and explain. We have made our case clear that this is a Government which wants to tax a tomato seller in order to raise revenue. 

MR BAHATI: Our Atat has spoken and I have heard her very well; I concede to the Shs 5,000,000 as a threshold. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, can we take a decision on the issue of deletion? Can I put the question to the deletion? 

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have raised my point of order to the minister but he incidentally ran away and sat down. I will stand up to raise a point of clarification because he has now sat down. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The honourable member is not allowed to change his mind when he has already moved the Speaker. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have listened in and I heard the minister’s withdrawal. I have heard all the colleagues and it is a very good healthy debate. I have to bring up the issue of institutional memory. For those who were here when hon. Frank Tumwebaze was the Chairperson of the Finance committee, you will recall they made a proposal that for agriculture to be taxed, your gross income must be Shs 100,000,000. It is on that basis that hon. Ekanya rose. 

They had wanted Shs 50 million and Government agreed at Shs 100 and somehow it was eventually withdrawn. They have now turned up in a very intelligent way. For Shs 5,000,000, whether you are a farmer or not, the taxpayer is going to be taxed –(Interjection)– the problem with hon. Fox Odoi is that he does not want to listen. If you do not listen, you will not learn because we are giving you institutional memory. 

Mr Chairman, I would like to conclude on this. The ministers have conceded on Shs 5 million and there is no problem with that. However, under normal circumstances, when something is starting for the first time, you do not become too hard. 

I heard a colleague of mine say that if we want taxes, we must tax them. This identification is for purposes of informing URA. You will get a man saying that he reared the cow and sold it at Shs 2,000,000 but the investment in the cow was Shs 3,000,000. Will you tax a loss? You must refund. The purpose is not to tax - that is why you see the Tax Identification Number. You are trying to identify for the future. 

I know you are going to take a decision. I propose that identification should have started on Shs 10 million then following year it would be Shs 5 million and then after that it moves to Shs 2 million; in that sequence until it even comes to 0. People have learnt the procedure. 

I will move an amendment on this. Is this on a single transaction or an overall transaction in a year? This is because we must also understand. Is it per transaction or is it by total? Who will be there to know that hon. Nandala-Mafabi will supply hon. Elijah Shs 5,000,000 in the year of transaction? That is where we wanted to have an amendment movement. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think it is in the provision. It says, “Any expenditure above Shs 1,000,000 on goods and services from a supplier who does not have a Tax Identification Number …” I think the wording is very clear. 

That is not even the issue we are debating right now. We are now saying it should be deleted all together. The other one is that we should start from a threshold of Shs 5,000,000; that is where the debate is. Please, let us conclude this and move forward.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, they are saying section 22. Section 22 says, “Expenses of driving income.” That means that when I am filing my returns, one of the expenditures which will be allowed for whatever value you apply - because now it will be Shs 2,000,000 after L. 

Under (2), they say, “Except as otherwise provided in this Act, no deduction is allowed for.” If we pass it in this form - if you get an expenditure of Shs 5,000,000 which is aggregated over a period of time and that person never declares, you will have problems. What we have to be careful about here - because section 22 is the total -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see that is the responsibility of the person who is claiming. It is not on the person who is required to be registered. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to give an example; you have brought a cow to me today of Shs 1,000,000. After two months you bring another one of Shs 3,000,000. At the end of the year, it is about Shs 5,000,000. At the time you brought Shs 1,000,000 under the law, you were exempt. After Shs 6,000,000 you will ask me to go and look for a man in Katakwi whom I cannot identify. 

It is very important that we put here “any single expenditure” because it is at that time that you determine whether you can buy something of Shs 5,000,000 unless you have a Tax Identification Number. This is so that at the end of the year, I do not have a problem. That is what I am trying to put up.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have got two issues that I need to guidance on. The first one is that even in taxation, there is the principle of clarity. When you go the tax optional clause, we are about to put a question. It is not very specific and very clear if it is a single transaction of either a million at that single entry point - a transaction- because he is talking about the transaction in a given financial year. 

Secondly, as we earlier on alluded to –(Interjection)– I need guidance. Issues of taxations need adequate and efficient representation. We are handling clause 4 which touches millions of Ugandans who we represent and these are the farmers and peasants of this country. I do not know if this House is well composed and we have the quorum to take a decision on that clause 4. I seek your guidance, honourable Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the issue we are discussing is simple. All those arguments can be entertained. What this provision is saying is also clear. If I am going to make a claim, my return later and I put in a provision, for example if it was still one million as proposed here and a figure of one million appears, I have to attach it to a supplier. I have to link that to the supplier. The only way I can link that to the supplier is only when he is registered. If I make a claim and it shows that I purchased from a supplier who is not registered, then I lose out. It is allowed. Okay? That is what it is saying.

I cannot make it as a claim. If we take it to Shs 5 million, it means that if I submit my papers that I did this and that and I am unable to show that that particular Shs 5 million was paid to a person and that person is not registered, I cannot claim it. So, it is up to me to make sure that if I have to claim interest in the Shs 5 million that I have spent, I should have a record of a supplier. That is all that it is saying.

MR MULIMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am one of the business people who have encountered different interpretations by the tax collectors, auditors and in many cases I have come along a number of correspondences, between tax collectors and the Attorney-General, in terms of the interpretation of the law.
I am sure if we got another person to give interpretation of exactly what you have given in a different setting, be it a tax body or an auditor who is presenting on behalf of the client, interpretation would be different.

I would like to plead with you, Mr Chairman that agreeing with the principle of the proposal and also having come to the middle line of the Shs 5 million, we make it as clear as possible and provide for a transaction. We should make it single. 

If I hired an auditor who is handling my returns, to him, it will be about me - the taxpayer - but the enforcement agency, the authority, will be aiming at maximisation of taxes. Therefore, the interpretation will differ and again we shall be running into clarification from the authorities, who are responsible for the interpretation of the law.

Therefore, in order not to cause this kind of doldrums, I propose that we amend to have any expenditure above Shs 5 million on a single transaction on goods and services from the supplier. I beg to move.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, I would like to enhance his proposal. Section 22 provides for the year of income and like he said, a year of income is a period of not less than 12 months. This implies that there is room to aggregate the expenditures to come up with annual expenditures. I do not see any harm by us testifying and making it clear that by any single expenditure above, in order to make it fit within the provision of section 22 of the Income Tax Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Okay, is that fair now? We first deal with the issue of hon. Ekanya. I put the question to that matter – honourable members, you remember we stood over clause 2 to find out if there was ever any definition in the law, where goods were defined to include movable and immovable property.

My attention has just been drawn to the Value Added Tax Act, section 1(h), where goods are defined. Goods include all kinds of movable and immovable property but it does not include money. That is what is in the VAT law, just for information.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You are right to read under VAT like that because what VAT does is value addition. It is far different from income tax. Mr Chairman, you cannot bring all the definition in wholesome of VAT to Income Tax. It cannot work out. This is because immovable properties like land have their own way of dealing with them and it comes to capital allowances. 

If I take you back to the Income Tax Act, under natural resource payment like what hon. Tim Lwanga raised, that is the definition, which says that natural resource payment means a payment including a premium or like payment made as a consideration for the right to take minerals or a living or a non-living source from the land.

It is clear there. You cannot say that it will be taken over. A payment calculated in whole or part by reference to the quantity of value of minerals or a living or a non-living taken from a land. When you go to CCC, it talks about rate. It says, “…means in payment including a premium all like any amount made in consideration for the use or occupation of or the rights to use or occupation, land and building.”
It comes and - if you go ahead Mr Chairman - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the point is made. Honourable members, honourable minister, you need to deal with those issues of that definition for goods, for Income Tax purposes. We need to look at it again because the two are not quite the same with the value addition issues.

The issue I now need to summarise is on clause 4, where there is a proposal to delete and to also amend the Shs 1,000,000 which appears in that new paragraph (m). It should be Shs 5,000,000. That is the summary of how far we have gone. Is that correct? We have not taken a decision on all those. There is also a proposal that it should in a single transaction. 

I said there are three aspects of these decisions. One is on the deletion; two is about changing of the threshold; and the third is on the single expenditure amendment. However, as it has been pointed out, we will not be able to take these decisions. Therefore, we have to move and do other things.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIKC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House to report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2015” and passed clauses 1 and 3 and stood over clause 2.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:
I)	THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2014/2015

II)	THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2015/16.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Chairman of the committee, please proceed. You have 10 minutes.

4.06
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Michael Werikhe): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to present a report of the Committee on Natural Resources on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2015/16. Before I proceed, I beg to lay a copy of the report on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR WERIKHE: I also beg to lay on the Table a copy of the minutes of the meetings that we had.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, the committee considered the ministerial policy statements and examined the budget estimates for the financial year 2015/16 of the following votes:
    a) Vote 017 - Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development;
    b) Vote 123 - Rural Electrification Agency;
    c) Vote 019 - Ministry of Water and Environment;
    d) Vote 150 - National Environment Management Authority; and
    e) Vote 157 - National Forestry Authority.

Mr Speaker, the financial performance of this year is enshrined in the report from paragraph 4.1 on page 3 to paragraph 8.2 on page 28. I request Members to go straight to page 28 under paragraph 9.

OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

1. Nuclear Energy Development 

This falls under the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. The committee observed that the ministry developed the Nuclear Power Roadmap Strategy for the year 2014 to 2016. The existing Energy Policy of 2002 focused on establishing an effective legal and institutional framework to regulate the atomic energy subsector with emphasis on radiation protection. However, the policy did not address critical nuclear power issues such as safety, security, safeguards, nuclear fuel cycle, radioactive waste and spent fuel management, decommissioning of nuclear power plants, compensation for nuclear damage, and research and development.

The committee therefore recommends that Government reviews the Nuclear Energy Policy to ensure that all the existing gaps are closed and nuclear power plants can be developed to provide more power, which is one of the critical engines of development.

2. Review of the Electricity Act 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, some of the provisions of the law have created operational challenges, which have serious implications on the effective performance of the electricity sector. These challenges range from issues pertaining to institutional responsibilities, land matters, enforcement of compliance, offences, penalties and sanctions.

The acquisition of wayleaves has continued to be a big problem for investment in the electricity sector. Government is required to compensate people adequately and promptly before these projects start. This is affecting the efforts of Government to extend electricity to rural areas and to connect other parts of the country to the national grid. Acquisition of wayleaves has increased the costs of generation and transmission projects in Uganda compared to other countries.

The committee therefore recommends that Government urgently reviews and amends the Electricity Act to strengthen the legal framework so that the electricity subsector improves efficiency in the delivery of its services to facilitate the economic and social development of Uganda, and removes the provisions on compensation for power distribution lines.

3. Rural Electrification  

There is currently no law in Uganda that provides for the manner in which rural electrification is undertaken. The rural electrification rate is expected to increase by two per cent to nine per cent by the end of June this year. However, this rate is still low. There is need for increased funding for the Rural Electrification Agency in order to cover the whole country. The Rural Electrification Agency has a funding gap of Shs 218.54 billion to effectively carry out its mandate. 

The committee recommends that- 
(i) 	Government reviews the Electricity Act to provide for the legal framework of the Rural Electrification Agency. 

(ii) 	Government should provide Shs 218.54 billion to enable REA connect more areas to the national grid as more investment is being done in the generation of electricity.

4. The Mining Act and Mining Policy

The Mining Act vests the ownership and control of minerals in the Government. Exploration and exploitation of minerals is through grant of minerals rights by Government to any entity and entry to the sector based on a first come, first served basis. 

The current system of first come, first served encourages speculators especially brown fields, where demonstrated high mineral potential is already established through available geo-data generated. The current Act in its form does not provide for artisans and small scale miners who are increasing in number, as well as decommissioning of sites which are no longer used for mining.

There is no established mechanism to determine how much of the minerals have been extracted and exported. The Government depends on the declarations made by the mining companies. This is causing loss of revenue to the Government of Uganda. 

The committee recommends that- 
(i) 	The principle of first come, first served be modified to create systems of competitive applications for mineral rights in brown fields. In respect of green fields, areas without demonstrated potential or lacking appropriate geo-data, investors in the mining sector shall be encouraged and the system of incentives should be considered to encourage them to report and submit to DGSM findings of mineral occurrences.

(ii) 	The legal authority for both grant and regulation of mineral rights currently lies with the commissioner. There is need to separate powers of grant from that of the regulator to ensure efficiency.

(iii) 	Government should develop a system of penalties for non-compliance to support and make effective the wider powers and discretion granted to the commissioner under the Act.

(iv) 	Government should ensure monitoring of mines to determine the quantities mined and ensure compliance of laws on mining and environmental protection.

5. VAT on Transmission Projects

The committee recommends that Government removes VAT on electricity transmission projects as this increases the cost of energy infrastructure. This eventually transforms into high tariffs, which increase the cost of production in Uganda. 

6. Regulatory Framework for Oil and Gas Sector 

The committee observed that Parliament considered and passed the Petroleum (Exploration, Production and Development) Act, 2013 and the Petroleum (Refining, Conversion, Transmission and Midstream Storage) Act, 2013. These were enacted in June 2013. However, the necessary regulations required to operationalise the Acts have not yet been made. 

The committee recommends that Government fast tracks the implementation of the upstream and midstream regulations in order to streamline the operations of the oil industry and operationalise the petroleum laws. Drafting of the regulations on local content should also be fast-tracked to enable participation of local investors in the oil sector.

7. Institutional Framework

The committee equally observed that since the passing of the two petroleum Acts, the operationalisation of some of the proposals made, especially establishing the Petroleum Authority and the National Oil Company, has not been done up to date.

The committee recommends that Government operationalises the Petroleum Authority and the National Oil Company so that they can carry out their mandate as provided for in the Petroleum (Exploration, Production and Development) Act, 2013.

8. Compensation for the Construction of the Refinery

This issue has been on the Floor several times. Government is acquiring 29 square kilometres of land in Kabaale Parish, Buseruka Sub County, Hoima District for the purpose of constructing the refinery.

The committee therefore recommends that Government fast-tracks the compensation and resettlement of the project affected persons so that the construction of the refinery can commence according to schedule.

9. Geothermal Policy 

The committee observed that there is no geothermal policy in Uganda. If this is implemented, geothermal energy would be one of the major sources of energy. 

Therefore, the committee recommends that Government develops a geothermal policy to enable the development of sites where geothermal power can be generated and improve on the energy needs. This will reduce the current dependence on hydro power. 

10. Traceability of Uganda’s Minerals 

It was observed that there is lack of traceability of Uganda’s minerals on the international market, which is undermining the export potential of minerals.

The committee recommends that Government fast tracks the process of mineral certification. In fact, the absence of mineral certification is the cause of the lack of traceability of Uganda’s minerals on the international market. Therefore, the process of mineral certification should be put in place in order to sell Uganda’s minerals on the world market.

11. Ban on Export of Minerals

In a bid to promote value addition in the minerals sector, His Excellency the President of Uganda directed that exportation of unprocessed minerals from the country be stopped. The ban is likely to adversely impact on foreign direct investments in mining over the long term, considering several disincentives. 

Therefore, the committee recommends that Government reconsiders the ban by providing incentives for value addition on minerals in order to avoid the long term effects of the ban. This will increase foreign direct investment and provide the much needed foreign exchange to provide for the balance of trade.

12. The Energy Fund 

The Energy Fund was established to enable the mobilisation of financial resources for planning and development of power projects related to electricity generation and transmission. The fund is operated under Statutory Instrument No. 16 of 2009. The proceeds from the fund have been used for the construction of Karuma and Isimba hydropower projects.  Other projects that are being packaged to benefit from the fund are Ayago, Oringa, Kiiba and Uhuru. 

For the past two consecutive financial years, no money has been deposited in the Energy Fund. This is affecting the above planned energy projects as Government has to contribute to the development of the projects. The deposit of funds into the Energy Fund was a one-off injection. Since then, there has been no replenishment. 

The committee recommends that Government provides, in every financial year, funds to replenish the Energy Fund to fund energy infrastructure projects.

13. Escrow Account 

The escrow account was established under the lease and assignment agreement to compensate Umeme in the event of contingencies including Government non-payment of electricity bills and the Electricity Regulatory Authority’s non-compliance with the terms of Umeme’s electricity licence in establishing the retail tariff. It also serves as security for Government’s obligation under the support agreement. 

The committee observed that there are a number of MDAs that do not pay for utility services that are rendered to them - we have named a few of these – and when they fail to pay for these utilities, the last resort is the escrow account. As a result, this has depleted the account. As we consider this report, there is zero on the escrow account yet under the agreement there is supposed to be a minimum of US$ 20 million on the account. That means there is actually a violation of this agreement on our part.

Members can see the defaulters there, who include: Ministry of Defence, the Uganda Police Force, the Uganda Prisons Services, Ministry of Health, Uganda Broadcasting Corporation, Mulago Hospital and so on. Those are some of the observations we made. 

The committee recommends that- 
(i) 	Funds be relocated from the budgets of Ministry of Defence, the Uganda Police Force, Ministry of Health, Uganda Broadcasting Corporation, Mulago Hospital and the Uganda Prisons Service to replenish the escrow account since these departments of government received money for utilities but never paid.

(ii) 	The committee also recommends that the Auditor-General should conduct an audit into the activities of the above said institutions to establish why they never paid their utility bills when funds were appropriated by Parliament for that purpose.

(iii) 	The committee recommends that Uganda Electricity Distribution Company should install prepaid meters at all government departments within three months to stop the misuse of funds in the escrow account. It is unfortunate that Ugandans pay taxes and are still made to pay for electricity bills of government departments when funds for such purposes are appropriated by Parliament every financial year.

(iv) 	The Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited should work hand in hand with Umeme to publish, name and shame MDAs which do not pay their electricity bills. 

(v) 	Government should install solar power at government departments to reduce the cost of electricity. This should start with the MDAs that have very high level electricity bills.

MINISTRY OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT

1. The National Meteorological Authority Staffing Levels 

Parliament considered and passed the Uganda National Meteorological Authority Act in 2011. However, up to now, the staffing levels are very low, which is actually affecting the performance of Uganda Meteorological Authority.

The committee recommends that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development grants the authority a vote status to enable it accomplish its mandate.

2. Weather Forecasts

Whereas a lot of advancement has been achieved in the field of seasonal forecast (registering 70 to 80 per cent in the March to May rainfall season and up to 90 per cent for the September to December rains), daily weather predictions still require a lot more. Procurement of the required equipment is on-going and some have already been handed over by UNDP under the Strengthening Climate Information and Early Warning Systems project. 

The committee recommends that the ministry fast-tracks the procurement of the remaining equipment in order to improve the database and improve on accuracy and reliability of information. This will improve productivity of sectors like agriculture, which rely heavily on weather forecasts.

3. The Environmental Levy

Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is something we have actually discussed here in the House. The committee recommends that Government releases these funds to NEMA to enable it fund its programmes aimed at protecting the environment. No funds are being released to NEMA much as the law directs that funds from the environmental levy should go there. 

4. Understaffing at the Ministry of Water and Environment

The committee observed that Government put a ban on the new recruitment in all government ministries, departments, agencies and local governments except on replacement basis. The Ministry of Water and Environment has only 203 positions filled, leaving 215 vacancies available. It is not possible for a ministry to fully fulfil its mandate when it has less than half of the required staff to fully operate.

The committee recommends that Government considers lifting the ban for the water sector because it is very critical to the development of the country. The ministry will not be able to improve the current water coverage with a country’s population growing at a rate of 3.2 per cent without the necessary personnel. Filling of these vacant positions will help reduce on the unemployment in the country as well.

5. Staffing levels at Nyabyeya Forestry College

Along the same lines, the committee recommends that Government recruits staff for the college to train forest artisans to provide the much needed technical expertise to forestry, which is one of the fastest growing sectors in Uganda.

6. Critical Funding Areas

The committee recommends that Government increases the budget ceiling of Ministry of Water and Environment by Shs 108.9 billion to enable it undertake the above mentioned activities.

NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY

1. Cancellation of Titles in Wetlands

This is what Parliament has actually asked the Executive to do many times but it keeps coming back. The committee recommends that Government cancels the titles in wetlands that were issued after 1995 as enshrined in the Constitution and regulates all activities in wetlands to ensure sustainable development in the country. 

Also, the Government should prosecute the encroachers on wetlands and Ministry of Water and Environment make a progress report on the cancellation after every three months to the House.

2. Understaffing at NEMA 

This is also a problem actually, which is affecting the performance of National Environment Management Authority. 

The committee recommends that considering the mandate of National Environment Management Authority to enforce environmental protection and conservation across the country, funds to the tune of Shs 3.1 billion should be provided to NEMA to recruit staff on a yearly basis to enable it fulfil its mandate.

3. Financial Constraints

In order to deal with the current environmental challenges in Uganda, NEMA’s annual projected activities for environmental management in Uganda as a whole totals to Shs 22 billion. The key critical areas in environmental management for which NEMA is required to make timely interventions include mitigating against climate change induced disasters; sound chemical management; environmental monitoring of oil and gas sector; electronic and other hazardous waste management; enforcement of compliance with environmental laws, regulations and standards; implementation of the law on polythene bags; protection and restoration of the integrity and functionality of degraded fragile ecosystems.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government increases the MTEF ceiling for NEMA to Shs 22 billion to enable the authority carry out its mandate. Caution should be taken as no price value can be put on the cost of environmental degradation. The consequences are more expensive to deal with than protection of the environment.

4. Environment Protection Police 

This has also come on the Floor several times. We have always said that there is need to increase these. As we talk, I think we have only 100 or 300 environment protection police officers to handle both National Environment Management Authority and National Forestry Authority. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government provides funds to train 600 personnel in environmental matters to enforce compliance in environmental laws and protect the central forest reserves under National Forestry Authority.

5. Creation of Regional Offices 

We recommend that the Government provides Shs 2 billion to enable National Environment Management Authority open four regional offices to effectively monitor the environment across the country.

6. Ban on Polythene Bags

This issue has been going on. I think we applaud National Environment Management Authority because they have embarked on this process but of course they need a lot of support to cover the entire country. There is also that issue of smuggling polythene bags. Actually, our neighbours have targeted Uganda to smuggle in polythene bags that are of 30 microns and below yet these are very dangerous to our environment. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry for East African Affairs takes up this matter and handles it at the regional level. The East African Community member states should implement the East African Community Polythene Materials Control Act in order to protect the environment for the current and future generations.

The committee further recommends that the banned polythene bags should be added onto the list of anti-smuggled goods immediately, in order to effectively stop their being smuggled into Uganda. The committee further recommends that the ban be increased to cover all polythene bags under 100 microns. 

7. Importation of Used Vehicles 

This is also something we have been talking about. We even had a debate on this recently. The committee recommends that Government stops the importation of vehicles, which have been used for more than 10 years, and Uganda Revenue Authority stops clearing these vehicles to enter the country.

8. Compliance with NEMA Certificates

The committee recommends that NEMA should enforce compliance with the environmental impact assessments, and name and shame companies which have not complied with the conditions stated in the environmental impact certificate. 

NATIONAL FORESTRY AUTHORITY 

1. Local Forest Reserves 

The committee observed that 70 per cent of the forests in Uganda are under local forest reserves and private forests. There is rapid forest depletion and degradation under the local forest reserves in pursuit of revenue to finance local government services, which has translated to harvesting forests with little or no consideration for planned forest management. 

The committee recommends that districts develop environment and production ordinances that provide for conservation of forests and mandatory tree planting and also invest in forest restoration and development of commercial plantations in local forest reserves. 

2. Re-surveying and Demarcation of Central Forest Reserve Boundaries 

The committee recommends that Government provides Shs 2 billion in the financial year 2015/16 to enable NFA re-survey and mark the boundaries with concrete pillars. This will help in identifying and protecting the central forest reserves from encroachers. 

3. Degradation of Central Forest Reserves 

Encroachment of central forest reserves has led to their degradation leaving most of them with no trees and destruction of the ecosystems and biodiversity. Much of the degradation is due to the high demand for wood, especially for charcoal which is used in many urban areas. There is need to restore the degraded forests, which have been encroached on, including river banks. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government provides Shs 351,148,000 to restore 349 hectares of degraded natural forests and preserves the biodiversity and water catchment areas. 

4. Forestry Regulations 

The committee recommends that Government gazettes the regulations to make them enforceable and to guide the sector in its operations.  

Before I conclude, I would like to draw your attention to Appendix A, which summarizes the unfunded priorities for the financial year 2015/16. 

Conclusion

Mr Speaker and honourable members, subject to the above observations and recommendations, the committee recommends that Parliament approves the budget estimates for votes 017, 123, 019, 150 and 157 as follows:

Vote 017, Ministry Of Energy and Mineral Development
    a) Recurrent - Shs 8,744,867,000
    b) Development - Shs 2,715,103,441,000
	Total 	Shs 2,723,848,308,000	

Vote 123, Rural Electrification Agency
    a) Recurrent – Shs 18,517,908,000
    b) Development – Shs 73,017,700,000
	Total   Shs 91,535,608,000

Vote 019, Ministry of Water and Environment
    a) Recurrent -	Shs 13,487,204,000
    b) Development – Shs 432,847,397,000
	Total 	Shs 446,334,601,000

Vote 150, National Environment Management Authority
    a) Recurrent – Shs 7,996,419,000
    b) Development – Shs 1,251,770,000
	Total	Shs 9,248,189,000

Vote 157, National Forestry Authority
    a) Recurrent – Shs 19,234,676,000
    b) Development – Shs 4,029,618,000
	Total  	Shs 23,264,294,000

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to report. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairman and all the committee members for this comprehensive report on this sector and the recommendations you have made. This guides the House on what we must do to achieve what you have recommended.

Honourable members, the matter before us is to adopt the report of the Committee on Natural Resources on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2015/16. That is the motion for your debate and the debate opens now. I will begin with the Shadow Minister for Environment. Honourable member, do you have a procedural point?

THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, we had adopted without our rules, though generally accepted, that when the main report of the committee has been presented, the shadow minister is allowed to give a summary of the alternative input to the committee. 
It is generally accepted that that report contains the input of the committee but we are given a few minutes to highlight. So, I was raising it as a matter of procedural but apparently, you already had it at the back of your mind. So, I would like to appreciate that and thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKLER: Honourable members, the time that procedure was adopted was when the alternative policies were not submitted to the committee. That procedure does not apply anymore when the alternative policies have been submitted to the committee. This is because we do not ask the minister to respond to the report of the committee now, just like we cannot ask the shadow minister to respond to the report of the committee. That matter has been overtaken by superior procedures which we adopted which settled that matter. 

The issue now is to debate the report of the committee. I have asked the shadow minister to speak to the debate and the debate is limited to three minutes for each member. Is she a member of the committee? Well, let her make some comments.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker and honourable members, our colleagues from the other side fully presented their alternative policy statement to this committee. We actually incorporated all the issues they raised. If there is anything that was missed, I think the Shadow Minister of Environment will highlight only those that might have been left out.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, this is now debate on the report. Please, let us not go back to the policy statement; let us speak to what has come to the Floor. If there are issues to be plugged in, recommendations can be made now. So let us proceed, but only three minutes.

4.44
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. As the government in waiting, we have looked at the policy statement and highlighted the gaps. I appreciate the fact that we were able to have some of the items really taken on by the committee. However, we need to emphasise some of these for the smooth running of this ministry.

I will start with the issue of the ban on polythene bags. As much as the committee adopted the idea of taking the minimum microns as was reported, which I am happy we adopted, what is going on is that the manufacturers are running advertisements on radio telling people that what has actually been banned is those below 30 microns. They say whoever confiscates any polythene bags above 30 microns should be reported to the authorities. This is a contradiction, which I would want the authorities to take up.  I am happy the minister is passionate about this issue. Let it go out there so that whoever is confusing the public, especially the manufacturers, should really be put to order. 

The Government should even encourage the manufacturers of polythene bags to take on alternative carrier bags that are degradable. In any company that produces plastics, the production of polythene bags is just a small line of production, employing less than five people. So, these manufacturers can be encouraged to produce alternative carrier bags.

We are asking the Government to quickly fund the National Meteorological Authority in order for it to operate. Because of climate change effects, we have challenges, so we need to see this sector of Government become operational.  They need to be given the funds.

We also ask that Government gazettes the forestry regulations as fast as possible. As we speak, we are operating almost in vacuum. We would want them to come out as quickly as possible, to give guidance on how we can really manage this sector.

We are also proposing, as the Opposition, that Government keeps this House abreast of the benefits accruing from the River Nile waters vis-à-vis other beneficiaries. We know that there is a silent war over the Nile waters; we would want this Parliament to be briefed by Government on how the waters are being managed. We would like to know the benefits accruing from River Nile for us vis-à-vis other people.

The issue of climate change has remained in the ambit of a parliamentary association. We would want Government, and particularly the minister, to come to this Parliament and update the country on how far the undertaking on climate change has gone. We had proposed that climate change be given its own mandate –(Member timed out). 

4.48
MR ISIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I commend the chairperson for the good report. 

I commend the committee for the recommendation on lifting the ceiling and providing more resources for further recruitment in the water sector. Sometime back, we got national water services in Budadiri and Sironko town councils. However, much as they are trying to do a good job, the hiccup is that they do not have enough staff. Most of the staff employed by National Water and Sewerage Corporation are on very short contracts of three to six months, which may not be good for the sector. So, if resources could allow, I am in total agreement with that recommendation. 

Maybe what is not so fair is the cancellation of the land titles from 1995, as the chairman said in the report. Mr Speaker, cancellation of land titles from 1995 up to now might even cause civil strife. There are many questions pertaining to that; for example, who issued those titles? They were issued by a government department. Government itself issued the titles. Who is going to compensate these Ugandans who have constructed in those areas or who own land and were genuinely given titles by the Government of Uganda? I think that is an issue we need to go slow on as we address the challenges. 

If we are cancelling the titles, adequate compensation must be given to those people because it was not their fault that they acquired those titles. They identified land, went to the authorities and the authorities okayed the land and they were given titles. 

Also, if they constructed in those wetlands, who authorised the building plans? Definitely, it is the same Government. I think this is an area for which I would urge Parliament to go slow, especially in passing the resolution that Government cancels the land titles from 1995 and above.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, let me say something about the environment levy. I think it is high time we took a very strong stand on this. This is because time and again, year in, year out, Government is hiding behind this environmental levy. We impose taxes after agreeing here but after the money is collected, Government does not remit it. Why should we continue imposing the environmental levy yet the money collected does not go to the line sector? I think this is very good; I agree with the committee’s recommendation that this money be remitted to NEMA so that it can execute its mandate of ensuring the environment is well kept and looked after. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.51
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is critical to our lives as a country. Considering the fact that Uganda’s population is increasing rapidly and is currently at 35.4 million, we need to be aware that we are going to experience resource scarcity in the shortest time. This is because of the massive competition that this grappling population will face in the future.

Those circumstances would therefore call for relocation of people and making sure that the biodiversity is actually catered for critically, if we must survive today and the generation to come tomorrow. As we start production, you realise there is likely to be massive pollution of the air. Therefore, how best we protect the current population and the population of tomorrow by making sure our air is clean?  This matters a lot. We must also focus on how to regenerate most of the biodiversity that actually is within our boundaries.

Mr Speaker, the other aspect is to do with allowing the electricity sector to be fragmented and to fall into international hands. I feel that Ugandans do not have the feel that actually the programme and projects are theirs. So, how do we ensure that Ugandans generate that feeling that the project is theirs and that the power projects that we have here are not entirely owned by the foreigners especially in the area of contracts? 

Contracting is very key because that is what generates money for contractors. Therefore, if Ugandans are not directly involved in contracting these projects, it will mean that they are denied income. This money will go to the foreigners who will precipitate capital outflow. Once there is capital outflow and yet most of the money that we are using in these projects is from loans, it means that the burden is doubled because Ugandans will pay back the loan but also they will lose profits since they will have not been involved in contractual work at the various levels and where possible –(Member timed out).

4.55
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join the rest of my colleagues who have spoken to commend the committee for the job well done. However, I have some observations to make.

My first observation is in respect to Rural Electrification Agency (REA). I would like to draw the attention of the chairperson to the appendix on unfunded priorities. Whereas in the main report you do observe that one of the areas that requires upping in financing is REA, in the annexure you did not indicate REA as one of the unfunded gaps. I would like to beg that you include Rural Electrification Agency as one of the agencies which must be funded. 

With this economy, Mr Speaker, we are not going to talk about agriculture per se without value addition. We cannot talk about value addition without provision for construction and distribution of power so that we can provide for cottage industries wherever and whenever possible. I see a very big gap of Shs 127 billion, which is required for this sector. I think that even some of the monies you are proposing to put under NEMA, NFA and many of these bodies, which are not doing their work diligently, should be transferred to REA because it is a very serious priority.

The other issue is about the ban on exportation of minerals. I want to get clarification on whether this was not a ban on the exportation of unprocessed minerals other than a ban on minerals. If I got it right, I think the committee must have missed the point; it is a ban on unprocessed minerals.

The other observation is on preparation for provision of geothermal energy. My understanding of geothermal energy is that it is about the earth warming or something of that kind. However, I think we should expand the latitude to include solar energy. Other countries have gone solar and have succeeded. Every time I look at the internet, there are very many investors out there who are seeking for provision of solar power. They only require sufficient preparation and provision of PSAs by the ministry.

Another issue I would like to talk about is accounting officers of MDAs that have not paid for utilities. I see the proposal is to name and shame. In accounting and responsibility allocation, I think we should not be talking about naming and shaming only; we should be talking about holding people responsible and accountable if indeed they got this money. 

The other time I was reading a story from the internet that somebody had been executed for dozing while the head of state was addressing the nation. What about those who get monies from Government and they simply misappropriate it; why should we be talking about naming and shaming? I think that this is a very serious matter. The committee - (Member timed out)

4.58
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to add my voice in thanking the committee for the elaborate report presented.

Mr Speaker, since 2010 the country, after exploring and finding minerals specifically oil and petroleum, has been waiting to hear the programme from the Government regarding the expected commencement of the refining of these minerals. The dates have been changing day and night and yet the people out there want to know. Can we get informed on when you expect to start refining these minerals? It will help us to plan accordingly.

Mr Speaker, the last time this Parliament passed laws relating to oil and petroleum, we were assured that the regulations regarding waste management and local content would be brought to this House so that we get to know how we are going to move on. I would like to thank the committee chairperson and the committee members because they have made good recommendations in this regard. However, we would like to know from the minister – From when you started exploring, I know we still have some waste which is lying somewhere. We would like to be informed about the mechanisms you come up with to manage this waste.

Thirdly, the people of Bunyoro to date are seeing foreign companies supplying services and we are not informed about how we can benefit. We are waiting for the regulation on local content which is not forthcoming. Can we be informed on how we shall benefit as people from that region?

Mr Speaker, today many people and factories have encroached on wetlands. I appreciate the committee’s recommendation but even when you inform the relevant authorities, there is nothing that takes place. What we are saying is that the ministry should take charge. I really do not know whether we are serious, especially in protecting our environment. If you go through the Gulu highway, you will see that there are very many factories encroaching on the wetlands. It is as if the authorities who are responsible do not go through that route. 

It is very bad to see our wetlands being actually encroached upon and there is nowhere for the water to be drained. The papyrus, which would have protected the environment, is actually being wiped out and we wonder where we are moving. We really need assurance, especially now that people are contracting many diseases like cancer. These wetlands would help protect our environment. 

This leads me to NFA. Mr Speaker, in the chairperson’s report it is stated that NFA –(Member timed out).

5.02
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Female Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Allow me to thank the committee for this very elaborate report and the very concerted effort they always have as a committee on issues of energy and the environment. 

I would also like to commend the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development for the aggressiveness and competitiveness that they have brought into this sector, especially the energy sector and rural electrification. I think they are doing a good job. In my view, if we were doing this for the last 20 years, we would have moved to the middle income economy that we so much desire as a country. 

However, issues of environmental management and climate change are still lacking largely. I want to add to what hon. Beatrice Anywar ended with in regard to climate change. I want to agree with what the committee is saying at page 41. If you want to talk about sustainable development, the amount of planning and investment that you put in should also be put in managing the after effects of the development projects. So, I think the sector needs to really up their energies and programmes in whatever they are planning in the area of environmental management and climatic change.

If you went to the village where I come from in Kumi, you will barely find any trees standing. During the dry season when the winds are at the maximum, one cannot even sit outside and the roofs keep falling off from people’s houses. The ministry knows all this. However, the energy that the ministry is investing in that part of the sector is not commensurate with what is happening. I wonder whether they are not seeing this or they are just interested only in constructing bridges and generating energy. What about the people? Will they be around to enjoy this? Madam Minister, that area is still lacking. 

Mr Speaker, environmental management is very poor. We have been talking about NEMA. You expect NEMA to oversee Uganda, but you are not willing to invest money into NEMA. How is NEMA supposed to oversee the other happenings including the wetlands? I know that NEMA is supposed reach all the wetlands, even those as far as the villages that that I come from, but without money! I have a friend who works with NEMA and she says they keep complaining all the time about lack of resources and money to invest in their work. I think, as Parliament, we need to –(Member timed out).

5.05
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to associate myself with the report of the committee and to start by generally giving credit where it is due. I want to salute, in particular, the Rural Electrification Agency and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development generally. 

Despite the fact that I represent a rural area called Ajuri County in Alebtong District that falls among areas that have the least coverage of electricity under rural electrification, as a Ugandan who has travelled to the countryside I must salute REA for being almost everywhere. If you move to the north, east, central and west, you will find rural electrification. It gives me hope that one day my county, Ajuri, will be on the national grid of electricity. (Laughter) 

I want to support the entire Alebtong District that comprises of Ajuri and Moroto counties. Normally, I say that if services to the people of Uganda in terms of districts would move according to the roles played by every district, Alebtong would not be complaining. We would be seated and observing other districts complain. Why? It is because of the role this district has played in the political history of Uganda. In 1962, the current Alebtong District with Otuke elected a gentleman who spearheaded the process of the independence of Uganda. We are celebrating 54 years. It is Alebtong and Otuke that elected that gentleman. (Laughter)

In 1964, Alebtong produced the only field marshal in the history of Uganda and that is none other than Field Marshal John Okello. For those who have read the history of Zanzibar, he came from Alebtong District. (Laughter) 

Not only that, Mr Speaker, in 1972, for those who are keen in the sports of Uganda, Alebtong District dedicated one of their sons, regarded as the first Olympic gold medallist, in the name of John Akii-Bua. What are we talking about? (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, as if that is not enough, in 1978 when Uganda last participated in the African Cup of Nations, one of our sons, in the name of Denis Obua Senior, regarded as the best footballer in the history of Uganda, is a son of Alebtong. I do not think we would be complaining. The list is endless.

However, what I am raising is the fundamental point that rural electrification - (Member timed out). 

5.08
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also join my colleagues in thanking the committee for its elaborate report. 

Mr Speaker, as we struggle to develop the mining sector, a lot needs to be done in this sector. This sector is not remunerated. We have been talking about the use of artisans and small scale miners who are being exploited by the well-to-do businessmen in this sector.  We would like to see something seriously provided for in this financial year to cater for the future of these women who are participating in mining mostly in Karamoja. I would also want to see the complete surveying of minerals in the whole country so that we are able to establish the potential of Uganda in as far as minerals are concerned. 

Mr Speaker, when we passed the petroleum law, we indicated that two institutions would be put in place, the Petroleum Authority and the National Oil Company. Up to now, these institutions have not seen the light of day. The second round of bidding for the oil wells is going on and the licensing is supposed to be done by the authority. In the absence of this authority, who is going to expedite the exploitation of these resources? I would like to see these institutions put in place to address the issues of oil. 

Mr Speaker, we also agreed that when it comes to making regulations, they should be brought to Parliament. Our interest is to ensure that the issue of local content is seriously taken care of. My colleagues have alluded to it and I think it is very important as they prepare the regulations to manage this aspect. They should be tabled before Parliament so that at the end of the day Ugandans can benefit from this sector.

I would like to comment on the issue of geothermal energy. We are trying to add more power to the grid. As much as we are we are still looking at hydropower, this potential is enough in Uganda though it lacks funding. We would like to see funding go towards the exploitation of geothermal energy. If you go to Kenya, geothermal energy is actually contributing a lot to the grid. However, in Uganda where we have a lot of potential, nothing is being done. It has actually taken a lot of time for this potential to be exploited. (Member timed out)

5.12
MS HELLEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the detailed report presented. 

I want to talk about the compensation of the people of Kabaale in Buseruka Sub-county, Hoima District, for the proposed construction of the refinery. It is now more than two years and over 250 families have not been compensated and yet they are not allowed to cultivate land so that they can have food to eat. They are always promised next month, in three months and they run to borrow money from the lenders thinking any time their money comes in they will pay debts, but they have always been disappointed. 

Mr Speaker, the school-going children in those areas are not even accessing schools. The health services are very poor. The value of land, because of the excitement of the oil, has gone up. So, I really do not know whether the minister or the Government will still compensate these people at the same value of two years ago or they will revise the value of money to compensate these people.

I also want to thank the committee for bringing up the issue of taxes regarding vehicles of 10 years and above because they are very dangerous to the environment. However, I want to remind the committee that they should have also included factories and industries especially those that are constructed within settlements or homesteads. Recently, you saw what happened in Ntinda when one of them caught fire; the whole of Ntinda was full of fumes. These fumes are very carcinogenic. They are very dangerous to the lives of human beings. Above all, these industries and factories release their effluence or liquid waste directly into the environment. This is very harmful and yet they are just left to continue operating.  

On NFA, in their attempt to restore the degraded natural forests it is my humble prayer that they also consider the natural species or the traditional species that were initially found in these degraded forest reserves. In most cases as I try to move around so many forest reserves, I find that NFA is concentrating on pines and –(Member timed out).

5.15
MS CHRISTINE ACAYO (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to commend the committee for the comprehensive report. 

I would like to commend Government for the policy of gravity flow schemes in areas that are water stressed. When boreholes are drilled in areas that are water stressed, their functionality is questionable and it does not give value to Government. I therefore recommend that Government continues with implementing or operationalising gravity flow schemes in water stressed areas. 

The chairperson of the committee called upon this House to pass a development budget of Shs 432 billion for the Ministry of Water and Environment. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I stand to oppose this budget. If this budget has to be passed, the amendment I am bringing is that this budget has to be passed with funding to the Alwi Dry Corridor Water Project in Nebbi. 

Mr Speaker, in budget of the Ministry of Water and Environment this year, they are deducting Shs 8.75 billion from the Alwi Dry Corridor Project. It is being implemented in my district. The President directed that this project be implemented and according to what we know as the people of Nebbi, this project is supposed to be handed over to us next year. However, they have decided to deduct Shs 8.75 billion and the justification they are giving is that they are finalising on this project.

As a representative of the people of Nebbi, I can confirm that we have not seen any water flowing in Alwi; we have not seen any water flowing in Nyaravur. This project is for 11 sub-counties and yet we have seen water in only two sub-counties. If money from the Alwi Dry Corridor Project has to be deducted, it must be after the Ministry of Water and Environment has handed over the project to the district and the people have seen the water. Honourable colleagues, I ask you to support me on this. I am from the ground and we have not seen the water in the other sub-counties. Why is the Ministry of Water and Environment removing this from the development budget? 

As a representative of the people, I have monitored and I know that they have not completed this project. It will be good for them to deduct from the financial year of 2016/2017 when they have already handed over the project. As of now, I see that it is not fair. 

Secondly, I welcome the committee’s proposal that enforcement officers be put in place. We have seen wetlands disappear in Kampala. Sometimes we even see how murram is being dumped in wetlands at night –(Member timed out).

5.18
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to join the rest of the Members in commending the chair and his committee for the good report. 

One of the issues that I picked interest in is rural electrification. When you move across this country and observe the extension of electricity in rural areas, there are places where you drive for a number of kilometres without finding any sign of utilisation of that electricity where we have invested heavily. I keep wondering whether we distribute this electricity using a scientific method or we just want to create an impression that there is electricity in the country when the investment is just being wasted. 

Except for some cases, which I am sure the chairman of the committee and the minister know about, where people have innovative ways of how to utilise the electricity, in most cases these are white elephants; they are investments that are not being tapped. Can we, therefore, know whether the ministry is coming up with more rational approaches of ensuring they allocate electricity where it can be utilised or where it can provoke and ignite development? 

The other issue is on the proposal by the committee to ban importation of vehicles older than 10 years. Just the other day when we were debating the Finance Bill, some of us raised that issue and it was not popular among most of us here. However, now that this has come, how do we relate this recommendation to the Bill that has already been passed? 

The concern here is that in the Bill they provided for the categorisation of 10 years and above. My position at that point was that, “do we think that a vehicle of 10 to 20 years old can be treated in the same way as one of above 20 years?” In Uganda, people import vehicles of 1980s. So, when you charge 50 per cent for the environmental levy –(Member timed out).

5.21
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also commend the chairperson and the entire committee for the beautiful piece. 

My first comment is on rural electrification. I thank the ministry and the agency for the work well done. What is surprising, however, as already mentioned, is that we are selling power to a tune of about 542 GWhs to Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and DRC. We only have 14 per cent, according to the report, accessibility of power in Uganda of which only seven per cent goes to rural areas. However, when you are allocating funds, you have only allocated Shs 91.5 billion to REA. 

If we are generating a lot of power to the extent that we can sell it to outside countries, I wonder why we do not allocate enough money so that we can use it or step down whatever we produce to our people. If we are selling 542 GWhs, may we also know how much we are getting out of the power we are selling?  Where does that money go? We are saying that we do not have enough money for the Energy Fund and we do not have enough money to run the stepping down of power and yet we are selling power. I think the ministry or the minister should look into this. Let us look at what we sell out, look at the proceeds and get enough money for the Energy Fund or for REA so that the people of Uganda can benefit.

Secondly, I will comment on the escrow account. There are some MDAs that are mentioned here that are defaulting. Our committee went to the Bugisu sub-region where the minister comes from and we found a lot of power theft. There are very many huts with illegal connections. I remember we invited the ministry together with Umeme to look into this loss of power. We lose a lot of money from power theft, especially, I am sorry to say this, in the Bugisu sub-region. So, why don’t we look into power theft and unfortunately - (Member timed out). 

5.25
MS JOVIA KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to commend the committee for the report. 

On the issue of staffing, Government should be serious. You cannot expect work to be done when there are no people do it. So, the ban on recruitment should be lifted. Alternatively, we could revise the terms and conditions of service - the contracts - of the existing staff, give them more duties and pay them better so that they can do the work. However, I think the ideal is to fill the structure; provide the money and fill the structure. I do not know why Government would be dilly-dallying on this.

Secondly, the committee recommends that all government departments should be installed with pre-paid meters. I hope hospitals and sensitive government installations remain an exception to the rule. We all know what would happen if we had a power cut when a patient was on the operating table. So, I hope that exception is there.

I also would like to support the recommendation on the cancellation of all titles in the wetlands. It is painful that we turn a blind eye, let people put up permanent structures and then the following day we demolish them. I do not know why Government cannot take a serious stand and implement the policy. I think we need to grow integrity in implementing policy. 

On polythene bags, I support hon. Anywar. I actually propose that we have a complete ban for now and then in future, we can begin to get those that can be trusted to have those recommended polythene bags. This is because for now, everyone is hiding under the fact that there are polythene bags that are allowed. I think we should not allow further degradation of our environment in this matter.

On minerals, as one of the colleagues said, I think the committee got it wrong. Actually, this arose from a presidential directive concerning unprocessed minerals; it was not all minerals. 

On the compensation for the Buseruka people, I hope Government will once again take a firm stand and compensate –(Member timed out). 

5.28
MR JOHN AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join the rest to thank the committee for the detailed and good report. I have some few comments to make.

First of all, they have indicated on page 33 under the institutional framework that even though Parliament passed the Petroleum (Exploration, Production and Development) Act of 2013, the board of the Petroleum Authority has not yet been fully formed. Five slots have been filled but two are still vacant. 

If you recall, during the debate on this Bill which was later enacted there was a serious and contentious issue regarding the huge powers that had been given to the minister. Members of Parliament thought that if the Petroleum Authority is put in place, the work of the minister would be easy. Two years down the road, nothing has been put in place. The committee’s recommendation should be taken seriously and implemented very fast so that this board is formed.

Secondly, REA should be thanked for the work they are doing, much as they do not have a law in place to guide them. However, it is important that we put this law in place. Otuke neighbours Agago District and we accessed a document which stipulates that electricity should be extended from Otuke to Odokomit in Agago District. However, when they reached Otuke, they stopped there; they did not cross to Agago. If the law was in place, we could have known that a particular clause has been violated because in a way, money has been provided for power to be extended to that area. 

We have to put this law in place and stand firm. These laws should be there to guide and the responsibilities and functions of these institutions should be clear. This will help in monitoring what is being done on the ground, especially by service providers like Pacnet and Yaka, among others, who normally come to collect the tariffs. Things are not uniform. Take time to find out the money spent on power here in Kampala, for example, and compare it with rural areas, you will see disparities and yet the units consumed are sometimes the same. So if the law is in place, we shall be able to monitor this body.

Mr Speaker, the committee has recommended that money should be relocated from bodies like Mulago Hospital and the Police. However, I do not agree that- (Member timed out).

5.32
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have just got a magazine from out here entitled, “Oil in Uganda.” I think it is from the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. On page 3 of the magazine, there is a picture of a Russian-made jet belonging to UPDF Air Force and the heading says that this contract of the refinery was awarded to Russia. I would like to understand whether they gave us the jet in exchange for oil or oil for the jet? It is very well written and published by the ministry. I would like to understand that. That is query number one.

Two, we had a report about Umeme that recommended very many things and even the issue of the escrow account came up. I recall Government committed themselves to come back and report. Ever since then, I have not seen a progressive report on the implementation of the report on Umeme - the Oboth report. Nothing has been done and yet that report recommended that some people should answer.

Thirdly, on the escrow account, what happened to the initial money? Where is the accountability for this account? We cannot talk about replenishing that account when there has not been any accountability for the initial money. However, as far as I know, all government departments now use pay-as-you-go or advance payment. So, who ate the money?

Fourthly, Mr Speaker, I do not understand this issue about wetlands. Nobody can get a land title without passing through the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. How do you give somebody a land title and cancel it after someone has already put up their developments and you say you are not going to compensate them. The first culprits that should be dealt with are those in the Ministry of Lands before going for the landowners.

The issue of the 1995 Constitution does not apply. I will give an example. Those who go to Ntinda must know this. When you leave Nakawa, there are mango trees and as you go down the valley there is a petrol station around there. That place was well known as a wetland but now there are very many houses that have been built there; NEMA saw this happening, even some ministers saw this happening but no action was taken. Therefore, those who were involved should first be taken to Luzira before you cancel people’s titles.

Finally, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should do better. People who want to access power say that there is politics involved. I heard about rural electrification - (Member timed out).

5.36
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga):  Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. 

I will start with the issue of compensating communities that are affected by the oil refinery. I should say this process needs to be fast-tracked so that our communities see life after the compensation or after the refinery has been built. I will connect that to the oil pipeline that is supposed to be constructed from Kenya to Uganda. In 2008, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development reached out to communities where surveys showed the pipeline would pass. To date, people have failed to develop their plots and they have failed to work on their land awaiting compensation or negotiations to take place.

Compensation rates were already set. I do not know whether when it comes to paying them, they will use the current market rate of this land or the market rate for 2008. The committee has just mentioned the pipeline but they have not made any recommendations to that effect. What is the fate of these people whose land will be affected by the pipeline? Can we say something about this? 

Recently, you wrote to Members of Parliament asking them to cooperate with the work, but there is no provision that has been made for these people according to the report. What do we tell these people from Busia up to Buloba where you are planning to put the tanks for this particular process?

We need to comment Rural Electrification Agency for its efforts. However, I should say that some of us who represent semi-urban areas have totally failed to benefit. Because of this rural component, those of us who represent semi-urban areas only end up supporting but we do not benefit. Like my brother, hon. Dennis Obua, observed we have been there for this sector and we see it producing results but when they are earmarking resources and projects, our areas are left out. 

This is humble appeal that I should raise on a selfish note, honourable minister and the team from REA that is here; the people of Kigulu South are anxiously waiting to see a “kaveera” or their share being given to show that at least they have benefited from our programs. 

Mr Speaker, I am going to talk about the kaveera now. Having supported the ban on polythene bags, I would like to appeal to our Government; now that we have begun acting this time, let us not backtrack because of politics. (Applause) We should be firm. On so many occasions, we have lost out whenever politics is around the corner. (Member timed out)

5.38
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me commend the committee for this quite informative report. 

I would like to link the committee’s observation relating to rapid forest depletion to the support to community tree planting programme under National Forestry Authority. Accordingly, allow me commend Government and the National Forestry Authority for the tree planting campaign, which has gained momentum, to combat the effects of climatic change.

At the moment, statistics indicate a progressive increase in demand for seedlings for planting. In 2010 and 2011, the demand was 4 million seedlings but in 2013/2014, the demand rose to 31 million seedlings from various clients across the country. However, National Forestry Authority would provide only up to 3 million seedlings per year. In addition, national days have now been designated for tree planting and this has led to higher demand for seedlings. 

My main concern, however, is that with the disbursement of Shs 1 billion per year to National Forestry Authority, it is clear and apparent that the authority cannot meet the increasing demand for community tree planting. In the medium term, I would be glad to know, probably from the chair of the committee, whether there has been a proposal to have additional funding given to National Forestry Authority to support community tree planting. However, in the long term, I would advise and recommend that a comprehensive plan and budget allocation be made to address these limitations as a strategic intervention to promote a green economy, and this would be in the real sense of the word. I beg to submit.

5.41
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to commend the work of the committee but I would like to emphasize especially two areas - the report on mid-stream, refinery development and refinery feeder pipeline development.

Mr Speaker, the report does not say enough and it is not very sincere. I say this because on the ground, most of these companies that have been trying to do some work in exploration have begun demobilising their work because they do not see a realistic programme on the construction of the pipeline to evacuate the oil from wells to the refinery. They do not see a realistic plan on setting up a refinery. Therefore, I would like to see a more realistic programme so that it can build hope in these investors. What is missing in the report is the plan.

Secondly, we have been talking about training Ugandans to get involved in the construction of these pipelines. I am worried that by the time the pipelines start coming, we shall see a multitude of Chinese or Indians doing this job. By now the ministry would be training Ugandans in pipeline construction. These trainings are available in Kenya, India and many other countries. We should start doing this now.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like to address myself to the National Forestry Authority. We are destroying our environment at a terrific speed. When you drive on all these beautiful roads, what you see being sold is only charcoal. At this rate, this country is going to turn into a desert.

The only thing we can do to reverse this situation is to encourage tree planting. Have nursery beds in almost every parish so that when there is a programme for planting trees, a Ugandan should be able to go and pick seedlings and plant. However, I do not see this being provided for in the coming budget. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to see realistic programmes on tree planting and on evacuating people who have invaded wetlands, otherwise Lake Victoria is going to dry and the future generation will be in trouble. If we do not take drastic measures to reverse these areas of environmental degradation and climate change - (Member timed out_)

5.44
MS BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the comprehensive report. 

My first concern is about the pollution of the water we drink. The outbreak of typhoid in Kampala was a great embarrassment to Uganda because people who came to Uganda feared that they would contract the disease. Why did we get typhoid which has affected thousands of people? It is because of our water from Lake Victoria, where we get drinking water. 

We are aware that we are polluting Lake Victoria very badly. All the waste from industries and the sewerage goes to Lake Victoria and yet it is this very water which is processed for drinking. Because it is not properly purified with enough chlorine, this very water goes to our houses and many people drink it directly from the tap thinking that it is clean and we end up contracting typhoid.

Mr Speaker, why doesn’t the National Water and Sewerage Corporation treat the water well? What is the problem? Is it lack of money? How much have you given National Water and Sewerage Corporation to purify our water? In some developed countries, you just get your water directly from the tap and drink without any problem –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable colleague. I would like to inform hon. Baba Diri that the water supply we have in Kampala is not strictly under the supervision of National Water and Sewerage Corporation.  There are some illegal wells in place which some people use and they are not able to supervise them. They have to coordinate with KCCA to do that. Thank you.

MS BABA DIRI: Yes, I am aware of those wells. That is the second source of typhoid. However, for your information, we are advised to boil our drinking water.  If the water is clean, why should we boil it? It means it is contaminated. So, we need our water to be properly treated so that we do not get typhoid. Not everyone can afford mineral water and we are not even sure if it is pure enough for us to consume. 

I would like to thank the Government for extending water to upcountry towns like Koboko. This town has got underground water, which is pumped from far. However, we are not sure of how much is there. During the dry season, the water table goes down and people suffer because of inadequate water supply. It is only during the rainy season that there is plenty of water for - (Member timed out).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have finished this last section. Can we reduce the time to two minutes to accommodate as many Members as possible? You have sat this long so you need to contribute. 

5.48
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this little time. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee members for the good report. 

I thank the committee for pointing out the issue of pre-paid metres. If pre-paid metres are installed, maybe we shall be saved from the trouble of Umeme who bring new bills every time. I do not know what it is happening; it seems their prices are uncontrollable. We will be very happy if we can control our own power consumption.

I also would like to thank the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development for rural electrification. Madam Minister, thank you very much. Power is everywhere, although others are still screaming that there is no power in certain areas. However, honourable minister, there is a problem; as you continue extending power to the countryside, the tariffs also keep going up and this will bring your work to naught. In the rural areas, people will not afford the electricity and they are not happy to keep looking at the power lines passing by and they cannot afford. So, something should be done about the power tariffs. 

I would like to talk about the environment. There is a problem with our rivers. One time I stood here and talked about the extinction of River Nile. While the big shots are encroaching on the wetlands in the city, the small people are encroaching on the river banks. They have cultivated cassava, potatoes and other crops that will cause soil erosion and silt our rivers. (Member timed out_)

5.51
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also wish to thank the committee. I will be very brief. 

One, the rural electrification programme is going on well but I would like to request the committee to take interest in the way it seems to be provided - in an ad hoc manner. Sometimes you find electricity poles being erected when the Member of Parliament is not aware. The Member is just informed that a few individuals applied directly to the agency. This leaves out the ordinary citizens; they are simply skipped because they were not part of the application. This is happening in my district and it is causing restlessness in some areas.

Secondly, some poles are already up but they remain without wires for a long time and people start to feel it is just a campaign strategy. It is because they wait for a long time to see the wires and the operationalisation of the whole programme.

Thirdly, on REA again, we were told that the transformer just serves a one-kilometre radius. Some of these supplies leave out health centres and schools. This turns out to be a bit uncomfortable for us. Households that are not even ready to have these wires extended to their homes simply let them pass and yet if these went to the schools and health centres, it would serve the communities better. 

Members have talked about environmental degradation and tree planting. I would like this committee to get interested in the supply of biogas. (Member timed out)

5.53
MS ALUM SANTA (UPC, Woman Representative Oyam): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to also join my colleagues in thanking the committee for coming out with this report. 

I will begin by saying that the effects of climate change are real and very detrimental to us. So, we need to tackle this with all the aggressiveness it deserves. I propose that we create an independent department to address the issues of climate change if we are to achieve much. If we get independent institutions, it will mean we shall have enough resources and staff to check on the issue of climate change. 

Secondly, I would like to mention something about the issue of local forest reserves versus the central forest reserves. The committee has recommended, in regard to local forest reserves, that the districts have to come up with production and environmental ordinances. I feel that this not enough. If we want the districts to address the issue of the depletion of local forests reserves, we need to give them resources in terms of money and staff.  

Also, the demarcations should not only stop with the central forest reserves but they should extend to the districts. This is because what is happening is that the demarcations are not clear and people are settling in some of these areas unaware. If you only stop at the central forest reserve, what happens to the local forest reserve? Therefore, I think we need also to look at the districts and give them enough resources to address these issues. (Member timed out)   

5.55
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the committee for the good work done. 

I would like to appreciate the committee more so for their recommendation at page 40 concerning the weather forecast department of Government. For long this department has been abandoned. These days if you listen to the predictions given by the department, you shake your head; they are no longer as correct as they used to be.  

Mr Speaker, my district and northern Uganda in general, depend mostly on agriculture. However, for the last five years, the department has been giving wrong predictions to our farmers. I will give an example. Two years ago, they predicted that rains would go on until November. People were excited, they planted their crops but they lost most of their crops because the rains did not go that far. Therefore, I am so grateful to the committee for recommending that we give more funds to this important department of Government. 

If you visit the weather stations in most of the districts, you realise they are no longer operational. When we were in primary school, we used to learn about the weather from Gulu weather station and it had all the equipment. This is not the case today. The equipment and staff are no longer there. That is why I am saying this department needs to be taken care of. 

On rural electrification, my colleague put it very rightly - the major aim is to connect health centres, schools and the business trading centres within particular districts. (Member timed out)

5.57
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to join my colleagues to thank the committee for this ministerial budgetary report. I have very few points to make. 

First, I would like to appreciation the plan in relation to National Forestry Authority, but I have a great worries. Some years back, through the ministry, National Forestry Authority facilitated farmers to plant trees. This was actually a very good thing because it has helped us protect and make our environment look very good.  However, people were told that after the some years when the pine trees are ready, the Government would go back and help farmers get market for them. This has not come to pass. 

As I talk, for the last three years, the farmers have been crying, looking for the Government and wondering why the Government has kept quiet about helping them get the market or buy these pine trees. Nothing has come from the Government. Therefore, I request that something be done about this. If farmers are encouraged and given seeds and money to plant trees and they remain with these grown trees without any market, it is terrible.

A colleague talked about the market; the market which is there is very low and it cannot do anything for them. They want a good market where they will get some profit and not just sell their trees because they have to or because they have matured. (Member timed out)

6.00
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Youth Represent, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Whereas we have a renewable energy policy, our electrification remains at 14 per cent as a country. There have also been several interventions to exploit renewable energy resources that we have across the county.  There have been some programmes - the Promotion of Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Programme (PREEEP) and another called Energising Development (EnDev). 

Mr Speaker, whereas all these efforts have been trying to ensure that we exploit our various sources of renewable energy especially in the form of water, others like wind energy and biomass remain hardly exploited. It appears that those who have been trying to invest in renewable energy somehow for some reason keep getting frustrated. We are aware that there are some Germans who have tried to invest in renewable energy particularly in wind energy and biomass. However, for some reason, every time they keep trying they are frustrated. 

I would like to, therefore, seek clarification from the minister. Considering that we have a renewable energy policy, and considering that there are all these programmes funded by different donors, and that also Uganda will find it pertinent to invest in renewable energy, wouldn’t you find it important and urgent to cooperate with all these organisations and companies that would love to invest in renewable energy in our country? I think it is important –(Member timed out).

6.02
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. 

My concern is about water for production.  I would like to thank the committee for the list they have given us on valley dams. They have given us a long list of valley dams which are to be constructed. My concern, however, is about those which have already been constructed. One time I went to Otuke District and saw a very big valley dam called Akwera Dam. It is a very big dam that holds a lot of water, but it is very idle; it is not helping the people there. My suggestion is that such dams be made functional so that they help our people. Water systems should also be put in place so that water can be pumped to the surrounding communities.

Another concern is about the distribution of seedlings by National Forestry Authority. I want to thank NFA for the work they have done especially in growing tree seedlings. However, the distribution centres are very few in the country. My suggestion is that if we have to effectively mitigate climate change, we need more tree distribution centres. In places like Kapchorwa, Kween and Bukwo we do not have tree seedling distribution centres. That is why I would recommend that Sebei region be given a distribution centre.

6.04
MR FRED BADDA (NRM. Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is an important issue I would have wished to see being addressed in this very good report of the committee but I do not see it anywhere under vote 157, National Forestry Authority. This issue is hampering development in the country.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, you may be aware that over 20 towns and municipalities in this country are sitting on forest reserves. These towns cannot expand anymore because they are sitting on forest reserves. These towns and municipalities were advised over eight years ago to find alternative land for compensation. This land has been identified and all procedures have been fulfilled but no action has been taken. This issue has been hanging between the ministry and Cabinet for all this time with nothing being done. 

The problem is that the land that was identified is being depleted by encroachers while the towns are not expanding. How much time does Cabinet need to solve this issue so that we get development and at the same time do not deplete and exploit the natural resources? Can this issue be responded to by the minister? I thank you.

6.06
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia-Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to appreciate the committee for their report. 

I would like to comment on one area. The committee recommended that we give bigger financing to NFA. This is important because there are very few centres for tree seedling distribution. I would like to put it to the minister that it would be so good if the ministry came up with a programme to help farmers develop their own nurseries and also improve on the distribution within the districts. If we can have the district seedling distribution centres and you also invest money down to the district, it would be easy for the communities to secure seedlings for tree planting. Otherwise, the demand is now so high.

Mr Speaker, I would also like the minister, through the programmes that we have seen coming up, to increase the networks for water supply. We know National Water and Sewerage Corporation are trying to benchmark and increase their market. The other year, we heard that a report was being worked on in Busia District where water would be drawn into the tanks at Majanji - the Lumino Water Project. Madam Minister, I would like you to at least mention something about this project. It will help us know how far this project has gone and if World Bank is going to fund it. This is because Busia has over 70,000 people who can subscribe to the national water grid. 

On the distribution of rural electricity, recently there was a programme running via Namayingo to Busia and it was funded by JICA but it stalled and we are wondering what happened. We are wondering about the reinstatement of the programme so that we see the wires being put up. Also, when are you going to ensure that these distribution wires get to places like health centres and institutions of Government? (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable ministers, I am going to give you four minutes each and the chairman will have five minutes to close, but I will first have Nakasongola District. 

6.09
MRS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence. I have two issues to raise. 

One, in my district I have the Kaisagara and Karubanga forest reserves but they have never been demarcated.  The citizens do not know where they start and end, and there is always a mix-up about which land belongs where. In Kaisagara, people were chased away when NFA attempted to clear the land to plant trees. However, ever since they were chased away – it is now three years - there is no single tree and human being there; it is only a bush.

I want to know the plans the ministry has concerning these forests reserves. Isn’t it time for us to devise a policy so that if you lack human resource, you use the people on the forest reserves to plant the trees and they live there? We could do that instead of leaving the land empty, harassing and chasing people away. When are we going to gazette these forests reserves?

Secondly, I did not hear anything about pollution of water bodies. These are natural resources. Our lakes are covered by weeds. There is pollution all over. I want to hear something particular regarding water pollution and conserving our water bodies and the catchment areas. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.11
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for the report. 

I hope the sector ministers have been listening to the very important recommendations raised by the committee. My problem has been that the committees do good research and make very good recommendations but they have become songs. Maybe we will have to devise a method such that when a committee presents their recommendations, in the following budgetary season they should be able to highlight the aspects of their recommendations which have been implemented by the ministries. Otherwise, it looks as if we are just wasting time. We study the ministerial policy statements and bring our recommendations here, sing the song year in, year out and we have the same story of lamentation. 

Mr Speaker, I feel there are few items we need to raise which were not clearly emphasised in the report. One of them, which affects all of us, is the demarcation of boundaries of central forest reserves. I feel that National Forestry Authority should be adequately funded so that we fully understand the boundaries of our forests. Right now, we do not know whether the government is involved in land grabbing by taking up some forest reserves and converting them to whatever they want or the population is also breaching the law by encroaching on the forest reserves. In all this you do not know who to blame unless we have clear and well defined boundaries.

This is a matter, which for the last three years - I do not know whether you have been able to study your policy statements and recommendations for the last three years. But I have read through and I have not sighted any or at least, there has not been any emphasis on that.

The issue of climate change is a reality, Mr Speaker, and it looks as if this Parliament and the government have surrendered the issue of climate change to be driven by civil servants. Once or twice, I have attended the climate forum - (Member time out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your time is up.

MRS OGWAL: I have attended – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your time is up. (Laughter) 

MRS OGWAL: You know, the Speaker keeps forgetting that when I speak as LOP, I speak as LOP not as representative of Dokolo. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I am speaking as LOP.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One minute.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you. Mr Speaker, the issue of climate change is very important and I would expect the government to present to this House what are the various sources of funding that we have received from the international agencies for mitigation and adaptation. 

We want to know and I know our Minister of Water has been attending this forum and Uganda is very instrumental. However, what are we benefiting; what is going on? We do not know. 

Mr Speaker, even Parliament itself is not involved; what they call the carbon credit and what have you, there are technical things to us and we do not know the reality. Therefore, can we be educated as to what is happening to show that we are actually dealing with the issue of climate change.

Finally, as a woman and as a mother, what alternative is Government putting in place to stop the women from using charcoal? I believe that even in the houses of ministers, charcoal is being used. (Laughter) Yes, I am trying to use briquettes which are cleaner but still, there is VAT on briquettes. So, if you are really focused, you should try to remove VAT on briquettes and energy saving stoves so that we can find cheaper sources of energy. That way, you can stop our women from using firewood. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, who will go first, environment or energy? Four minutes. 

6.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Flavia Munaaba): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the good report and also the honourable members for the lively debate and their contributions. I had a long response but I will try to break it down to the four minutes. 

I will start with the issue of kaveera. The ban of kaveera is on and my ministry is continuing to work with the stakeholders in an effort to clean up the country of the dangerous material of kaveera. So, the ministry urges all stakeholders to cooperate and indeed, we desire more funds to be availed for this purpose. 

We have already engaged supermarkets who have now transformed their distribution of goods to paper bags and some other materials. We are still struggling with the ordinary people in the markets who seem to think that they have to continue using kaveera but with more effort, we shall be able to deal with that issue.

On cancellation of titles in wetlands, the process has begun. The titles have been delineated on the cadastral maps of this country and a wetland atlas has been made. We have prepared a Cabinet memo, which is awaiting the clearance of the Ministry of Finance before it is presented to Cabinet. Otherwise, guidelines have already been prepared and this one is still on course.

When we talk about weather information, the ministry has worked on upgrading the Meteorology Department to an authority and we are now waiting for the Ministry of Public Service to ensure that the vote for Uganda National Meteorological Authority is given and processes are being undertaken to ensure that the right staffing, positions, counting officers are in place. It is a process which is also taking place.

There is something, however, on appendix A - the National Meteorological Authority has not yet been funded but within the unfunded priorities, it has been omitted. So, it needs to be included so that funds are available at the right time.

When we come to National Forestry Authority, the forest reserves, which are being encroached on, this country has undertaken a massive drive of community tree planting. In fact, the ministry has prepared national tree planting strategy which has already been approved by Cabinet. What is lacking is enough resources to have the nurseries in every sub county but there is a plan to have nurseries in every sub county so that the tree seedlings can become available to as many people as possible. However, I call upon all the Members of Parliament and other stakeholders to get involved in the plan of initiating tree nurseries in their constituencies.

 THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up. One minute.

MS MUNAABA: There are some who are already doing that and I would like everybody to get engaged into ensuring that tree seedlings are everywhere. National Environment Management Authority needs to be staffed adequately. There are not enough staff in NEMA. However, the Ministry of Public Service is telling us only to recruit on the basis of replacement of staff who fall out and not on expansion. We would like to request that the Ministry of Finance releases funds for the unfunded priorities so that we are able to have the right staff; even in the Ministry of Water and Environment, we do not have the right staff. (Laughter) 

There is this issue of the microns of the banned kaveera. We are working on this and a committee has been set up in Cabinet to discuss the issues of what microns of kaveera - (Member timed out).

6.22
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Irene Muloni): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the chairperson and members of the Committee on Natural Resources for a job well done and I thank colleagues in this august House for all the support you give to my sector.

In principle, we agree with the recommendations that have been made in the report and for your information, when you look at most of the recommendations on policy reviews, on amending the legislation, which is in place, there is already work that is going on. We are trying to fast-track these reviews so that we can address those shortcomings in the existing policies and the laws so that we can have a smooth operation of the sector.

On rural electrification, Mr Speaker, I again appreciate all your support. It is our intention to reach out to all of you and ensure that you all get electricity in your constituencies. I will not have enough time to go in details for each one of you but I have taken note of your concerns and indeed, a lot of work is going on right now. There was a bit of a halt because of financing. However, the Ministry of Finance released some funds recently and so, the construction of most of those schemes is resuming.

Therefore, bear with us. If we can get as much money as possible, we would be able to accelerate the rural electrification throughout this country. Of course, on that I really appreciate the support and the urge that we give special attention and focus on rural electrification so that we can promote value addition and industrialisation in the rural areas.

While we are doing all that, renewable energy is our centre of focus because as a country, we are endowed with many of those resources ranging from geothermal, solar, wind biomass and we are trying to tap into all of these. We welcome investors. We have a feed-in tariff which guides them in developing and planning for the development. 

I suppose where they may have not taken on some of those resources, it could be as a result of the resultant tariff for some of those renewables like solar. For wind, work is going on to try and establish the data and how much wind, in which places so that we can also tap into it.

Issues of efficiency in the sector to do with power theft - this is a vice, which is practiced throughout this country. We condemn it; we are fighting it. I would like to appeal to all of you, colleagues, in your constituencies, please, preach the gospel of no power theft and no illegal connections so that we can get everyone properly connected and metered to ensure they all pay and we get a sustainable service.

Prepaid metres is the way we are moving so that people can manage their lives and change their habits instead of resorting to tapping electricity. Also, change in technologies using conductors, which have insulations so that we can avoid power theft. 

We are also trying to increase the generation capacity in the country, as you all know many of the projects that are going on. Therefore, where we have inter-connections with the neighbouring countries for power exchange import-export, -(Member timed out).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up. One minute.

MS MULONI: Thank you. On the petroleum sector, I am certain everyone is very keen to know when we will have the first oil. Mr Speaker, we are trying our level best to ensure that we have the destinations of the crude oil once it starts going into production, in terms of the refinery, we are in the final stages of getting a lead investor so that a refinery can be constructed. We are also going to develop the crude export pipeline as a regional project.

Waste management facilities are now in place in the Albertine Graben. For local content, we are trying to ensure that our people prepare themselves to tap into the opportunities in the sector. 

For the National Oil Company and Petroleum Authority, we are waiting for H.E the President to make the appointments of the people so that these institutions can continue. 

Compensations are going on, in advanced stages, so that we can prepare the places for all these installations to be effected. Of course, the ban on - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very, honourable minister. Chairperson -

6.28
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Michael Werikhe): Mr Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank all of you for the valuable contributions you have made to the committee report. I would like also to mention here, in a special way, and thank my colleagues, Members of the Committee on Natural Resources, for their valuable input to the report.

I would like to reiterate my prayer that honourable members, a report of the Committee on Natural Resources on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for the Financial Year 2015/2016 be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question to that prayer by the chairperson of the committee that the report of the Committee on Natural Resources on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget estimates for Financial Year 2015/2016 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is the House properly constituted so that we go on with the other business? Can we proceed? Honourable members, let us finish this business, please. We are time barred. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a procedural issue, which the members – we need to have consensus. I see frustration among colleagues when they are given two minutes. I saw my sister throwing a piece of paper. I saw another member getting disappointed.

Even at United Nations and everywhere at least five minutes. I would like to beseech colleagues that you do not need to speak on every sector so that a member can be given five or six minutes and you know, you are going to speak on education. People can research and then even the Hansard – because this Hansard is researched – they will know that hon. Wamakuyu spoke on this issue. (Laughter) However, Mr Speaker, if you give somebody two minutes, the Hansard is even distorted. They do not think a member has made a contribution that brings change. Therefore, I would like to request you and colleagues to agree that we do not speak on every sector. We agree and speak on one sector for six minutes. I beg you to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am one of those people who proposed that we should have a structured debate. Structured debate meaning the sides sit and agree on who will be speaking on this particular subject and they give me an advance list with which Member will speak for how long so that we allot block time to the Government side and to the Opposition side. 

Say, if the debate is going to take five hours, how are you going to use the five hours on the Opposition side? How are you going to use maybe seven hours from the Government side and allot it among yourselves and identify people who will speak so that we go by that. I was defeated, honourable members.

Now, on this particular issue, 30 members want to speak. If 30 members want to speak and you give them five minutes each, tell me how long that debate will take. I will need months to do that. Therefore, unless we agree on making some adjustments on the way we do business, we are going to have to live with these two minutes. 

Honourable members, I do not even have to apologise for this. Two minutes are two minutes. If you are disappointed, it is not my problem anymore because that is what we are being forced to do. You think I like it? I do not like it. If you ask me to speak in two minutes, I will also complain but I will try because that is all we have. We do not have any more time than that. Please, Members.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the best way is that we should adopt what is provided for in the rules that the Clerk and hopefully the Speaker, will make available to us the issues to be discussed the following day – actually, the whole week. If we know that, then somebody can pick the key issues, do research and know when to contribute. However, the Order Paper comes at about 1.00 p.m. It comes the very day of the sitting. I wish it could come early, by 8.00 a.m. However, it comes by 1.00 p.m. and we are supposed to, especially if it is the Deputy Speaker who comes exactly at 2.00 O’clock - (Laughter) - You have just seen the Order Paper and you are expected to - even the LOP is given three minutes - it is not humanly possible.

Mr Speaker, I think we have somewhere to start from. Personally, I have no problem with the two minutes if you give me time to study. If you give me time to research - Remember, Mr Speaker, you are the one who is leading the delegation to ACPEU. That one is strict - two minutes is actually too long. They can give you 45 seconds. However, you are given two minutes after they have told you three days ago that we are going to discuss this and you just hammer the point. We Ugandans left huge impact there talking on two minutes.

Therefore, give me time and in two minutes, I will give you the point but you are just ambushing me – now, I am trying to scratch my head and I cannot remember everything. 

Mr Speaker, I think the members have a point. We have to find a way of making them feel comfortable when making their contributions. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. However, honourable members, I think you have noticed that from Tuesday, the Order Paper has been coming the day before. The only challenge is - Yes, I have been in charge and I am aware. I sign them off. 

The problem that you have is, for example, after closing business, what is left of today is what will be transferred to tomorrow’s Order Paper; but the structure of the Order Paper is finished. Therefore, we only wait for how far we have gone today and then we make the adjustments and issue again. However, that is a problem that can be settled. That does not stop us because you do not need the Order Paper to know that there is going to be a ministerial policy report on education. You do not need the Order Paper to do that. You need to know that there is going to be a report of a Committee on Education. Therefore, you prepare in advance and then, when it is on the Order Paper, you are ready.

Therefore, if you are to wait for the Order Paper, you will ambush yourself, not the Speaker ambushing you. It is because this matter has been on ever since the ministerial policy statements were brought to the Floor of Parliament and that was some three weeks ago. Therefore, let us try and use whatever is available to move, honourable members.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we are very certain that as you keep time, most likely, you will get alternatives to that. 

We raised very many issues on this report and the ministers were given limited time; members are still yearning for answers because some of them are very important. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Mr Speaker, since the ministers were writing answers to every question asked, that tomorrow, they give us the answers to the questions we raised? 

Where is the money on the escrow account, for example? Where is the Umeme report? There are issues that we have but if you give them only four minutes, they will say Parliament - do you think four minutes will do anything - they will go scot free! Mr Speaker, don’t you think it would be procedurally right that these ministers give us answers to the questions we raised?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, you will prepare those responses to the questions that you have not been able to cover and lay them on Table at time the Parliament comes to sit and the members can look at them. That will now be for the next processes because we now have many other reports. However, we will have the record of the issues raised. Therefore, can we move to the other item and finish that matter.


BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Is it order for the ministers to start running away after finishing their - (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable ministers-

Clause 4

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ekanya, you had something to say on this clause 4? We proceed? 

MR EKANYA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question to the proposal by hon. Ekanya that clause 4 be deleted. 

(Question put and negatived.)


THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the amendment that the Shs 1,000,000 be changed to Shs 5,000,000.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the final issue that this particular matter should be restricted to one transaction at a time. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, clause 5 is deleting “allow expenditure as far as mining is concerned.” Anybody who invests must be allowed expenditure. Therefore, I see no reason we should delete it. It is concerning mineral exploration expenditures. If somebody has gone for exploration, he should be allowed expenditure. Therefore, Mr Chairman, I say we should not repeal it; we leave it because any man in business must be allowed business expenditure.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, we are proposing to repeal section 36 of the principal Act, which allows the person carrying out mining operations to produce income included in gross income- a deduction for capital expenditure incurred in searching, discovering and testing or winning access to mineral deposits in Uganda. To us, it is a very important section that we should retain because part IX of it is being extended to apply to the mining operations. I want to oppose my friend and request him that we can maintain the way we have suggested in the Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the minister must show me where the person claims. I think you cannot - for example, I open up a business and put in furniture and many other things. In normal trading, those expenditures are written over a period of time. Unless there is somewhere you are taking these, because capital expenditures on any businesses are allowed. You cannot oppose for the sake of it. What type of minister is this one? An expenditure - he is consulting- 

Mr Chairman, all capital expenditures are allowed over a period of time. The minister must show us where a person who is investing capital investment in mining - unless you are telling people you do not want them to come and mine. I put in my investment, $10,000,000, and you are saying “You are not allowed” after when I start trading. Is that fair? 

Therefore, they should be allowed. Even if you construct an industrial building, you will claim the industrial building deduction after a period of 25 years. You have operations and machinery. After a period of five years, you will be allowed the deduction. Why do you want to disadvantage those in mining? That means you are trying to become a disincentive to the mining industry.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, didn’t we cover this particular provision in the other oil laws that we passed? If it is not covered in any other law, what would be the reason for deleting this? If we had covered it in the other new laws that we passed, then it would make sense to remove it from here. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I would like to seek your pardon. This section is being repealed from this part. We are creating a special part for petroleum and mining. Therefore, we are repealing it from this section and we take it to section 5. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Where? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, let me search for it very well and then, I will bring it here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it the one on page 19 of the Bill? 

MR BAHATI: Yes, Sir. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, then the minister should have said they are transferring it. He should not have come up to say that they cannot allow. If there is a place they are taking this section, I would love to know where it is. This is because they are telling us Section 89. Section 89 deals with thin capitalisation. There is no relation between this section and section 89. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Look at section 89 (d)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have seen hon. Mudimu wants to give me information. 

MR WAMAKUYU: Mr Chairman, it is taken to 89 (b).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is 89 (d).

MR WAMAKUYU: It is (b), taxation of licences. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No it is (d)- Mining Exploration Expenditure. (d) for delta. I do not trust my friends from Bugisu when it comes to these letters of (b) and (d). That is why I have to be emphatic. They could say (t) when they mean (p). (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, yes I can see it but not fully. The law says “a person.” “A person” means both a company and an individual. Here, it is showing a licensee. This person we are talking about is now a taxpayer. If you are taking of 89 (d) to be (1) you should say, “We are repealing this and transferring the whole of 36 to 89 (d)” I will agree on that because a person, whatever the case may be, should be allowed to trade.

When you say a licensee; what do you mean? That is why I am saying a person carrying on a mining is allowed a deduction - because I have been allowed to carry out; so, I do not see what the big difference is -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable, could you use both a person and a licensee?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: In Income Tax, we use a person. It is well defined even there. “A person” means a company or an individual for tax purposes. When you put a licensee here, it means you must go for the definition of licensee. I do not see anything about the definition of “a licensee” in there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is “licensee” defined? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, it is called interpretation. As for interpretation, we must shift this to the interpretation section. Let us shift the whole –(Interjections)– I am talking because I know what I am saying -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This particular definition is in the interpretation clause. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Did you say 89 (a)?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes. If you look at the licensee, it is on the Interpretation Clause which is on page 8 under 89 (a) of the Bill interpretation and under licensee on page 9. It defines a licensee which is referred to in 89 (d). Does that make it better? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I can see the figures adding up. If the minister had said that they were repealing this and they had transferred it here, I would have understood. Next time, do cross referencing very well. I have seen it. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 5 stands part of the Bill

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR OKELLO: Mr Chairman, clause 7, paragraph (a) (4) should be revised as follows:
“(4) The furnishing of services including consultancy services by a person through employees or other personnel engaged by the person for such purpose but only if activities of that nature continue for the same or a connected project for a period or periods aggregating more than 90 days in any 12 months period.” 

The justification is that the services branch rule is not so much the place from which services are performed in Uganda but the period during which services are performed. Consequently, it is not intended that the services be performed for the requisite period from the same place. This should be clarified to avoid Section 78 (a) (4) being read down through the reference to (place).

Clause 7 (c): replace 78 (c) with 89 (a). The justification is to correct the cross-reference.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can I put the question to that proposed amendment? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR OKELLO: In clause 8, delete paragraph (b) and (f). The justification is that paragraph (d) intended to substitute paragraph (g) of section 79 of the Income Tax Act but on a closer reading of the Act, the original provision is clearer than the proposal. 

Paragraph (f) is intended to repeal paragraph (l) of section 79 on the Income Tax Act, which is a catch or provision that brought into the tax net any income that is attributed to any other activity, which occurs in Uganda that is mentioned in other paragraphs. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that clear honourable members? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, on that one, I may have no problem, but on (1)-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can I deal with this one first, then we come to (1), which you have a problem with? I put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, on (1), it talks about income derived by a resident person through a branch outside Uganda. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: where is this? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is 8 (a) (1). According to the old law, this was basically 79 of the income tax “…income derived from sources in Uganda to the extent which is derived from the sale of goods…“and that is what we are deleting.

If we are saying that the income of a person derived from a citizen who resides outside Uganda, for a branch working outside, then that person when he is working outside Uganda, he ceases to be a resident person unless he is there for a short time.

In this case, if the branch is here for a foreign branch, the only income which will be attributed to the resident person is the income when he works here. If he goes out, his income ceases to be an income for a resident because we have our way of how to describe residence as far as tax purpose is concerned. 

I am raising this because in the old law, it is better than what they are bringing here. If I went out of the country and to work in South Africa, when I come back, all my income from wherever is liable to taxation here because I went and earned income, came back; you tax me or you allow it if there is double taxation agreement.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, you are proposing a deletion? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We are proposing that (a) should be deleted and we maintain 79 as it exists.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister -

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, I would like to be granted one minute to reconcile what he was talking about and what I have here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we stand over clause 8? 

Clause 9 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, in clause 9, replace “tax year” with “year of income” wherever it appears in the clause.

The justification is that the reference in the Income Tax Act is to a year of income and not a tax year. 

In sub-clause (4), under the definition of “debt”, replace “foreign controlled company” with “foreign controlled resident company.”

The justification is that thin capitalisation is applied to foreign controlled resident companies and not foreign controlled companies.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, it is not okay. Foreign controlled company means that the control of that company is from outside. Even a company can control another company. It is not only individuals. So, if the chairman is talking about that, I think as it is in the law, in relation to foreign controlled company means that the great amount of tax – we have already said that. That is very good and we cannot change that.

We have to follow the financial reporting standards. It is the one, which defines foreign company’s control, 51 per cent of the share-holding being controlled by a foreign person. This is good. The only thing I can agree with is the year of income, which is okay. So, on that one, the chairman is wrong. The second one which I want to raise – maybe we deal with that, then I come to - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We may need to deal with what they have proposed first. Mr Chairman, with the intervention from hon. Nandala in relation to debt, what you are proposing to amend in the clause 9 (4), the definition of debt, the member is stating that it is better the way it is in the Bill than what you are proposing.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: I have heard the explanation from my honourable colleagues, the passionate appeal he has made and I wish to concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do you withdraw?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: I withdraw, Mr Chairman.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. What he is raising was an error that was put in the Bill but in principal law, it is clear and well spelt out in 2(a) where it indicates that “foreign controlled resident company” means that a resident company in which 50 per cent or more of the underlying ownership or control of the company is held by a non-resident person. In this section, referred to as the foreign controller, either alone or together with an associate or associates-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, the insertion of the word “resident” is for consistence?

MR MAWANDA: Yes, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I also see it in 3(a), the branch is treated as a foreign control resident company. The same word is used there even in (b)(1), (2), -  non-resident company - so the phrase is all over the document in relation to foreign control company in (4), in definition of arms, it is all there except in the definition of “debt” where foreign control, the word “resident” is left out.

I think this was the purpose for which the committee was making this amendment. It is for consistency. So, Mr Chairman, it is consistent with the rest of the provision of the law.

Honourable members, that means that for consistency, we keep the phrase as proposed by the Chairperson, “foreign controlled resident company”. It is also in the mother law.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Most obliged, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can I put a question to this amendment, honourable members? I put a question to the amendment as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, this clause 89 is trying to heal where companies come here without money and borrow to trade. Eventually, they make profit and take it out of the country. This is what it is trying to cure. 

The minister wants to remove financial institutions. You all know well that financial institutions are making a lot of profits. You cannot remove financial institutions if you want to promote local companies like Post Bank among those others you have been mentioning, you must deal with those who come with briefcases and make money and ferry it out of the country.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, why do you want to exclude financial institutions that have the same descriptions?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, this does not include financial institutions because by their nature, they borrow from the operations. In case of any capital inadequacy, the Financial Institutions Act provides for how a financial institution recapitalises.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think the minister is making two different things: there is the depositors’ money - those are stocks, actually goods in trading and there is what Bank of Uganda wants them to be. That is what we are looking at. The capitalisation of a bank must all come without using borrowed money.

So, what we are trying to say here is that we should not exclude financial institutions as far as capital is concerned and when they are doing their capital, it is wrong.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you my colleague for giving way. What hon. Nandala is saying is that they are excluding financial institutions; they are actually not excluding them. What they are saying is that these institutions, which lend money to each other – there are situations where one company lends to and borrows money from another sister company of its loan and it is still through the interest rates. In fact, what they are providing within the law is that they were talking about excess of two to one.

What they are proposing is 1.5 to 2. Therefore, in actual sense, they are not excluding the financial institutions.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if we had made an error initially, it is now that we correct it. We shall not allow financial institutions to be exempt because the financial institutions like a company, I have also seen - Since you have brought the amendments to remove from 2 to 1.5, if we removed them the other time, this is the time to add them because there are also registered companies that make money but the only difference is that they are regulated by the Central Bank.

I still insist that financial institutions must be also included in this thing of 1.5 to 1. I am getting perturbed by colleagues every now and then crossing that side. Is he part of the Ministry of Finance - (Laughter) - If you do not know how to debate, you stop going there. I want to insist that financial instructions must be included. So, we must delete it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal is that we delete the phrase “other than a financial institution” from this provision. That is what the member is proposing. He has given the explanation. Can I put the question to that proposal that the phrase “…other than a financial institution” appearing in 89(1) be deleted. 

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, on clause 10, we propose to delete proposes 89(h). The justification is that not all of the section 89(h) of the current law is covered by the new section 89(h)(f) thus existing section 89(h) should be retained.

4.2 Under the proposed section 89(a) (1); delete the definition of “barren”. The justification is that it is not used anywhere in the clause. (2) Substitute for the definition of “commercial production” the following, “Commercial production means;
    a) For mining operations the first period of 30 consecutive days during which the average level of production of the 25 highest production days in the 30 day period reaches a production level deemed to be commercial as determined by the minister responsible for mining operations; or 

    b) for petroleum operation - the production of crude oil or natural gas or both and delivery of the crude oil or natural gas at the delivery point under a programme of regular production and sale.”

The justification is to extend the provision to apply to mining operations as well.

(3)  Substitute for “contract area” the following: “‘A contract area’ means an exploration area, which is a subject of petroleum agreement or a development area as the case may be.”

The justification is to reflect the progressive reduction of the contract area as defined in the production sharing agreement.
(4) Substitute the definition of “delivery point” with the following: “’Delivery point’ means the point at which petroleum passes through the intake valve of the pipeline vessel, vehicle or craft at a terminal or refinery in Uganda.”

The justification is to harmonise the definition of the delivery point with the one in the Petroleum (Exploration) Development and Production Act, 2013.

(4.5) Substitute for the definition of “development expenditure” with the following: “Development expenditure means expenditure incurred after issuance of a production license in undertaking development operations including the acquisition of a depreciable asset used in such operations and an expenditure treated as development expenditure under a petroleum agreement but does not include any expenditure incurred in the acquisition or construction of a pipeline (not for use in petroleum operation) or expenditure that is not allowed as a deduction under section 22(2) or 23.”

The justification is that this removes the inclusion of pre-license cost and social infrastructure costs and includes expenditure incurred on the depreciable assets, which have otherwise been left out – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, can I come up to this far and see if there are any comments because I am going to put the question once to all of them? If there are any issue with any of the recommendations, you can rise and move so that when we finish all these, I put the question once. Proceed

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. 
(5) Insert definition of “contractor” as follows: “’Contractor’ means a person supplying services other than as an employee to the following:
    a) A licensee in respect of mining operations undertaken by the licensee 
    b) A licensee in respect of petroleum operations undertaken by the licensee.”

The justification is that the withholding tax rules in subsection 89(h) (f)(1) applies to only contractors providing services. The reference to supplying goods may cause confusion.

(6) Delete definition of “development expenditure.” The justification is that it has been replaced by the definition term “petroleum development expenditure.”

(7) Delete the definition of “development plan.”

The justification is that it has been replaced by definition of “approved development plan” in section 89(g) (d) 5)
    a) Under the definition of “firm out agreement” replace section 89(l) with section 89(g)(e). The justification is to correct the cross reference.

    b) Edit the definition of “gross income of a license” as follows: Gross income of a licensee includes cost oil, licensee’s share or profit oil and any credit earned by the licensee from petroleum operations.

The justification is for clarity of what constitutes gross income of a licensee.

(8) Substitute for the definition of “licensee” as follows: “’Licensee’ means a person who has been granted a mining right or a person with whom the Government has entered into a petroleum agreement as defined in the Petroleum (refining, conversion, transmission and mid-stream) Act, 2013.

The justification is that licensee has been defined in the relevant laws on petroleum.

(9) Under the definition of “mining Act”, insert the word “operation” at the end of the provision. The justification is to clarify that the Mining Act mandate exceeds beyond mining to cover mining operation.

(10) Under the definition of “mining exploration expenditure”;
    a) Replace the word ”exploration operation authorise under a mining exploration rights” with “mining exploration operations.” The justification is that mining explorations operations has been defined.

    b) In paragraph (c), insert the term” first” immediately before the word “use.”

The justification is that as mining exploration expenditure is expense, it is important that the definition is limited to depreciable assets that have their first use in the mining exploration operation.

Otherwise, depreciable assets first use for other purposes maybe transferred to mining exploration operations to take advantage of expensing.


(11) Substitute for the definition of “mining exploration rights” as follows: “’mining exploration rights’ means a prospecting exploration or retention’s licence.”

The justification is that the definition should include a reference to a prospecting licence. 

(12) Under the definition of “mining exploration information”, substitute for the reference to an exploration or retention licence, the word, “mining exploration rights.”

The justification is that the reasons for change is that; mining explorations rights is a defined term.

(13) Under the definition of “mining exploration operations”, substitute for “reference to an exploration or retention licence” the words, “mining exploration rights.”

The justification is that the reason for change is that, “mining exploration rights” is a defined term.

(14) Insert a definition of “mining information” as follows; “mining information’ means, information relating to mining operations.” 

The justification is that the definition is relevant to the proposed section 89 (a) definition of “mining extraction expenditure.”

It is also relevant to propose section 78 (a) (b) and (c). Insert a definition of mining revenues as follows: “’mining revenues’ means signature and other bonuses, surface rentals, royalties and any other duties or fees payable to the government under the Mining Act or a mining right granted under that Act.

The justification is that the definition is relevant to clause 10 proposed section 89 (m) (a), 89 (o) (a), 89 (c) and 89 (q) c) which have been revised to apply also to mining revenue.

(16) Under the definition of “mining rights” (1) substitute for the words “a prospecting exploration or retention licence” the words; “mining exploration rights.” (2) Delete the word “granted” at the end of the definition.

The justification is that “mining exploration rights” is the defined term.

(17) Under the definition of “participation dividend - (1), replace the word “divided” with the word “dividend”, (2) replace “contractor” with “licensee”. The justification is to correct the spelling.

(18) Delete the definition of “Petroleum (Exploration Development and Production Act.” The justification is that there is need to define-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is no need.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: There is no need to define an Act of Parliament because it is self-explanatory. 

(19) Substitute for the definition of “petroleum operations” as follows: “’Petroleum operations’ means authorised operations under a petroleum agreement for petroleum exploration, development production and export, including planning, preparation, installation, transportation of petroleum storage or decommissioning and for the construction of a pipeline or petroleum refinery.”

The justification is that this is carried from the principal law on petroleum operation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You are not defining “petroleum agreement” anymore?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: No, Mr Chairman. 
(20) Substitute for the definition of “petroleum agreement” as follows: “’petroleum agreement’ means an agreement entered into by Government of Uganda with another person in accordance with the Petroleum Exploration Development and Production Act, 2013. Or the Petroleum (Refining, Conversion, Transmission and Midstream Storage) Act, 2013. 

The justification is that it is important that the definition of “petroleum agreement” for Income Tax purposes aligns with the definition in the Petroleum Exploration Development and Production Act.

(21) Under the definition of “Petroleum development operations”, insert the word “petroleum” immediately before “production.”

The justification is that the word “petroleum production licence” is a defined term. 

(22) Substitute the definition of “petroleum exploration expenditure” with the following: “’petroleum exploration expenditure’ means expenditure incurred by a licensee in undertaking exploration operations authorised under the petroleum exploration rights.”

The justification is to align with the definition used in the production sharing agreement.

(23) Substitute for the definition of “petroleum operation” the following: “’Petroleum operation’ means, a petroleum activity as defined in the Petroleum Exploration Development and Production Act.”

The justification is to align it with the definition in the Petroleum, Exploration, Development and Production Act.

(24) Delete the definition of “petroleum production licence”. The justification is that the definition is unnecessary, given the operation of clause 10 proposed section 89 (a) (2). The effect of 89 (a) (2) is that petroleum production licence means a licence issued under section 79 of the Petroleum, Exploration, Development and Production Act.

(25) Substitute for the definition of petroleum revenue the following; petroleum revenue has the meaning in section 3 of the Public Finance and Management Act, 2015.

The justification is that section 3 of the Public Finance and Management Act, 2015 provides for petroleum revenue.

(26) Substitute for the definition of “petroleum right” the following: “’Petroleum right’ means a petroleum exploration right or a petroleum production licence. 

The justification is that an exploration right is only vested in the holder of a petroleum exploration licence not a holder of reconnaissance permit.

(27) Insert definition of “prescribed licensee” as follows: “’prescribed licensee’ means (a) a person who has been granted a mining right and in respect of whom the commissioner has notified in writing to be a prescribed licensee; or (b) a person with whom Government has entered into a petroleum agreement.”

The justification is that the definition is relevant to the revised clause 89 (i) and 89 (p).

(28) Insert definition of “resident licensee” as follows: “’resident licensee’ means a licensee that is a resident company. 

The justification is that the definition is relevant to the clause 89 (a) definition of “participation dividend”. 

(29) delete proposed section 89 (a) (2). The justification is that it is ambiguous.

(30) Insert new sub clause (4) as follows; (4) an amount is not treated as mining exploration expenditure, mining extraction expenditure, petroleum exploration expenditure or petroleum development expenditure to the extent that the amount is not allowed as the deduction under section 22 (3) or 23.

The justification is that this means that amounts that are otherwise non-deductible under the ITA do not qualify as mining exploration expenditure. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to those series of amendments from the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, there is proposed section 89 (b) (i) change the heading to “taxation of mining licensees”. The justification is that with using the term “licensee” for both mining and petroleum operations, it is suggested that the heading is changed to “taxation of mining licensee”. In sub clause (1), insert the word “in relation to mining operations” after “licensee”.

The justification is so as to make clear that it is a mining licensee to which section 89 (b) applies. Currently, there is no reference in section 89(b) to mining. 3) Sub clause (2), insert the word “referred to” in sub section (1) after licensee. The justification is for the same reason on 2 above. It is suggested that the words “referred to” in sub section (1) are inserted after licensee.

(4) Insert new sub clause (3) as follows: “(3) The rate of income tax applicable to a licensee in respect of mining operations is the rate specified under paragraph one of part nine of the third Schedule.” The justification is that this is intended to provide physical stabilities for both the government and mining licensees in relation to the corporate tax rates applicable to mining licensee.

Proposed section 89(c);
    1) In sub clause 4 replace “previous” with “earliest”.
    2) In sub clause (5) replace “explorations or retention licence” wherever mentioned with mining “exploration rights.” The justification is, this is intended to cover all licences and permission granted, which go beyond the exploration or retention licensees.

 Proposed section 89(d) - replace section 89(d) with the following:
 “
    1) If the cost of acquiring a depreciable asset is treated as mining exploration expenditures, section 27 applies to the asset on the following basis:
    a) The asset is treated as belonging to a separate pool of depreciable assets and
    b)  The depreciable rate applicable to the pool is 100 per cent.
    2) If the cost of acquiring an intangible asset is treated as mining exploration expenditure. Section 31 applies to the asset on the basis that the usual life of the asset is one year.
    3) A licensee shall be allowed a deduction from mining exploration expenditure to which sub section (1) or (2) do not apply in the year of income in which the expenditure is incurred.” 

The justification is that the cost of acquiring depreciable assets first used in mining exploration operations is treated as mining exploration expenditure. Similarly, the cost of acquiring certain intangible assets particularly in mining exploration rights acquired from the government or under the firm out agreement is treated as mining exploration expenditure.

Proposed section 89(e): 
“Amend sub clause (1) as follows: “Subject to sub section (4), if the cost of acquiring an intangible asset is mining extraction expenditure, the useful life of the asset is the lesser of - 
    a) The expected life of the mining extraction operation to which the asset relates; or
    b) Six years.”

The justification is to align it with section 31 of the Income Tax Act; in particular, under section 31, it is the intangible asset that has a useful life and not the expenditure.
    1) Under sub clause 4(1) delete -
    a) before “mining extraction expenditure” and also replace section 37 with section 31. The justification to correct the reference.

Proposed section 89(f) – 
1) In sub clause (4) -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You need the headings also.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you. In sub clause (4)(b) insert at the end of the paragraph, the words “that is returned to the licensee.” The justification is that under section 113(7) of the Petroleum Exploration Development and Production Act, “any surplus in a decommissioning fund, at the end of the decommissioning accrues to the government.”

There is no provision for rehabilitation fund in the Mining Act; therefore, there is no similar rule for mining but that may change in the future.
    1. In sub clause (5) under the definition of rehabilitation fund, replace the words “shall be” with “that is.”

Clause 10, proposed section 89 (g)
1. Change the heading to taxation of petroleum licensees
2. In sub clause (1) insert the words “in relation to petroleum operation” after licensee.

The justification is to make clear that it is a petroleum licensee to which clause 89(g) applies.
    1) In sub clause (2)(1) insert the word “referred to” in clause 1 after licensee and
2. Change “where” to “were.”
The justification is to make it clear that it is a licensee of petroleum operation that is being referred to in this part since there is also a licensee for the mining operation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, in three, the one in bracket, is that a clause or sub clause; or a clause of a section?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, I think this should be a sub clause. In sub clause (2) insert the word “referred to in”-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We cannot have a section in bracket. So that should be sub clause (1); is that correct? 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Yes, Mr Chairman.
4) Insert new sub clause (3), which provides for the corporate tax rates applicable to petroleum licensees as follows: 
“The rate of income tax applicable to a licensee in relation to petroleum operations is the rate specified under paragraph two of part nine of the third schedule.”
The justification is that this is intended to provide physical stability for both Government and petroleum licensees in relation to the corporate tax rates applicable to petroleum licensee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Yes, I said if there was an issue you could raise it so that when we finish -

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if an individual goes to mine, the individual rates will apply on his income.  Likewise, if it is a company, it will be a company. Why are we trying to say we refer to it because to that part, is it part three – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Which one is this?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You were talking about the tax rate applicable, so part four. Therefore, I am asking, what is the justification of us trying to single out - because even another trader also, you will need to refer to a part. Otherwise, you will say, as far as I am concerned, my tax rates are not prescribed here.

In this case, why are you singling out tax for mining yet we know that companies there is a tax rate, individuals there is a tax rate applicable?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is in relation to the rate of income tax applicable to the licensee in relation to petroleum operation; is the rate specified under paragraph two of part nine of the third schedule; is that what you are talking about?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, why I am asking the chairperson, why is he trying to single out -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, what I am asking, is that the reference or subject?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, the intention of these is to provide to people’s stability but if honourable member has got a better proposal rather than what the committee has proposed then he could raise it up so that we see whether we can agree with it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, he needs an explanation why you are singling out.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. What he is referring to in respect of rates that he is excluding some; all tax rates are prescribed in the third schedule. So there is no exclusion as you are saying and mining companies have got their specific rates in the parent law and that is what is being amended, part nine of the third schedule.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the reason I am raising it is that the company goes for mining, it makes money and its expenses are allowed like the capital allowances, the balance, which remains if it is an individual, the individual tax rate will apply. If it is a corporate company the corporation tax rate will also apply. The reason I am raising it, if you try to start singling it out, it stands clearly here, the tax rate, which is applicable to any business as long for that person is applicable that is my argument, I am putting out.

I am still insisting why are we singling it? I know hon. Mawanda is consulting because he cannot understand on his own, why is it –(Laughter) 

MR MAWANDA: Mr Chairman, is hon. Nandala in order to say that the reason I am consulting the technical people, I cannot understand on my own?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think honourable member for Budadiri West that was beyond what the language of the House permits; so you owe the member an apology.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I apologise to hon. Mawanda, but he should stop consulting. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it clear, honourable members, the rate of income tax applicable to a licensee? Is it for the avoidance of doubt so that we do not make a mistake in case it is not captured somewhere else?

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I think as you raise the point now when you look at the intention of this provision is purely for purposes of emphasis that it should be much more clearer because they are not restating anything new but referring to the applicability of which part of which schedule would be applicable. Paragraph two of part 9 of the third schedule - I think there is nothing that would stop and hon. Mafabi would be glad to know that for purposes of emphasis, provision of the law can be restated even when there is no harm.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is no contradiction; it is just for the avoidance of doubt, in case something is missed out then they restate it. Is that okay?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. 4.9, Clause 10, proposed section 89 (h), states: 
1) Renumber as Clause 89 (g)(n). 
2) Under sub clause (1), insert between the words “only against the” and “gross income” the words “the value of the cost of oil included in them. 
The justification it to limit the deductions to the cost oil.

    2) Under sub clause (1) and (3) replace the words, “a petroleum operation” with “petroleum operations.” The justification is that “petroleum operations” is a defined term in section 89 (a)

    2) Sub clauses (2) and (3), replace the word “where” with “Where.” The justification is that sentences begin with capital letters.
    3) Insert the following sub clauses immediately after sub clause (3) as follows:
“4) If a licensee has a loss carried forward for a contract area under subsection (3) for more than one year of income, the loss of the earliest year shall be allowed as a first deduction.”
6) In this section, a contract area that is a development area includes an exploration area provided the development area is wholly within the exploration area. The justification is to align with the equivalent rules for mining operations under section 89 (c).
4.10) Clause 10 -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if I understand what the chairman is proposing is that if I have a mining area here, it is only the expenditures in this area or loss to be allowed. If I go to another place and I am mining, those losses cannot be offset. This is business I have come and made a loss, I should be allowed to carry my loss forward. That is how business works.

It is leaving Mbale because you have made a loss and change your business location to Gulu and say that, “loss I made in Mbale should not…” and you are the same person trading in the same activity. I do not think that is fair business.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I would like to seek clarification from hon. Nandala, whether he finds this very fitting in anyway where a contract area is restricted to an area. If that was the intention of the law, then why would we say “contract area?” Then we would just say, “in Uganda” so that whatever you do anywhere you are covered but I think the issue is this kind of resources are not available in Budadiri or Bulambuli where you can find floods instead of minerals –(Laughter)– but the contract area is well defined. Why do you find it as a problem in this state? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I know what you mean and in Bulambuli the lower part is flood-prone but I am aware also in Bunyole and in your places, when it rains it also floods. All I am saying is that the contract area is purpose in mining that you do not go anywhere but I have mined and still in Uganda, I have gone there and made loss; I try another place where I can generate - why should I not be allowed because – (Interjections)  exactly, I think you have never engaged in business.

Assuming you have a petrol station in Kampala and you are making losses and another petrol station in Soroti and you are making profits; when you aggregate, you get the total. If it is the overall loss, you made a loss. If you have made profit, it is only taxed. This person is trading in mining of oil, you have contracted him in Bunyoro; he has another contract in Nwoya. If he makes a loss here and he is making his final accounts, are you saying you will give him two tax files? One for Bunyoro and another for Nwoya? A tax file is one and that is why you have one TIN.

The purpose is that if you have made a loss here, it would be good enough to offset it from the other one unless the loss is not at arm’s length but if it at arm’s length, this is trading. 

Therefore, Mr Chairman, the chairman must explain to me better why he should not allow other than wanting to restrict people so that people continue to make losses. By the way, you could be coming to Uganda for the first time. Why are you -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can you now allow the Chairperson to deal with it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am going to allow the Chairman. You could be coming, in initial business you can make a loss while you are making an entry aiming to make profit the following year.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, I think the committee proposed this because for all contracts, you cannot have it without any form of limitation, especially in the geographical area. This is very important even if you are doing oil exploration or mining, the output that is envisaged in the contract will be for that specific area and you cannot, therefore, transfer your gains or losses to another geographical location, which will require another contractual obligation.

I think this is not anything new; it is something that has been the practise whether in Local Government, districts or Central Government. It is not anything new. I just wish to implore my colleague, hon. Nandala, to accept this position so that we move forward. Otherwise, to say that we leave it open so that when you make losses in an area, you can then transfer the losses, I think Government would be on the losing side because somebody may relax, not put a lot of effort and eventually, think that he will make recoverable costs when he goes to invest in another area.

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform to hon. Nandala that when we look at these proposals, we should also know very well that there are parent laws that have even conditions attached to some of these contracts. For example, in oil exploration, there are defined blocks. Once you are given a block, while you are doing exploration, you may either hit a dry well or a wet one. 

If you hit a dry one, actually up to a certain point, you may not be compensated if you do not discover oil for example. You will not be compensated what we call recoverable cost. So, if you hit a dry well you cannot say, “I hit a dry well here, let me go to Mbale or Sironko or Bulambuli and be compensated.” These are enshrined in the parent laws. So, let us not look at this in isolation.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am not talking about recoverable costs. I am talking about - after making your expenditures vis-à-vis against your income, you make a loss. I am not asking that Government should pay them. No, that is where you are making a mistake. Let us do it simple. This is Werisha and Sons Construction Co. It has been given a road in Bundibugyo and in Soroti. The one of Bundibugyo, they make Shs one million and the one of Soroti they make a loss. It is a different contract but they are doing roads. At the end of the day, you allowed your loss when you are doing the totals. (Interjections) Yes, that is how it happens. That is in construction. These are different contracts but you aggregate them at the end of the year to see whether you made a profit –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I want to thank hon. Nandala and I want him to help me understand. We have been doing very well with defined territories: development area, exploration area, contract area. I think, to me, to use ordinary contract of petrol stations like hon. Nandala is doing  - because he has some - or use ordinary shops in Nakivubo or Kikuubo, would be diluting the very purpose of knowing that this is a specific specialised area. 

It is about oil and specific area is given specific licence. That is why we have this contract area. I do not know because my understanding is limited but why do you think that this is the same kind of business? Otherwise, people from Budadiri would be going into it if it was the same business. This is quite capital intensive business with a lot of risk before you go into it, you should be able to know and appreciate the risk. Hon. Nandala do you find it difficult that we have contract area, licence for that area, development area - is that difficult? I know what you are really saying is that it would be prudent to have one TIN – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I do not find it difficult. You may be the one finding it difficult.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Nandala, may be you could help us. Is there a difference between an investment loss and a business loss?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Mr Chairman. There is an investment loss and that means I invested, I have not recouped all my capital allowances. It is a loss - by the way, it is trading loss. You are the one who is even bringing the word “investment loss.” It means I invested $ 10 million; of this, I have recaptured $8 million and lost $ 2 million in the trading.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, if the investment area is specific and you have had losses there, would that be transferable elsewhere?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If I am in the same country, it should be. (Interjections) Yes. Which other laws? You see, Mr Chairman-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Because you see hon. Mafabi, you took all the risks for that area. That risk is not transferable. Now, you want to transfer it to another area when the risks are not -

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Hon. Nandala, what you are actually referring to, these are clauses that are imbedded in the agreements that were signed by these foreign companies as hon. Oboth has said. This is a specialised business. People go into this business well knowing what they are going to do.

Secondly, this is why we call them contracted areas. These are blocks. You enter into that block; otherwise, if you allow people to make losses in one block and go to another and make losses, at the end of the day Government will lose out. We are trying to operationalise what is in the agreement and put it in the law so that the government can be properly protected.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, now that one has even made it better for me. If the contract says that that is the only area, which you will trade in, that is different. But for income tax purposes, if you go very well under the law, you aggregate all incomes and expenditures. You know it. Do not be confused by people of Ministry of Finance. You aggregate. There is a difference. 

If the contracts you are having unless you say, this, we are talking about income tax. I am not talking about your losses here and there; I am talking about income tax, you want to see what remains to be taxed if he makes a profit. If there is no profit, he makes a loss, you make a loss. If you leave the country you carry the loss out. That is no problem to us.

There is no way a country will lose. What we are saying is that “As you were in Uganda, how much did you generate as a profit, which is reliable to 30 per cent as tax?” Those are things I am talking about. I am not talking about the recovery; that is business. So, Mr Chairman –(Interruption)

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, hon. Nandala for giving way. Mr Chairman, what I get from hon. Nandala, the assumption is that this person or the licensee who is contracted is going to be given more than one contracted area. I think if that is the case, then the logic he is advancing may apply. (Interjections) No, that is why I want him to actually explain. Are you premising your argument on the basis that this licensee is going to have more than one contracted area?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I do not know how many places or who are involved, it is the Minister for Energy who knows because she is involved with them. Somebody could be in Bunyoro, at the same time in Nwoya. Now, he is making his returns. As he makes his returns, it is very clear that the one of Bunyoro because, it is dry rock, he has got nothing, the one which is wet in Nwoya has made profit. So, when he aggregates his income, he discovers there he made $ 1 million, here he made a loss of $500,000, the balance is only $ 500,000. But you are saying for the other one, you are not allowed a loss, you say the $500,000, you go empty-handed. This is different. 

I am raising this because this is when it is concurrent. But if the man trades, does the work, finishes, he has closed that licence; he cannot claim because that is the end of the licence. But the moment somebody is doing concurrent work at the same time, Mr Chairman, it would be wrong and people will object to this and I can tell you, you will be defeated. 

You can have those things; if I close my licence on this place, then, I come tomorrow for another licence, that is a different story but if there are two or three licences running; in the very year, I must be allowed my expenses because that is my year of income. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, from the accounting point of view, hon. Nandala seems to have a point but I also want to draw his attention to the fact that we are actually creating specific regulations for this industry because it is a special one and we are not only doing this as Uganda. This is the best practice worldwide because it is a complicated business. 

We are not saying we are denying you to recover those losses if you are doing business in other areas. We are saying if you have accumulated for three years, let us first have a toll on the first year. That is what the proposal is saying.

Mr Chairman, I think hon. Nandala should concede and we move forward because the oil industry is a very complicated one. That is why we are creating a special vehicle for this because we want administration of tax from the oil to be very clear. We do not want to confuse that you are going to have a block here, you do business and make losses; then, go and trade in casino and then, mix up and say, “I made losses in the oil here. I want to recover them in my business in casino somewhere.” 

We want to be specific because it is a specialised area that we need to really be clear and also help those who are implementing the tax policy that we have made in this House to be easy for them. We are not saying you are losing your money. No. However, for purposes of tax administration, we want to be very clear.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to refer Mr Nandala to the Income Tax Act, which we passed – 89(C) limitations on deductions. I would like to read it: “An amount that a contractor may deduct under this Act in relation to Petroleum operations undertaken by the contractor in a contract area in a year of income is allowed as a deduction only against the cost of oil derived by the contractor from the operations in the contract area for this year.” That clearly explains what you are actually referring to.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think hon. Bahati who is an accountant is also making a mistake. I respect you, honourable minister. There is where there will be Government sharing of those incomes. I do not mean those ones. I am very clear. Those ones you can do; the proportion the Government is going to take and the investor is going to take, I have not touched that. My interest is, what is left for tax purposes; the profit or the loss? I hope you understand me. I have come from above. In fact, I do not need to know up there because technical people know those technical issues on that. I am looking at what is the end result after those expenditures? That is what I am looking at. 

In that regard, there is no complication. If somebody goes to gamble in a casino, which you are bringing, that is not allowable business expenditure. You know it. Therefore, it would be wrong for you to bring it as an example here because it is unallowable for tax purposes. Who is saying, where professional accountants like this can allow it to pass in the books of any company.

Therefore, Mr Chairman, I even have to go back and show something which is different. The chairman read, “If a licence has a loss carried forward from a licensed area under sub section (3) for more than one year of income, the loss of the previous year shall be allowed at the first deduction.” What do you mean here? You are even making it worse. Listen to it; for more than one year of income, the loss of the previous year shall be allowed as a first deduction. You are saying the loss of the last year would be the first deduction on a call. 

Otherwise, the others can follow later. I hope that is what you are meaning. I do not understand it. That is what you read.

Mr Chairman, I am not yet convinced on this. I need time to be convinced. Otherwise, for income tax purposes, what hon. Bahati is raising cannot apply.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Chairman, I would like to try and convince hon. Nandala by saying that I do not think and I do not see how a person is affected by treating each licence in its own right. Where he makes losses, it is treated in that regard and where he makes profit in a different area, he recovers and it is treated in its right and he recovers those losses if he decided to do more than one business and to operate in more than one area. Therefore, I do not see where you have a problem. I would like to convince you. 

The issue of petroleum and these mining issues; somebody mentioned the word “specialised”. By the time exploration is done, yes, there are certain percentages of hitting the dry well. However, by the time exploration is done, there is a lot of scientific and technical work that has been done that limits the losses. Therefore, if we start confusing and adding one area to another, we are going to get abuses. I know how sensitive and tactical these companies are. We are going to mix up and we are going to cause abuses in this business.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, can I put a question to the preceding ones before we came to this particular amendment? Can we close that area, then this remains?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Which one, Mr Chairman?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The ones that were read before this one. The amendment up to proposed Section 89(g)? Was it?

MR OKELLO: Proposed section 89 -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: (g)(a). Yes.

MR OKELLO: Yes. We stopped just before 4.10, which is proposed section 89(h)(a).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This particular falls under what? The one we have been discussing?

MR OKELLO: Under proposed section 89(h).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Therefore, we stop at Section 89(f) which is -  Can you help me where you stopped before we came to this particular one? Your document is different from mine. That is what is confusing us.

Therefore, the matter that we have been handling now is the one we are not going to put a question on. However, all the preceding ones; I think I can put the question to the ones before this – the amendments that were proposed before the proposed section 89(h) now under clause 10. I put the question to those amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: For this clause, which is being problematic, can we stand over them now because honourable members, I think you can appreciate the kind of difficulty that we are all facing. This is the first Bill I have handled where the amendments are bigger than the Bill. (Laughter) Ordinarily, if it was not because of the spirit of transition, we would have thrown out this Bill and they come back later because you cannot have amendments bigger than the Bill.

However, it is the spirit of the transition that is making us try to make accommodations to these rather strange procedures. It is because these amendments are too many. It does not make ordinary sense.

I think we will stop at this point and handle the next sets of amendments from where hon. Mafabi raised the objections. We will continue from that point.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME
8.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House resumes and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to that motion.
(Question put and agreed to.)
(House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
8.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2015” and passed some clauses.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Passed clause 1, stood over clause - Please, go in that order.

MR BAHATI: Okay. Passed clause 1, stood over clause 2, passed clauses 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,8,9 and some parts of -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clause 8 was stood over; did we pass it?

MR BAHATI: It was passed and some part of clause 10-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I did not complete clause 10.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE 

8.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. We had thought we would complete this Bill as well but I think the complications are a bit many. We need to come back and handle it properly. 

We are also aware that the committees are not ready with most of the reports. Now we do not have any report that is ready, except for the Committee on East African Community Affairs which has been ready. However, it has not yet been submitted to the Office of the Speaker.

Therefore, honourable members, this House will be adjourned to enable the committees finalise from tomorrow, Monday and Tuesday. We will resume on Wednesday at 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 8.08 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 20 May 2015 at 2.00 p.m.)
