Friday, 18 May 2012

Parliament met at 10.41 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good morning and welcome, honourable members. We have a long day today and thank you for coming early. 

On a sad note, I would like to inform the House that the former MP, hon. Moses Kizige, Senior Presidential Advisor Special Duties in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, has lost a son, Jesse Kizige, a senior six student at Greenhill Academy. It occurred yesterday, 17 May 2012, at 11.00 p.m. There will be a funeral service at St Andrew’s Church Bukoto tomorrow, Saturday 19th, at 9.00 a.m. Burial will take place on Sunday, 20th, in Kamuli starting with a prayer at 12.00 noon. May his soul rest in eternal peace!

Today is one of those days when we have an Order Paper running on three pages and there is a lot of business to handle. I think we can proceed with the items which are available. 

RESPONSE ON THE ISSUES RAISED BY MEMBERS ON THE NATIONAL YOUTH
VENTURE CAPITAL FUND

10.43
MR PETER OGWANG(NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Mr Speaker, first of all, I want to thank Government for the initiative of giving us the fund. However, we have the following observations:

I would like to request government to lay on the Table the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) it signed with the commercial banks. We are requesting for the MoU because we are getting contradicting information from commercial banks, which makes us, youth representatives, think that what we are discussing in Parliament is contrary to what is in the MoU. 

Why are we saying this? The banks are still requesting for CRB cards yet the minister one time laid on the Table or read a statement here saying that those cards will only be requested for from successful applicants. I can give you an example. Banks go ahead and mobilise these young people and after they have mobilised the young people, they open up accounts. However, out of those mobilised, maybe two or three can access the money.

Another issue which is very critical is the issue of the funds. In almost all the banks, there is no specific loan officer who is in charge of managing this fund. If you look at the document the minister one time tabled on the Floor, she told us that in each branch there was going to be a specific officer to manage the fund. 

An area which has caused a lot of controversy is the grace period. To be fair, the minister told us here openly that there was going to be a one-year grace period for the borrowers. But to be fair-

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I had no intentions of interrupting my colleague but Item No. 3 on the Order Paper is talking about response to issues raised by members. We are still touching the issues and yet the sector minister is not even in the House. I wonder how they will be able to respond to the supplementary issues which the honourable member, the Eastern Youth MP, is raising. I beg to – I think now the minister is here

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister is here. Hon. Ogwang, restate the issue you raised.

MR OGWANG: The issue, which I began with -Maybe let me begin from the last one, the issue of the grace period. The Minister of Finance said in a statement that the grace period for this fund was going to be one year. However, if you borrowed money today or tomorrow, you will be requested to begin repaying next month. I wonder what the provision for this was - telling Parliament that there was going to be a grace period of one year.

Two, look at the specific areas where the money was going to be borrowed from, for instance agro-processing; the banks are entirely focussing on small businesses which are available but if you look at agriculture, you cannot get any money. 

Getting back to the issue of banks; in all these banks in the country - DFCU, Stanbic Bank and Centenary Bank - there are no specific officers charged with the responsibility of co-ordinating this fund. The worst is lack of co-ordinated information on the fund. You go here, they ask you for a land title; you go there, they say that for you to be a guarantor, you must have a specific amount of money in that bank. It makes us wonder what the problem is with the fund.

There is also the issue of the fund being accessible to some districts. Over the weekend, we had youths from all over the country here. I want to talk about some districts in hard-to-reach areas like Amudat, Nakapiripirit, Bukwo, parts of Kween. These banks are not there. What are we going to talk – (Interruption) -In fact, my colleague has reminded me of Manafwa. 

An area which is also contentious is guarantors. I think Government needs to help these young people. If I have a business, why not choose my business to guarantee me a loan other than telling me that you have to have someone to be a guarantor and if you default, you fail to pay. 

Those are the few observations that I had about the youth fund. In conclusion, I request Government to revise the way this fund should be handled and also put in place an appeal system. There are those who have jumped in trying to go and access the money. However, you might fulfil all the requirements and at the end of the day you cannot access the money. So, how are you going to appeal? To which office do you appeal to for you to be given this money?

Also, the minister one time told us that those who are going to be the first beneficiaries will not be entitled to again getting the same fund. However, there are some young people who have been doing business, they have been accessing loans and they want to get this money, but when they go to these banks they are barred from accessing it. The package of the youth fund is different from the main financial loans from these respective banks. This is the youth fund and should not be treated like any other fund.

10.50
DR OLUSEGUN OMONA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Ogwang for raising the challenges that we meet with the Youth Capital Venture Fund. I want to say that we have got problems, and we have registered so many challenges with this fund. About two weeks ago, I survived a beating by the youth in my constituency. When I spoke to them, they told me that what I was telling them is a complete lie. 

We have tried our best to satisfy these conditions, but the banks give us different messages. In my district, for example, all the banks that the youth accessed asked them to produce guarantors who are 40 years and above, but most of the people who could guarantee them were young men doing business. So I think, like hon. Ogwang said, we need to see the memorandum of understanding that the ministry signed with these banks so that we can convey the right message to our people.

Secondly, there is mixed information about this money, which should be corrected. The challenge we get from the districts is that the young people, especially those in our constituencies in the countryside, feel that they may be sidelined because many of them are not acquainted with the complexity of modern business. For them to believe that this money is meant for every youth in this country, with equal opportunities, they propose that there should be equitable sharing of these monies. 

They say that you should specifically say that each region is allocated this amount of money. They believe that others who are better placed, say in Kampala and elsewhere, may access the money more easily than those in the countryside. Probably, this too should be taken into consideration so that our youth who may take some time to qualify may also access it. Thank you very much.

10.53
MS EVELYN ANITE (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you in a very special way for always giving us this opportunity and bringing back the issue of the youth fund on the Order Paper. 

Mr Speaker, from the reading of the Budget, - the day the youth fund was mentioned - we the youth MPs have not been getting any rest. Honourable members might have read in the newspapers how the young people of Acholi sub region came to my office demanding for this money and saying that if I do not explain to them carefully, they were going to censure me. It was as if I am Government itself. I know I am in Government because I came here on the Government ticket, but I could not explain the source of the money in details. 

What is happening on the ground, and in the banks in particular, is that the issue of O’level certificates has resurfaced. We resolved here in Parliament that the issue of O’levels should be removed from the requirement list. I disguised myself as an ordinary youth and I decided to go to the bank in my district. I was very shocked when the loan officer asked me to produce my O’level certification. Apart from the O’level certificate, he asked me to produce my land title and bring two guarantors. The loan officer in Stanbic Bank Koboko told me that the guarantors you bring should also declare their financial assets. They should declare how much money they own in the bank and how much wealth they own outside the bank. 

Mr Speaker, it has been a big problem. The young people are running, right, left and centre. They cannot take the word that we are telling them. At the end of the day, I told the loan officer that I am youth MP and showed him the guidelines that we approved with the minister. We have been making an effort to speak to the Minister of Finance, hon. Maria Kiwanuka. She told us to go with everything we get on the ground that is contrary to what we had agreed. 

The loan officer told me, “Are you aware that this money is not for Government? Are you aware that we, the banks, have put in Shs 12 billion?” I told him that we know that, but Government has told us that they put money in this bank for the young people to access and we know it is not free money. All we want is to meet the requirements that have been agreed upon between the Ministry of Finance and the banks. 

Then the loan officer told me, “We are not going to give you this money for free. There are other better loans here; if you want, come and get them. Leave this money of Government alone because it is a myth and not reality.” Now, if this happened to me, the youth MP, how about the young people I represent who do not have the information? It is a very big challenge. 

On 14th, that was Monday, we organised a meeting under the Parliamentary Youth Forum and we invited all the district youth leaders to come and give us their testimonies. Their testimonies were worrying. They said they cannot access this money.

Finally, we are aware that the Government of Uganda made a promise to the youth of this country that they will give us Shs 44.5 billion. What has come out clearly is the Shs 25 billion. The Shs 2.29 billion that we lobbied for on the Floor of this Parliament and asked to be sent to the Ministry of Gender has not gone to the ministry to date – (Interjection) – I am informed. I have been following this very critically; I do not need information on that. We had a meeting with the minister responsible for youth on this issue. He told us that truly, they have not accessed this money and he wanted us to lobby the Ministry of Finance to get the money so that it gets to the Ministry of Gender. 

What discouraged us most was that our mother ministry, which should stand with us at all times, was the one bringing in the idea of O’level certificates as a requirement. When we dug deeper to find out why they insisted on this, our youth minister told us that they told him that the initial intention of this money was to benefit those who have A’level qualifications but they have just come down to O’level.

Mr Speaker, I want the Minister of State for Youth to come and iron out this problem, much as we want the money to go to the Ministry of Gender. Also, the Ministry of Finance should tell us why they are not sending the money to them. Thank you.

11.00
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To me, this issue is not only for MPs representing the youth; this issue is for all of us – (Interruption)

MS NAMARA: Mr Speaker, I thank you for allowing this debate to go on. However, in my understanding, this issue was debated for almost two days. It is an issue that does not only concern youth representatives; it is a biting, passionate issue that really concerns us all as Members of Parliament. 

A lot was said and there is nothing new we expect. A lot of controversy has been put in the newspapers, and of recent, there was a halt from the President. So, I do not know whether it is procedurally right to again allow the debate to go on and yet Government is not coming out to give us a response. I thought it would be better to allow Government respond and then from there we could see the way forward,– (Applause) – otherwise, we shall talk and talk and yet these issues are already known by the Government. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to make some response?

11.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Ms Caroline Okao): I thank you so much. I would like to take this opportunity to thank my honourable colleagues for the pertinent issues they have raised. Noting that the concerns raised by the honourable members are very pertinent, and also noting that our youth out there have been waiting for so long, as we earlier communicated to you, Mr Speaker, our position is that we have to give a very comprehensive statement to this House. As a ministry, we have considered the issues and concerns that were raised at one time and which we were supposed to respond to as a ministry, and also those that are being raised today are very pertinent and important.  

We, as a ministry, are going to do this during the Budget Speech–

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I thank you very much. I know that the honourable minister has not been in exile; she has been in this country. Secondly, she has a constituency that she represents. Thirdly, she is the minister responsible for microfinance where most of the youth are employed. Fourthly, I have constantly seen her attending Parliament when we are discussing these matters. Now she rises at this time to say that according to the issues that we have been raising and are raising now, she wants to present a comprehensive statement. I am wondering where she has been.

Is she in order to just come up at this time as if we are at a tea party? This is not a tea party but a serious matter! Our youth want money! Is she in order to treat us as casual? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that was a point of order and I need to rule. You might be interested in hearing the ruling. (Laughter)

When this matter came on the Order Paper yesterday, I remember that I communicated to you the situation that was obtaining in the Ministry of Finance and a letter was sent to me. The Madam Speaker and I insisted that this matter should come back today because Members are facing difficulties in their constituencies. (Applause)

This morning, we still got information that the substantive minister who should be handling this matter is not yet ready with some documents – (Interjections) -Would you like to listen? I am not a minister! There have been some correspondences from the President that came three days ago that they need to incorporate in the new guidelines that they will come back to Parliament with, and that is why the minister who is on the Floor is asking for time so that they come and handle this thing comprehensively.

At the beginning when this matter was called for discussion, I allowed more information to be brought to enrich the content of what may come from the ministry, in my judgement, based on information that was available in the Office of the Speaker. That is why we were proceeding that way. So, honourable members, I ask you to provide more information, and the minister who is in the House should be able to gather this information and then we come back. As you are aware, we may not actually be able to prorogue Parliament today as we may need to do other things before we do that. 

What we want is not information that is not complete. You cannot squeeze water out of a stone because if it is not there, then it is not there. What we are going to do is to allow more information to come from the debate. The minister will take note and then we shall ask at the end for a timeframe within which they should come back to this House. So, let us give more information. I will give this debate another 20 minutes, two minutes each. The honourable member for Rukungiri Municipality was on the Floor.

MR MUGUME: I thank you very much. The point that I wanted to raise is on sensitisation about this fund. As my colleagues have said, we have a very big problem; first of all, we lack information on this fund. This is not only faced by Members of Parliament but also members at the district councils.

I think this issue, to me, should be bottom up. The councillors should have information at that level because it can help us to know how we can sensitise these people. What is on the ground is that there is no information. So, we are in a very serious problem. We need information and literature about this fund.

Members will recall that in 1992/93, the Entandikwa Fund was introduced. Up to today, entandikwa is still a myth. I can see this fund following suit. You cannot tell me that the money is in the bank and as a Member of Parliament I should go and tell my youth that there is money, but you go to the bank and there is no information. You go to the district and the secretary of youth has no information. So, there is a very big problem.

Secondly, if this information exists, we need to decentralise this information to the respective banks that we have in the districts. If my Stanbic Bank in Rukungiri, for example, had this information, we would not be getting this problem. Some of these banks which are dealing with these issues are centralised and the youth, who should be the beneficiaries, are not getting this money. 

Thirdly and lastly, I would like to talk about the double standards with the NRM Government. Mr Speaker, when going to contest for mayorship, you do not need any qualification. If you are going to contest for LCIII chairperson, you do not need any qualification. Why then do you need to have a senior 4 certificate to access this fund? We know that the people who want this money are those who have not even stepped in a school. So, I think we need to clarify on this issue – (Member timed out)

11.11
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think most of us, if not all, have visited a bank to ask for a loan, and in this House there are people who are educated. Who of you was asked to produce academic documents in the bank as criteria for qualifying for the loan? So, do you think the government is genuine in bringing any abnormality into the banking sector?

They are stressing people in need, the youth, who cannot even get loans where academic documents are not asked for. This is supposed to be a special case but here is a case where what is not asked of you, an able person, is asked of a person in need. So, is this a genuine government that wants to help the youth? My youth in Obongi, listen to me; the youth of Uganda, listen to me. This is a deception. The Government is not interested in helping you by providing you with means of capital through arrangements of a loan -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you addressing the House or some other audience? (Laughter)

MR FUNGAROO: I am speaking to the Parliament.(Laughter). Thank you, Mr Speaker. The point is very clear here – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member should ask permission from the Speaker to address the country because I only gave you permission to address the House. Proceed.

MR FUNGAROO: Most obliged. The first point which needs to be addressed here is the issue of qualifications. If I have never been asked to produce my academic qualifications in the bank in order to access a loan, if a minister, a professor or other people who are given loans from the banks are not given these conditions, why should you demand them from a vulnerable person who, on the basis of affirmative action you are helping using the loan? Let that person – (Member timed out)

11.14
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to declare my interests before I say what I am about to say on this subject matter. I come from Acholi sub region and I am going to zero my comments on that.

Ninety-eight percent of these people lived in IDPs for over two decades. I am one of those who lived in IDPs. I want the Ministry of Finance, when they come to this House to make their final presentation on this subject matter of the youth fund, to tell us how a young Ugandan who comes from the part of the country where I come from, having lived in an IDP for over two decades, will get a business to start up first before they can access such a fund. I want the minister to tell us, I want the government to tell us frankly how the people who have been in conflict for over two decades can get money to start up businesses. You come during the State of the Nation Address, during the Budget Speech and say, “Youth, we have money for you to start up your businesses”!

I want the ministry to tell us; most of my generation missed out on school while in the IDP camps. So, the majority of my people do not have the minimum qualification of O’level. Really, if the ministry wants to help us access these funds, which have been given to us by those banks as they claim, which is true anyway, I want them to reconsider. I want them to reconsider that if we want to help the young Ugandans we must scrap all those tough conditions that are attached to – (Member timed out_)

11.16
MR VINCENT SEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on two brief points. On the issue of who is supposed to do the sensitisation, Mr Speaker, we read in the papers that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is in conflict with the Minister of Finance on the issue of who is to lead the sensitisation. As usual, we thought that the Ministry of Finance is trying to cling onto this money, even to do the sensitisation of the youth. What we are saying is that the Prime Minister should be very clear about this and indicate which ministry should lead the sensitisation process. 

Secondly, during this recess, I am very sure that the youth are anxiously waiting for us. They want an answer from the MPs because the issue has been ongoing for some time. They do not expect us to go back without an answer. So, as we decide on getting a report from the Ministry of Finance, we must know that we are going to get a lot of pressure from the youth who are waiting for this answer. I do not know whether we shall receive the report when in recess. Thank you very much. 

11.18
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have two issues to raise on this issue of the youth fund. 

First of all, we have the element of sensitisation. The youth have continuously loitered, trying to get information about this fund. They go to their representatives and they say they do not have any information. They go to the district and there is no information. They come to us, the Members of Parliament, and we do not have adequate information. They go to the banks and the banks tell them, “Maybe if you want another loan, you can start the process.” These people are confused. It is high time that we are given the right information so that we can decide the way forward for these youth in order to access this fund. 

Secondly, when you look at our country, we have areas which have difficulties in accessing financial institutions. A case in point is Bukwo District. There, people have to walk for 100 kilometres to access either Stanbic Bank or Centenary Bank. The costs they incur to access these funds are much more than the interest that they pay. So, I do not know how Government is going to recover this money. By the time these youth access these funds, they will have used a lot of money in the process. If, for example, one has to stay in one place for a week paying for accommodation and upkeep, the interest will be thrice!

I think those issues have to be put into consideration by the ministry if we are to help these youth, especially those in the hard-to-reach areas like Bukwo and other similar areas.

11.21
MR PATRICK NAKABALE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To begin with, I would like to say that Government and other stakeholders should use the youth fund in the previous budget to ascertain and study the loopholes and strengths, and agree to the successes and failures realised.

I would like to inform the House and the responsible minister that we need to have the Government set aside this money at the Treasury and not depend on the goodwill of commercial banks. All these challenges are coming up because a lot of what we seek is dependent on the banks because they contributed to this fund.

Two, we needed to involve selected youth leaders and individuals in the initial stages of conceptualisation, planning, drafting and implementation of this programme. We are facing these challenges because it looks like this programme was forced onto the youth. This may be true because there were no orientation and awareness campaigns administered for these youth. 

Also, we needed to have a committee or a council of eminent youth to follow up on this project. They would be constantly reporting to the relevant authorities from time to time.

As of now, we need to carry out a survey on how far we have gone with this fund, to ascertain the number of youth who have so far accessed this fund. That way, we will be able to establish why others have not accessed it. In the same vein, we will be able to establish why terms of reference are always changing from time to time.

I also notice that we lack clear monitoring and evaluation methods. If you compare this project to what is happening in other countries, which I and my other colleagues have visited, you realise that in Uganda we still have weaknesses on the part of monitoring and evaluation as far as this fund is concerned.(Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, my 20 minutes allocated to this subject are up. In the circumstances, I will only allow one person from both front benches, the Opposition and Government. 

11.23
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Winnie Kiiza): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to make a contribution in regard to this matter. When this fund was mentioned in the budget for this financial year, many youth in Uganda had smiles. We actually thought that something was going to change. However, from time to time, issues arose about why the money had not gone to the ministry responsible for the youth. That remained a question.

Mr Speaker, there is a time we met the Minister of Finance and she said that the issue to do with age limit had been dealt with. She told us that the challenge they were facing then was how to disburse that money to the youth. At that time, she assured us that they had put into consideration the many other financial programmes that Government engaged in; she said they were learning from the challenges and therefore this scheme was bound to be better than the former ones they had handled before – (Interruptions)

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, hon. Winnie Kiiza, for giving way. I also thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me give this information. If we are going to give this money to each of the estimated five million youth, each will get Shs 5,000. If you are going to give Shs 100,000, like it had been agreed, to each youth, only 250youth will access this loan even when there are no conditions. 

In this regard, may I give information in terms of a question; I would like to ask whether these conditions are not meant to bridge that gap? I am saying this because if there were no conditions and every youth accesses the money, it would cater for only 250 youth, each getting Shs 100,000, and if all of them are to get something each of them will get Shs 5,000.

MS KIIZA: Thank you so much, but I think that information was meant for the planers of this fund.

The most important thing I want to say is that it now defeats logic to hear that while the financial year is almost coming to the end, no Member of Parliament has any guidelines on who is eligible and who is not eligible to access this fund. This means that even our people down in the villages do not have the correct information.

I still wonder how we run our budgets. A fund that was put in the budget to the tune of more than 40billion, mid-way came down to Shs 25billion and before we end the financial year, the money is nowhere to be seen. Where are we going as a country? Do we draw budgets for the sake of it? We draw budgets because there is something we have to sort out. We should not draw budgets that are cosmetic.

We should draw budgets which are people-focused. I remember when this budget was read we clapped, but now here it seems the people do not know what is due to them. Also as we speak, Members of Parliament do not know what message to be given to the youth. So, where are we going as a country, Mr Speaker?

I want to propose that next time we want to run such an initiative, we need to do some studies so that we are able to determine what can be applicable to our situation. If it is a question of money, let our plan be within our limits and not promising what we will not be able to deliver. If we thought we had only Shs 10 billion, we should have budgeted for only that money in this financial year. We needed to have enabling procedures for the youth on how to access this money. That would have been better than providing for the Shs 40 billion, which has not been heard of. 

We need to style up in our operations as a people of this country. We need to plan properly. It is because we do not plan that even the money for municipalities is still problematic in terms of the population for which it was budgeted for. We are talking about populations of about ten years ago while allocating resources; now we are talking about the youth whose number we do not even know, I presume. So, did you have plans of getting that Shs 40 billion?

Mr Speaker, we should plan not for the sake of it. When doing our national budget, we need to really budget. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, do you have a short statement from your side? 

11.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS(Mr Ronald Kibuule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am happy that you are discussing an important matter. As the youth ministry, we are supposed to do the training. It is true that in the Budget Speech, Enterprise Uganda was supposed to do training and Shs1.0 billion was allocated for that. The guidelines kept on changing because of the memorandum of understanding and other pressing issues by Members of Parliament. 

Today, I am happy to report that Centenary Bank is doing their best. Over 1,000 people have accessed the money. The beneficiaries are there. The problem is the tough conditions. This money was targeted for a particular group. Historically, even the NRM Manifesto – (Interruption)  

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I have received very good news from the honourable minister that a number of youth have received this money. He mentioned a certain figure. Mr Speaker, it would do us good if he could lay those statistics on the Table to convince this House that his ministry is keeping track of the number of youth who are benefiting from this fund instead of just giving us a litany of unrecorded statements. 

MR KIBUULE: Mr Speaker, hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire wants me to lay the facts on the Table. It is true the Ministry of Finance is working closely with the banks and the banks are ready to reveal this information. So, the beneficiaries will be known. We have actually asked them to publish this information. 

The Ministry of Finance signed a Memorandum of Understanding on behalf of Government. The Ministry of Finance, I believe has got facts on every bank that is involved in this partnership, that is, dfcu, Stanbic Bank and Centenary Bank. (Interjection) The 1,370 was as per May but I will bring that list of beneficiaries. If given time, Mr Speaker, I am very ready to do so.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is the Speaker’s Office that brought this matter up for discussion arising from the pressure that the members are facing in their constituencies. If you recall, this matter was not on the Order Paper recently. We considered it necessary because members were raising issues about it and that is why I insisted it should come up. 

So, if there is what might not look like coordination at the frontbench, it is because we just pushed this matter before it was ready. However, it was necessary that this debate should take place – I am telling you what we did from the Speaker’s Office and I wish you could listen to me. Unless you were part of the Speaker’s panel, then you would have better information to give. (Laughter)

This matter was not on the Order Paper. We brought it up because of the pressure that was mounting on members. So, it has been on the Order Paper now for three days. So, the discussions should continue. If the honourable minister has statements that are accurate that they can make, please do that now. 

11.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT(PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am glad you have clarified this matter. As far as the Ministry of Finance or the Executive is concerned, we were not yet ready to come and present a statement to you because we are still studying how far this is going. As I speak now, we are gathering information so that we can come and give you a comprehensive picture. 

Secondly, this matter is going to be comprehensively addressed in the Budget statement, to give you sufficient time when we will be discussing –(Interjections)- That is all I have to state on this matter. 

MRS NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 22 February 2012, it was a Wednesday, in this House the Minister of Finance, hon. Maria Rhoda Nabasirye Kiwanuka, came here and after a lengthy debate, she requested the Speaker to give her up to Wednesday the following week to bring a comprehensive statement after consultations with all the MDs of the commercial banks. She indeed promised that when she returned, she would have a Memorandum of Understanding signed by her ministry with the various banks, and that would be the final position to Parliament on the youth fund. Three months later, the minister of state in the same ministry is here telling Parliament that they are still carrying out the study and that they will give us the report in the next financial year. 

Mr Speaker, is the Minister of State for Finance in order to continue coming to this House to give false information about his ministry. Is it in order for the same ministry to continue promising this House air now and then, and causing a lot of anxiety among the youth of this country? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am supposed to make a ruling on this but I will allow hon. Ssewungu to make a short statement first. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wanted to respond to hon. Kibuule, the Minister of State for Youth. He was talking about Centenary Bank giving out these loans to the youth. It is true that they were given some money, but a youth who wants Shs5 million is instead given Shs1million.This is happening in urban areas, according to the information I have.

Secondly, those conditions must be revised. That is the major problem with the banks. If conditions are not revised, there is a problem. Youth do not have land titles, and that is one of the major problems we are facing. So, I would think the ministers of finance and that for youth should revise these conditions. If these conditions are not revised, there is no way youth will benefit from this loan. Centenary Bank is giving the loans but the youth are not happy with the money they are getting because it cannot do anything.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the point of order that was raised by the hon. Nambooze is whether the Minister of State for Finance is in order to come back and promise another statement. The situation of this is so dynamic and changing by the day and we have also received this information in the Speaker’s Office. So, if a question is raised today you report tomorrow, by the time you are reporting tomorrow there might be another situation that you need to clarify on. 

We have agreed that they should be given a final chance to put their act together. We have also heard that the President again wrote a letter about three days ago and sent it to the Minister of Finance. All these are new situations. So, I do not think there is any violation of any order for the request as long as we keep on being updated on the subject before the House.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, with humility, I am standing on a point of procedure in search of your guidance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, you are very welcome back to Parliament. (Laughter)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. About two months ago, the Leader of Government Business assured this House that in the very shortest time possible, he would be ensuring that reports from inquiries on fires that gutted Kasubi Tombs, Kibwetere fires, Kanungu, Buddo Junior School and other related places would be coming to this House. The same leader of the government side said that a report on allegations that Uganda Museum was being sold would equally come here. 

Mr Speaker, public funds were spent to carry out those inquiries. So, I would like to know whether the continuous failure and refusal of Government to produce these reports does not tantamount to not being in charge of public affairs. If they are not in charge, let us get in charge as the Opposition. So, is it procedurally right for them to continue deceiving this House that they are producing reports, which reports were produced using public funds, and we are quiet when there are no reports? If there are no reports, let the Opposition produce those reports. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable member has raised a question of who is in charge. Just to guide the House, the next elections are in four years’ time and that is the only time, under the Constitution, that this could be reviewed.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UNITS OF ACCOUNT 40 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING THE RURAL WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION PROGRAMME

11.43 
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Birahwa Mukitaale): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for giving us the opportunity. On behalf of the Committee on National Economy, I would like to present the committee report on the request by Government to borrow UA 40 million, approximately US$ 62. 81 million, from AFDBfor financing rural water supply and sanitation programme. 

Mr Speaker, since you have guided that I have very few minutes and we have many items to present, I will summarise but request that the Hansard captures the report. It is also important that the Minister of Finance briefs Parliament, and we have catered for copies of the brief. So, I will ask members to follow both the report and the brief to Parliament, which is also ready, so that we can move in tandem. 

Mr Speaker, the committee held meetings with Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; Ministry of Water and Environment; and the Committee on Natural Resources, which will be responsible for implementation. We also did look at the brief of the loan request, which is being circulated now, and the programme appraisal documents, the implementation plan, and the draft loan financing agreement, which I request to lay on the Table. 

We also requested the Ministry of Water to provide all Members of Parliament with a copy of Uganda Water Atlas. I lay a copy on the Table. For those who may have missed out, some 20 or 30 copies are on the table for your reference. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you just lay the copy on the Table without seeking permission? 

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the Water Atlas – Can I read one by one?  I request to lay on the Table the loan agreement between the Republic of Uganda and ADB.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Doesn’t it have a date? Give small details, please.

MR MUKITALE: It is a draft pending parliamentary approval, which we are yet to do. So, this is a draft agreement. We have responses from the ministry during the time they interacted with Members of Parliament. Copies should also be available for members. I beg to lay the responses on the Table.  

The water and sanitation development facility document, the clarification-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Lay them one by one, honourable chairman. 

MR MUKITALE: I lay on the Table the programme appraisal report; the responses when the committee interacted with the two ministries; the brief to Parliament; and then the tariff policy for small water supplies. This is because this project, among others, benefits small towns.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that. 

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, this project has four components and it is based on sub–sector assessment. 

Government of Uganda developed a comprehensive sector strategy and sector investment plan covering the following areas: 
(i) 	Rural water supply and sanitation;
(ii) 	Urban water supply and sanitation;  
(iii) 	Water for production;
(iv)	Water resource management.

On page 2, you can see the components on the rural water supply. On page 3, we have a table of the small towns’ coverage for the whole country and down, we have the rationale for the bank involvement.

On page 4 we have the programme goal. The national goal of Uganda’s water supply and sanitation sector is to increase access to water supply and sanitation services from 65 percent and 70 percent respectively in 2010, to 100 percent by 2035.While the objective of the proposed WSSP is to support Government of Uganda efforts to achieve sustainable provision of safe water and hygienic sanitation, based on management responsibility and ownership by users, to 77 percent of the population in rural areas and 90 percent of the small urban towns’ population by 2015.

The programme target and the programme type follow. On page 5, we give the components. The table gives the components. On page-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairman, go by the numbering on the paragraphs.

MR MUKITALE: Okay, Sir. Let me mention here that there is also a component targeting the rural water supply component, which is targeting areas of Lirima gravity flow scheme, which covers Manafwa, Mbale and Tororo; the Bududa gravity flow scheme which covers Bududa, Bulucheke and Bukigai; and then Bukwo gravity flow scheme, which covers Kamet, Kortek, Kabei, Liwo, Tulel and Bukwo Town Council.

The Programme Cost 
As clearly tabulated, the grand total is US$ 40 million and as you can see, the components are listed therein.

The implementation arrangement is on 6.0 where we have given the -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it US$ 40 million?

MR MUKITALE: No, Sir. It is 40 units of accounts, converted to approximately US$ 62.81 million.

Point 6.0 gives the implementation programme right from the arrangement, disbursement and governance. I am abiding to the time limit. 

Procurement is 6.4, and thereafter financial management, monitoring, sustainability and risk management. That takes us to 7.0, the loan terms and conditions. This facility is largely concessional. The 40 units of accounts are at a service charge of 0.75 percent, commitment charge of 0.5 percent, maturity period of 50 years including 10 years of grace. 

This is largely a concessional facility, and the conditions attached include:

Utilisation of the grant is conditional upon acquisition and utilisation of the loan, submission of the legal opinion of the Attorney-General, opening by Government of a special account in Bank of Uganda to receive the proceeds of financing.

Releases of the funding to be based on four tranches: the first tranche is of fulfilment of conditions of effectiveness of loan and grant agreement and subsequent tranches to be based on recommendations of joint budget support framework, following the agreed procurement guidelines in line with PPDA.

Keeping abreast with governance issues in the sector especially as regards public financial management; and continued enhancement of financial management in the districts to avoid fiduciary risks associated with poor budget formulation and preparation.

Let me move straight to 8.0, observations and recommendations. The committee observed as follows: 

Government recognises that the private sector presents viable resources that can contribute to design and construction, cooperation and maintenance, training and capacity building in the water and sanitation sector and is presently being used in contracted water supply implementation roles. We find this commendable.

Furthermore, though the government policy of water supply provision and maintenance recognises other forms of investments for water supplies, the investments in piped water supplies are mainly entrusted to the Central Government due to the heavy investment involvement of urban/rural water sewerage systems. 

The committee recommends that Government expeditiously explores other viable forms of PPP to promote the role of the private sector in mobilising and financing resources for the water and sanitation sector through Build-own-operate or build-operate-transfer. The committee has, in many reports, been asking for the PPP law and this is just another reminder.

The committee observed the ever rising per capita costs of providing water and sanitation services by both local and central Government as a cause of concern. Lack of adequate funding is the single biggest challenge affecting sanitation and hygiene for all. Despite the presence of a sanitation budget line in the budgets of the three line ministries in charge of promoting sanitation in the country - i.e. Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education and Sports, and Ministry of Water and Environment - there has been little progress towards the agreed target of allocating 0.5 percent of GDP to sanitation as it should be.

The committee further observed that collaboration is still a major problem for the water and sanitation sector, mostly at district level but also at national level. Sanitation falls in the ambit of a number of ministries and there is need for better and strong coordination in all the line ministries. Better communication and information sharing is needed between the relevant central government ministries, development partners, civil society agencies to ensure coordination, accountability and consolidation of interventions in order to achieve agreed sector targets.

The committee therefore recommends that to get sanitation back on track, there is need to bridge the financing gap with concrete financial commitments from the government. All the three line ministries in charge of promoting sanitation in the country should adequately and comprehensively, in an integrated manner, finance their dedicated sanitation budget line. However, better sanitation financing should go hand in hand with smart utilisation of available resources. 

The committee further recommends for the reviewing of sanitation memoranda of understanding between all line ministries and establishment of sanitation specific performance contracts in all the line ministries and local governments.

In addition, the committee also recommends for the need for inter-sectoral coordination between national and local ministries with civil society to enhance optimal outcome, accountability and avoid duplication of efforts. 

In addition, there is need to improve coordination and information management between sector-wide development partners and organisations with a crosscutting portfolio to be given opportunities to participate in sanitation decision making processes.

The committee observed that although new water sources were being constructed every year, the pace of rehabilitating old ones is still a challenge to the ministry. A number of districts are still not able to renovate a number of broken boreholes and shallow wells. The problem of sanitation and provision of safe clean water to the community therefore remains unfeasible and may impact negatively on the health of the communities affected. More so, districts are increasingly being overwhelmed with the number of dysfunctional water sources which may be a bottleneck to priority planning and sources of waterborne diseases. 

Mr Speaker, the observations we make do not necessarily have to be cured by the loan we are dispensing. The recommendations to the plenary, where we report, are intended to guide the ministry and other stakeholders for future interventions so that we do not limit ourselves to the loan. 

The committee recommends that Government finds an appropriate way forward with a view of stepping up a budget allocation for rehabilitation and repair separate from installing the new sources. 

The committee observed that some of the activities under this programme involved putting up infrastructure in form of gravity flow schemes and public sanitation facilities in selected beneficiary areas in the central region. Although the water policy states that the location of water facilities is demand-driven and therefore land should be provided by the would-be beneficiaries, delays in obtaining ownership of land puts Government properties at risk of being encroached by unscrupulous persons. 

Colleagues, you are aware that we have had a problem where Government was installing big water sources on people’s land with their own land titles. If the owner fences of that land, the neighbours cannot approach it. So we continue finding land acquisition a problem in most utilities, not only water but roads and transmission lines as well. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Water and Environment should ensure timely obtaining of land ownership on these facilities given the huge investments that will be involved. Government should also consider re-visiting the policy regarding land acquisition for water and other utilities. 

It was further noted that current settlement pattern does not favour economical service delivery hence the persistent borehole syndrome, which is very costly. The committee therefore recommends that Government explores other cost-effective methods especially for rural water supply. 

Further, Government should come up with policies on land use planning with clear settlement areas where services can be provided in a cost-effective manner. We think urbanisation is one way where it is easier to provide services when people are living in one place. It would be easy to give water, electricity, education and health, for example. 

The committee has been reporting here that the borehole syndrome should be overcome, aware that maintenance is a problem and some technical sighting is a problem. So, we could do more water supplying instead of districts putting a lot of money in boreholes, which, at the end of the day, do not function.

In conclusion, the committee appreciates the water and sanitation issues, constraints, needs and challenges faced in the country while recognising the steps Government has taken in addressing them. 

The committee further notes that there is need for reforms in the sector and increased funding in order to meet set priorities and targets for increasing access to safe drinking water. 

The committee, therefore, supports and recommends this House to approve the request by Government to borrow UA 40 million from AfDB to finance rural water supply and sanitation programmes. 

Apart from the annex, which gives you the towns and selection criteria, we also have, on page 9, Annex II, a list of selected towns – actually they are in 25 districts, including Kalangala. When you look at the brief to Parliament, which I am sure you have got by now, you will be able to corroborate this information. These details are given therein. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to request the honourable members to support this programme as we urge Government to find more money to make sure that we achieve the targets. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, committee chairperson, for that elaborate report. You have made observations and recommended that this House approves this request. 

Honourable members, let me announce to you that in the VIP Gallery we have hon. Margaret Ateng, former Member of Parliament for Lira, and hon. Margaret Zziwa, Member of the EALA. They have come to follow the proceedings on the EALA in this House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Honourable members, we have heard the report of the committee which recommends that we approve the loan request. Does the sector minister have something to say on this?(Applause)

12.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER (Mrs Betty Bigombe): Mr Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. Before I proceed, I must say I am a little confused as I have lost focus; I could not understand the reaction from the Floor. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They are just encouraging you to proceed. (Laughter)

MRS BIGOMBE: I am happy and proud to receive this special attention. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

The report outlines the challenges and the progress that the ministry is trying to make to improve services countrywide. Let me add a little bit on some of the observations and recommendations that the committee has made. 

Part of the efforts by the ministry in providing sufficient services to the people include promotion of public-private partnerships, especially at district level. The other effort being made is that we are in the process of establishing regional offices so that the district officials do not have to travel to Kampala for issues that arise from their areas. This is an on-going process and I hope it should be completed in the next couple of months. We are starting with four regional offices and then at some point in time, depending on the availability of funds, we will open more regional offices. 

That is in general, but I will go to a few specific recommendations. As far as sanitation is concerned, although we work in partnership with the ministries of education and health, and although the mandate for sanitation is in the Ministry of Health, it is only the Ministry of Water and Environment that provides a budget for sanitation. To every district, we release Shs 20 million, which you will all agree with me is peanuts, to address the issue of sanitation. So, it is my hope that while we collaborate with the other two line ministries, there will also be budget allocation so that the districts can receive adequate funds to promote sanitation programmes. 

On page 5, the committee recommends for the need to have inter-sectoral coordination between national and local ministries. I have already explained that there is that collaboration but it is only Ministry of Water and Environment that provides budget support to the sub-sector.

I will also add in here that to a large extent, we are experiencing shortage of staff to be able to carry out the duties countrywide. It is my hope too that the Ministry of Public Service will allow us to recruit more staff so that we have equitable distribution of staff upcountry or in the districts. 

On the budget allocation, that recommendation has been taken and I hope the Ministry of Finance has taken note of that because this is our biggest constraint. 

On the issue of land ownership, we are handling it. There is a policy, and this is also emphasised by development partners that wherever a project area is identified, we negotiate with the land owners. The policy is very clear that land owners are compensated so that there is no dispute. 

On the recommendation that Government explores other means or other methods for supply of water in rural areas, at the moment the ministry is in the process of carrying out a pilot project. We intend to procure solar panel pumps so that they can be installed in rural settings, but more importantly, in small towns- (Interruption)

MRS OSEGGE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure. I do not quite understand what the minister is doing. I thought the minister would respond after we have had a debate. I do not know whether it will be necessary for her to respond again after the members have debated. She is already making closing remarks on all the recommendations of the committee. Will it still be relevant for us to go ahead and debate and make any input if the minister is going to close at this point?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is like a court of law. The committee has spoken, the minister who is defending the law should speak and then you allow the debate, and then she closes with the general closure of the debate. It is only fair that we do that. Honourable minister, please continue.

MRS BIGOMBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was talking about the pilot scheme which is in the pipeline, that is, to acquire solar panel pumps so that they can be distributed in small towns as well as some rural settings. If this pilot scheme works well, then we hope to expand it so that we can reach all corners of the country. This is in an effort to make sure that we increase in line with the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), but also for the commitment of Uganda Government to ensure that by 2035, all Ugandans, irrespective of where they are, will have access to safe water. Those are the comments I have in response to the committee. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the matters have been reported on by the committee and the honourable minister has made some responses on the issues raised by the committee. I am going to allow debate of 20 minutes. Is that fair? Each member will speak for two minutes. There is lots of other business for us to capture. The shadow minister will speak at the end so that you respond to all the issues. I will give you time to respond at the end. 

12.17
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to raise concern as a Member of Parliament representing a municipality. We are both urban and rural in most of our municipalities. The last study done by Ministry of Local Government in Lira Municipality found that almost all of our boreholes had been contaminated. There was just one which was not contaminated by the environment and the situation in the peri-urban areas.

At the same time, many of the water sources provided by the National Water and Sewerage Corporation had been closed down due to non-payment. At one stage, Government was looking into prepaid metres for urban environments but within the municipalities we are yet to see them. This is something which could help in the circumstances. 

Another area of concern, even before we start exploring private-public partnerships, is the state of the water and sewerage systems within the urban areas. I find that in the municipalities, the old major sewer lines are completely defunct. Everybody has resorted to septic tanks, which end up contaminating the environment, especially in an area where people are closely packed together. 

At the same time, National Water and Sewerage Corporation charge customers a percentage for sewerage services. I do not know about any of you, but I have never seen the provisions of services as far as sewerage is concerned from National Water and Sewerage Corporation. We pay 75 percent of our water bills as sewerage charges but National Water and Sewerage Corporation have stopped providing those services. It has all gone to the private sector. It used to be there but we continue to be charged.  These are matters which really need to be addressed.

As a consequence of this, we are having so many children suffering from waterborne diseases- (Member timed out)

12.20
MR KENNETH KIYINGI (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I also stand to thank the committee for this wonderful presentation and to thank Government for this initiative to save the lives of many Ugandans out there who are in quest of clean, safe water. 

Allow me to extend my voice on behalf of the people of Mawokota South Constituency, in particular Buwama and  Kayabwe, because for long they have been waiting for this opportunity to access clean, safe water. Since I was with them last week, I am glad to inform honourable members that my people from the constituency are only asking when this project is going to be implemented. 

From the research which the people have been carrying out, a loan request can be passed, but at the end of the day should we wait for three years for this project to be implemented? It is a very big question, which they are asking me. When is it going to be implemented to help fight the borehole syndrome, which our honourable chairperson has brought forth?

As I speak, allow me yet to register the pain I have as a Member of Parliament. In my constituency, every week there are over five boreholes which come to my office for repair. Without CDF, you may wonder how I have to carry out this work. So, honourable members, I urge you to support this request so that we can save the lives of many Ugandans. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.21
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for bringing this on the Floor of Parliament. I am very uncomfortable to be handling issues like sanitation as if it is something which is just coming to light. 

I have been in this sector – at least I worked with my colleague, the minister, when I was the Shadow Minister of Water. My biggest concern was that funds were released for water but we have never budgeted for sanitation. This is something, which is not just coming now. It is embarrassing to find that for all this time, it is the donors who have been funding and we still want them to fund our toilets in the villages. 

According to the statement here, some of the monies are going to be used for household toilets. Mr Speaker, pit latrines to be funded by donors! I think we should be going for loans for very serious developmental projects. As a country and as a Government, which you think should be planning and forecasting for the good of this country, you should have put in place all this. The problem right now, and that is my discomfort, is that within the ministry, there is poor planning. (Member timed out)

12.24
MRS BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Rt hon. Speaker, I stand here to speak on behalf of the eight new municipalities, including Mukono Municipality. This week, a loan was approved for the municipalities, US$150 million. The eight new municipalities were not considered as beneficiaries. Today, we are seeing a project for water for small towns and still we cannot qualify to benefit under that category.

The question I would like to pose, and I know this is the question of all the other members representing the eight new municipalities, is: where do we belong? When it comes to the municipal loans, we are told that we do not qualify because we are still new. When it comes to loans for small towns, we do not benefit because we do not belong to that category. 

At the moment, the districts no longer extend their services to the municipalities. I have a rural part of my municipality in Goma division, which originally would benefit from projects running from the district; now that we are a municipality, the district of Mukono does not do any work in the division of Goma. I know what I am experiencing in Mukono is what is happening in Iganga, Rukungiri, Busia and all those new municipalities. (Member timed out) 

12.26
MR ODONGA-OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion that the question be put. (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the question be put. I am enjoined by the Rules of Procedure to allow nobody to stand up - if you are standing up, please sit down - and put the question without debate. I put the question to the motion that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:I put the question to the motion for adoption of the report and the loan. 

(Question put, and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations chairman, congratulations honourable minister. Honourable members, I am advised that the report on item No.5 is not ready.  Is it distributed? 

Honourable members, I will use my prerogative under rule 22 of our Rules of Procedure to alter the Order Paper. I bring forward a matter, which has been in this House for a long time and has been a subject of litigation in courts here and courts outside this place, so that we can finish with that, move and finish with other business. 

I also intend to release our Muslim colleagues to go for their prayers at 1.00 O’clock, so I am giving it 25 minutes. If it cannot be finished in 25 minutes, then it is a problem. There were consultations which were done, so I would like to have a short report on that particular item and then we move on the basis of that. 

I am now bringing the next business to be “Consideration and adoption of the report of the Standing Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline on the amendment of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.” Is the chairman here? 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE ON THE AMENDMENT OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE PARLIAMENT OF  UGANDA

COMMITTEE STAGE

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we have had consultations for the last two days between the interested parties. Can I ask for a brief to the House on the progress made? If there is no progress made, we will need to make a decision one way or the other because nomination date has been set for Monday 21st and Tuesday 22nd. So today we need to finish these rules. 

THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, DISCPLINE AND PRIVILEGES (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Thank you, Mr Chairman. At our first meeting, we had a lot of goodwill from both sides of the House. We agreed on a broad spectrum of issues and we decided to come to the House and ask for time up to this morning to resolve the issues where we did not generate any consensus. This morning, we met and we never generated any consensus on the issues that were outstanding then. The committee however has proposals for amendments that I will table with your permission.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, are they in relation to the proposed paragraph 13 and schedule 4?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Then, please make your submission. Are there aspects of the report that are not captured? Please give us the full report so that we can move forward.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, the issues that I thought were not relevant for the rules were the following:

We received proposals from the Leader of the Opposition that all the slots available for Uganda, which are nine, should be shared among all the parties represented in this House and the Independents. That would make a total of seven positions - there are six parties and the Independents take one. The remaining two slots would be shared between NRM, the ruling party, and the official Opposition.  That would mean that the NRM would take two slots, FDC two slots and all the other parties one slot, and the Independents one slot. 

The position of the Leader of Government Business was that these are matters that we should discuss at a much latter time after we have passed the rules. His position was that the first issue to deal with is to incorporate in the rules the principles of consultation and consensus building. After that, we can then work on all these other issues. 

The Opposition parties then took the view that they would contest this matter in court and that they will do so immediately, and that they will get an injunction to stop this process. That is the aspect of the report that I had not indicated to the House. 

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Chairman, the chair of the committee has reported, but not fully. There are issues which are by law, and we say that you cannot run away from the law. 

We put up a case that when we were making this law, particularly Article 50, Uganda was then under one-party politics – (Interjections) - It was the Movement system, which is equal to a one-party system. At the time of making those laws, parties were not applicable in Uganda. What would be applicable were the other areas which follow, like gender, special interest groups and other shades. 

Secondly, we said that if we are going to satisfy those ingredients, then each of us should get what they are supposed to get. That is done by specifying to each party what they are supposed to bring in - the disabled person, or a woman or man for the sake of gender, or a youth. That way, the public will understand that we considered even those other points. 

The issue I want to conclude with is that the side led by the Prime Minister never came back to tell us their view on the numbers. They have hidden the numbers in their pockets and I do not know why, because we gave them our view on the numbers. 

So, Mr Chairman, I want to emphasise that for us as the Opposition, we shall not be party to rules which violate the Treaty and we shall not be party to elections which violate the rules.(Applause)

THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Chairman and honourable colleagues, I wish to report that we have carried out consultations from both ends of the arguments which we had here when we debated this proposed rule 14, and I am glad to report that we have made good progress. (Applause)I am happy to report to this House that both sides have agreed. The agreement was a result of this side of the House taking into account the argument by the other side of the House against talking about numerical strength and numbers in these rules, and we have conceded that. (Applause)

Therefore, I am happy to report to you that we shifted, in response to the demand by the Opposition that we do not talk about numbers in the rules. (Applause) I want to commend my colleagues on the other side for the very friendly and hearty atmosphere in which we held these meetings, very effectively and competently chaired by hon. Fox Odoi. (Applause)

As a result, we agreed – (Interjections) - when the Leader of the Opposition spoke, I listened - (Applause) - and I think it is really a hallmark of democratic practice to listen to each other. It is now my turn to report, please allow me to do so. We, therefore, agreed that rule 13 as is presently formulated should be completely amended to remove any reference to numbers. We therefore we came up with a formulation, which we agreed on. The formulation reads as follows:
“Election of Members of the East African Legislative Assembly:
1. 	The election of Members of the Assembly representing the various political parties and organisations represented in Parliament, shades of opinion, gender and other special interest groups in Uganda shall be conducted after consultations and consensus by the political parties and other Members of Parliament;

2. 	Subject to sub-rule (1), the Speaker shall, where consensus is not reached, put the matter to vote.”  

By coming out with this formulation – (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:: Let him finish and then you come and correct.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: By coming out with this formulation, as you can see we substantially changed 13 as it is in accordance with the arguments presented against it by the Opposition. The only point of difference, where hon. Katuntu missed the meeting because he was absent - (Interjections) - I am stating a fact- was on a suggestion that came from the Opposition.  

Yesterday, we all agreed that we go to our caucuses and report what we had agreed and come back this morning. Both sides reported. I reported what I have just told you to the caucus of NRM. The Opposition reported that when they went back to their caucus, they went back to the original position, which was that each political party should be represented in EALA. So, according to them, we should have six EALA members representing the political parties in this House and that the seventh should be from Independents, and that the two remaining seats should be shared by FDC and NRM. That was their report. 

I reported that on our side, we are interested in concluding the rules, and it is the rules that we have adopted that will even determine the negotiation between the two sides when we come to talk about numbers. I asked the Opposition a question: “You my friends, the Opposition, the other day you were arguing against numbers in the rules and we have conceded; how can you be the ones now to argue on re-introduction of numbers in the rules?” So, we did not agree on that, and that is where we are. Our position is very clear. 

On the question of going to court, I told the Opposition, and I would like to repeat this, that going to court is the right of every Ugandan. The Opposition is free to go to court, but I simply want to tell them that the position we have taken is a result of a thorough study of the statute, Article 50, our Constitution and the rulings of court. So, if you go to court, please know that you will come back to our position because our position is a result of that thorough study. There is no problem and we are not worried about it at all. That is our position.

So, the chairman in his report is absolutely right that they raised the question of numbers and we did not agree to it. This is the only remaining sticky point that we may have to resolve here in this House. We told the Opposition that to the best of our knowledge, in a democracy where consensus fails the answer is voting. I would like to hear the alternative because I do not know of any. So, that is the position and that is the position of NRM. I thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, can we listen from those who did not participate in the negotiations. Who goes first because you are all standing at the same time? I am just wondering because if it is a common position from the Opposition, then somebody could present it.

THE SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Abdu Katuntu): I thank you very much, Mr Chairman. It is not my intention to really go into the details of what transpired, but I think the mistake we made was that we never had a secretary and there were no minutes. (Laughter) That is the fundamental mistake we made. If we had that sort of procedure, then maybe this other disagreement would not come up because we would have a true record of what transpired in the meeting. I am at pains therefore – (Interruption)

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I would like to thank hon. Katuntu for giving way. I partly participated in that meeting and I remember when we were starting, the chairperson insisted that we had to get our names recorded and minutes taken for that meeting. 

Mr Chairman, I would like to request that the chairman of the committee, who was actually also chairing the discussion, comes up and tells this House whether we had a secretary, whether we had minutes, whether we recorded our names, and whether we signed for attendance or not. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, we need not actually be funny. This consultation did not start this morning. We have had this consultation since we adjourned. The first day, before we reported to this House that we had not concluded, we did not have any staff in that meeting. It was fully us, the politicians. The only time we called upon a member of staff was at the end when the chairman and I were trying to draft some sort of replacement to clause 13, and he never even came inside our meeting because we drafted this in the Sergeant-At-Arms’ office. So, it is not true. 

Today, when I walked in, there was some clerk who had come and he was just recording attendance. In any case, if we have got the minutes, you sign them and agree that they are the true record of what transpired. Those are minutes; you do not have to even to go to school to know that minutes are approved by the people who have attended that particular meeting. If we had those minutes – (Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, hon. Abdu Katuntu is an accomplished and practicing lawyer and very respectable in this House. He went with another group from outside and they sat in a closed meeting. I am very sure he attended that meeting because he is lamenting that it is unfortunate that they could not even take minutes or even cameras. Now he is here telling us how he failed to execute his own duty as a lawyer. Mr Chairman, is it in order for this lawyer to come and start telling us his failures with his group? Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There seem to be two separate accounts of the reflections of what transpired in that meeting. The lamentations come from that fact. So, there is no order violated. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I am at pains to even carry the debate of what transpired in that meeting to this place, let alone to contradict what the Prime Minister has said. I was being honest that if we had those minutes, maybe these contradictions would not be arising before you. 

Having said that, it is not true that the draft the Prime Minister read was agreed upon because – (Interruption) - can I make this point first. It is hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo and I who drafted this particular clause. We had a first draft, which was one clause, the one that the Prime Minister read. When we called upon the technical people to assist us improve, he added the second, which the Prime Minister read. When we introduced it to the meeting, members said, and rightly so, that the second one had not been agreed upon and that is where it ended. So, it is actually not factual that the voting was agreed upon by the meeting. It is not. 

What the meeting agreed upon is consultation and consensus. That is what we agreed upon, and we did not have any problem on our side and that side. This issue, which has been coming on this Floor from that side about numerical strength, I may hasten to add that we now agree that it offends the Treaty. Both this side and that side agreed. The majority of you, honourable colleagues- look at the Hansard- were pounding that “we are the majority”; but your side, in consultation after studying the law, agreed that that is not the basis. 

The problem is, you are finding it difficult to appreciate that actually the law is different, and we understand that, honourable colleagues. Nobody is here to plead superior argument. We came together as leaders and we sought an interpretation of the law. So, this issue of numerical strength should move out of our minds; in fact, Dr Bitekyerezo, if you are asking how, ask the lawyers on your side. 

Having said that, Mr Chairman, our side will go by one thing and that is the point we have made to the delegation from the opposite side. We shall go strictly, and I want to emphasise strictly, within the confines of Article 50 of the Treaty. That is No. 1. 

We also agreed that in case there is a problem of interpretation, then we go back again to the Treaty. What is provided for in the Treaty, if you have got this agreement on interpretation - I will read the relevant provision, Article 38.Article 38(1) says, “Any dispute concerning the interpretation or application of this Treaty or any of the matters referred to the Court pursuant to this Chapter shall not be subjected to any method of settlement other than those provided for in this Treaty.” So, if you think you will sort it out by voting, that is wrong.

Clause (2),and this is the most important, “Where a dispute has been referred to the Council or the Court…”Our side is saying since we are disagreeing on the interpretation, we can refer it to the court. The provision continues thus: “…the Partner States shall refrain from any action which might be detrimental to the resolution of the dispute or might aggravate the dispute.” Those are the provisions of the Treaty.

The consequence of this is that because we are having a disagreement on the interpretation, there is only one road for us to take, and that is the court. Once we do that, we have to refrain from anything – because that is what the Treaty says – which aggravates the problem or the dispute.

Lastly, the Speaker, since last year, realised that we had a problem in the interpretation of this particular Article of the Treaty. What the Speaker did was to ask the Attorney-General to go to the court for interpretation. I also remember the Speaker saying, “I did not intend to have your opinion but we want the opinion of the court that is mandated under the Treaty to interpret the Treaty.”

The learned Attorney-General failed on his obligation. He defied the directives of the Speaker to refer this matter to the court for interpretation. Actually, we would not be at this stage if that had been followed. Instead, he preferred to have the matter voted upon. I am saying this honestly. If anybody thinks they are going to sort out this problem using “ayes” and “nos”, the problem will remain with us.

Mr Chairman, as I rest my case. Allow me say - like the Rt Hon. Prime Minister said – that we have studied this law in detail. We have studied the cases that have gone to court before. So, we are very conversant with what is required of us under the law. Those who think it is about numerical strength can take the decision now against logic and the law, but I want to assure you, as day follows night, the chapter is not closed. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:I know you are asking me to rule, honourable members, but the matter is still before the House for debate. What do you want me to rule on? Please say what you wanted to say in your portion of debate.

MR BAKA: Mr Chairman, allow me to thank our party leaders who took the initiative to involve themselves in dialogue. That was the best thing to do in the circumstances. However, now that – (Interruptions)

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. You informed us at the beginning of the debate that today is Friday and that we would be leaving for prayers at 12.55p.m. Now it is almost 1.07p.m and I have a humble request. Since today is Friday and we, the Muslims, have to go for prayers, would it be okay for you to suspend the House until 2.00p.m. for us to go for prayers?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, indeed I said that we would suspend the House at 1.00p.m. to allow our Muslim colleagues to go for prayers. I think I will standby that and I will suspend the House until exactly 2.00p.m. But before we go, I would like to inform you that the matters we have to handle are very important so please be here by 1.45p.m. Can we hear from the chairman of the committee? 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

1.06
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, DISCIPLINE AND PRIVILEGES (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is that the House resumes and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. I now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.07
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, DISCIPLINE AND PRIVILEGES (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo):Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Rules of Procedure for the election of members of the East African Legislative Assembly, Appendix D, and stood over the same for further discussions at 2.00 O’clock. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.07
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, DISCIPLINE AND PRIVILEGES (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo):Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. I now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I earlier informed you the House is hereby suspended until 2 O’clock.

(The House was suspended at 1.08p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.57 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope the time has been sufficient for our colleagues to finalise interfacing with Allah. We proceed. 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the discussions were suspended to allow our colleagues to attend to prayers. At the time we left, we were still examining the provisions of the new paragraph 13 of Appendix B. That’s where we were, and we are trying to find headway on how to move. 

There were reports from the meetings that took place yesterday and this morning, and we were hoping to make progress on the basis of that. An amendment was proposed by the chair of the committee based on the discussions, and those proposals were objected to in terms of part of the provision which is under (2).

The discussions clearly showed that there was agreement on part (1) about the negotiations and consultations. However, there is disagreement on part (2), unless the position has changed since. That was the position we were able to discern. However, that part 2 was never negotiated, so it was not part of what was agreed from the submission from hon. Katuntu and the submission of the Rt hon. Prime Minister. That is where we are. So, can we move from there? Otherwise, I will have to take a vote on the issue of whether this amendment is okay and whether part 2 should be part of this amendment that had been proposed under paragraph 13 of Appendix B.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I was part of the negotiation team. I also want to add my voice, particularly with regard to what transpired. Contrary to the high emotions that are characterising the debate, we had a very cordial and friendly interaction with the members from the NRM side and our friends from the Opposition side. We met for quite some time. 

Mr Chairman, the difference between us doctors and you the lawyers is that for us, when you say there is a bone in my thigh, all doctors will agree because it is a fact. However, with due respect to you of the legal profession, there will be one statement clearly written but you will have as many opinions as the lawyers in the room, trying to interpret the same statement that is clearly written in plain English. (Laughter) That is why we say for us doctors, we are the educated colleagues, and for you, you are learned. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But you may also agree on a thick bone. (Laughter)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, the matter under contention throughout the discussions is the interpretation of Article 50, particularly with regard to the ruling which the court made. As you note from the submissions, our colleagues from the Opposition feel that Article 50, and whatever court has said, automatically means that every party in this House must have a member in EALA. Some of us have a different view. 

The article and the ruling of the court actually clearly put the authority and responsibility to this House to determine what is feasible as it constitutes the team which will represent the country in the East African Legislative Assembly. I think that is where the bone of contention is.

With due respect to hon. Katuntu, I think there is need to appreciate that all of us are here in our own right and are entitled to our own appreciation of what the law says, whether we are lawyers or not. I saw you try to intimidate us that many members are not lawyers and therefore they are bound to just listen to what you, the lawyers, are telling us. We appreciate the law at different levels but we are entitled to our own opinions. (Applause)

I feel that we must proceed because time is not on our side. We may argue and argue until cows come home but this Parliament has a duty to amend the rules so that we have our rules and we proceed with the process of complying with the timelines to constitute EALA. 

MR SSEBAGALA: Mr Chairman, I rise on a point of procedure. You have given us ample time to discuss so that we can amicably reach a consensus. It is also true that all of us, as a result of this scenario, have mastered the Treaty, especially Article 50. I do not think there is any person here who is going to labour much to explain the Treaty because none of us is more qualified than the other in as far as explaining the Treaty is concerned, and we have listened to various views. 

I believe we are only left with two options. The option is either for you to communicate to the East African Court of Justice for an interpretation or to make a ruling. If the ruling is not in favour of some us, we go to court, and that is final. That is the procedural matter I am raising. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ssebagala, if I make a ruling and you disagree with the ruling, you do not go to court. You challenge my ruling under the Rules of Procedure. In other words, all the local remedies within the House will not have been exhausted so you have no recourse to court. 

However, I do not think I am called up to rule on any matter in this issue here. The option you should have actually stated is that we either find a way of moving by consensus or we take a vote on the matters that are pending. But you do not call the Speaker on one way or the other on this matter; no. It does not work that way.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think as Parliament we have a duty to make our rules, and that is the process under which we are. Definitely, everybody here has the right to go to court. Even me, I can go to court if I am not satisfied with whatever is happening. So, the issue of going to court does not even have to be announced in parliaments because everybody has that right to seek justice. 

Finally, Mr Chairman, like it was reported, when we met the issue that we discussed, like it was raised the other time - I remember I raised the issue of the numbers six, two and one and I recall the arguments from the other side that that had been rendered anomalous in one of the court rulings, therefore, the numbers should not arise. That is why there was concentration from our side that for now, we try as much as possible to see how we put forward provisions that make our rules conform to Article 50 of the Treaty. That is why you heard the formulation, which was read. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we need to move forward. What was proposed, and what I think is before this House, is this 13(1) that was proposed by the chair of the committee to read: “The elections of Members of the Assembly representing the various political parties and organisations represented in Parliament, shades of opinions, gender and other special interest groups in Uganda shall be conducted after consultations and consensus by the political parties and other Members of Parliament.”

Part (2) says, “Subject to sub-rule (1), the Speaker shall, where consensus is not reached, put the matter to vote.”This is what was proposed. 

The discussion we had was that the hon. Abdu Katuntu and the Leader of the Opposition said part (2) was never part of what was agreed, however, they both confirm that part (1) was agreed. The hon. Prime Minister also says part (1) was agreed upon. Are we together? So, can I take a vote on part (1)?    

HON. MEMBERS: Yes!

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that you put the question.

MS RWABUHORO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have looked at part (1) and I cannot find the definition of the word “feasible”. Can I seek your guidance to have the definition in part (1)?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We are not here to define words of feasibility and things like that. (Laughter) This is what is proposed. I did not sit in that meeting and so you cannot ask me to define what was there. You and I were not there but the parties agreed on this formulation. I put the question to part (1).Have we agreed on it? I put the question that 13(1) becomes part of schedule B to this rule. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we would like to make an additional amendment. We would like to insert, before 13(2), an amendment, 13(1) (b), to read –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  There is No 13 (1) (a).

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, thank you, Mr Chairman. Let it be 13 (2) because we do not have all the texts here.  I am moving it under rule 118 (2). I would like to insert, “All the six parties represented in the Ninth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda shall be represented in the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA) taking into consideration gender and any other special interest groups.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Seconded.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the reason I am moving like that is to make it clear that in the Ninth Parliament, - under Article 50 of the Treaty, which talks about all political parties as much as feasible shall be represented -we have only six parties and yet we have nine slots in EALA. So, it is feasible for all the parties to be represented.  (Applause)

Mr Chairman, when they drafted Article 50, political parties was number one, and they never mentioned the ruling party and other parties. They said “various political parties”. This meant that all parties are equal as far as EALA is concerned. (Applause)

Mr Chairman, we must thank you for having given us the opportunity to talk. However, we would like to tell our colleagues, I must repeat this, we must tell our colleagues that it is not a matter of numbers, it is not a matter of numerical strength; in this case, it is the law. You cannot substitute the law with numbers. We believe, as Uganda, that we should not be party to people who will delay the process of electing members of EALA. (Applause)  If this takes place, then it would be our colleagues from the NRM who would have done this, not us from other political parties. 

Mr Chairman, I would plead with all of you that logic- you have logic, you think logically but do not undermine the goodwill of East African Legislative Assembly. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Katoto, there is an amendment and it has been spoken to. Honourable member, that microphone is for the Sergeant-at-Arms; I would invite you to speak form any other microphone. You would be speaking from outside Parliament if you spoke from there.

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am a peasant from Katerera County, Lubirizi District and according to the way I see it, when it comes to strength, the other side goes for logic. When they have strength, they do not want this side to go for logic. (Laughter)Now I am wondering because – Mr Chairman, I seek for your protection.

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi was talking about political parties in this Parliament; what if tomorrow I form another political party and another one forms and we have 13, what will we do? Even to date, we have 36 and you are talking of six. What would we do? So, I would propose that we could make laws that allow all members who want to be voted to participate and then the Parliament of Uganda will vote for them.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I rise to support the amendment but with an amendment. I believe that in order not to adulterate the Treaty, we need a clause like this one. With this clause, our nation can show others that we are willing to be constitutional and that we are willing to tolerate other political parties. 

The issue I want to bring in here is that the interest of Independent Members of Parliament is not clearly mentioned here. I, therefore, want to suggest an amendment to what has been brought to us. Probably, this too will cater for what the honourable, who said he is a peasant, has just submitted.

So, we may avoid stating “the six political parties” and instead we state: “All the political parties represented in the Ninth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda shall be represented in the East African Legislative Assembly, taking into consideration the interest of the Independent Members of Parliament, gender and any other political interests.” 

Mr Chairman, I am convinced that we shall not have acted to contravene the Treaty, which we have ratified in good faith. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, since I am the mover of the motion, I concede on that. (Applause)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to, in the strongest terms possible, oppose the motion proposing the amendment to what the chairman of the committee moved. This is because the amendment moved by hon. Nandala-Mafabi does not cater for the interests of my party. I am in this House as an NRM member; I cannot confuse my colours. I am NRM and anything that sabotages the interest of my party, I will oppose to the letter.

I thank the chairman for his amendment because it equally promotes the interests of the Independents. I want us to be genuine people in this House when we are debating. I like what you moved. You said you want us to be seen to tolerate each other. I want to ask you a question, why didn’t you tolerate the honourable engineer who you stood with and you even had to stand as an Independent? 

We know him as a card holder of NRM, the honourable member from Kamuli. Because of intolerance and political pressure from his supporters, he said “I am going to take on the engineer” and he defeated him. This is what we are doing here today. This is a political game. If you are thinking we are going to have tolerance here, you are in the wrong forum.

Mr Chairman, in my previous submission I said the East African Legislative Assembly is a political institution where we are sending members to talk politics for our country. I loved your submission, hon. Katuntu, the other day when you said we are promoting nationalism. But I want to ask you a question, the day you reach there and discover that the politics pertaining in EALA is not promoting the vision, what decision will you take? This is why we emphasise that as a matter of fact, we are standing our ground and supporting the amendment moved by the chairman and our position of NRM. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I believe the Leader of the Opposition is moving from the point that is written here in the Treaty, and that is with regard to Article 50. He has demonstrated that all the parties in the House need to be represented. I was also waiting to hear from him how we are going to represent all the shades of opinion in this House and interests, including shades of opinion of the Independents in this House.

We are talking about nine positions for EALA. We have here the NRM, the five other parties represented here, we have workers, the youth, name them, but I want to concentrate on this one. Each Independent in this House represents a shade of opinion, so if we are going to move the way the Leader of the Opposition has expressed here, how shall we represent each individual opinion of the independents in this House?(Laughter)

The Treaty says that we shall elect, but try as much as feasible to represent the different parties. That means that it calls for us to provide for each of the parties, each of the shades of opinion in this House, if they wish to, different interest groups here to participate in the elections, but it is up to the House to vote. So, the bottom line is, whoever wants to stand for these elections, in whichever party, should be given the opportunity but it is the vote to decide. That is what I wanted to clarify. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal that was presented by the committee, which I read, had a second part. The substance of hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s amendment, I suppose, is to delete part (2) of what was proposed by the chairman, even if it was not stated for deletion. The import of it is to delete it. So, he is proposing to delete what is contained in part (2) and replace it with what he has proposed. I just want to make that clear so that we know how to move.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I rise to oppose the amendment. (Applause) I oppose it for two or three basic reasons. The first one is that the amendment does not conform to the provisions of Article 50. (Applause)
This is what Article 50 says, “The National Assembly of each Partner State shall elect, not from among its members, nine members of the Assembly, who shall represent as much as is feasible, the various political parties represented in the National Assembly, shades of opinion, gender and other special interest groups in that Partner State, in accordance with such procedure as the National Assembly of each Partner State may determine.”

What hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s amendment seeks to do is to limit representation to political parties in Parliament only -(Interjections)- Mr Chairman, what I heard him concede on was the question of Independents, which is alright, because we support the idea of Independents having representation since they fall in the broader category. However, as I have read here, shades of opinion, gender and other special interest groups are in the whole country but not only in Parliament. (Applause) Therefore, this amendment does not conform to the requirement of Article 50.

My second point is –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Why don’t you finish your point, because this extends the debate?

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Chairman, the Prime Minister has made an important point of which I need some clarification. He has said that the shades of opinion are not only in Parliament but all over the country. I agree with him. What I am seeking clarification on is, where else are these shades of opinion from the rest of the country represented other than in this Parliament?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I will come to that later. 

My second point, Mr Chairman, is that I heard an amendment talking about Independents, but in this Parliament we do not have only political parties and Independents. We have members who do not belong to that category and we must –(Interjections)-Like the UPDF -(Interjections)- Oh, I thought someone was going to say that they are not there. They are there, and there are many other categories in this House that are not covered by this amendment.

Thirdly, and the most important point I want to make, is that once we passed clause 13(1), hon. Nandala should have sought to amend (1) because this is intended to -(Interjections)-You look at it. Clause (1), which we have already adopted, reads, “Elections of Members of the Assembly representing the various political parties and organisations represented in Parliament, shades of opinion, gender and other special groups in Uganda shall be conducted after consultations and consensus by the political parties and other Members of Parliament.” We have already passed that. 

What he is now seeking to do in this amendment is to specify that these members will be as he has specified here. So, the amendment is seeking to reverse what we have already adopted. So, Mr Chairman, our considered view, if I may restate it, is that 13(1) as already adopted takes care of all the elements under Article 50, including that question of feasibility. That is very critical. 

Section (2), which he is seeking to remove, is a logical and obvious position to find solutions in case there is no consensus. Hon. Odonga Otto was saying he does not need a lecture from me. I know that; since he is above me maybe he should not even be here with me -(Laughter)- because he has brought himself to my level.

Mr Chairman, that clause obviously seeks to give solution where there is an impasse. If we do not agree about the feasibility or representation through discussions, will this be resolved? As I said in the morning, the only democratic way, universally practised, is to vote. Decisions are made via voting. (Applause) You cannot seek to do away with voting. 

Mr Chairman and honourable members, I want to tell you that the provision we adopted yesterday in the negotiations and this morning, is a position very well considered. It takes care of the contents of Article 50 and actually it determines the mode through which we will find the solution. Therefore, we support the amendment -(Laughter)- presented by the committee chairperson reading, “Subject to sub-rule (1), the Speaker shall, where consensus is not reached, put the matter to vote.” I beg to move.

MR ISABIRYE: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the question be put on the amendment made by hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is that the question be put. 

MR KAWUMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We were earlier on guided by the presentation of hon. Katuntu. If we listened to him very carefully, he said the matter under contention is not a matter of voting per se -(Interjections)- No, it is not about numbers. The procedural matter I am raising -(Interjections)- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

MR KAWUMA: Mr Chairman, the procedural matter I am rising on is that Article 50 of the Treaty guides on how Parliament should come up with the rules for electing representatives. Also, inferring from the guidance of other provisions of the Treaty as presented by hon. Katuntu, we are bound to drag this Parliament into disarray -(Interjections)- Mr Chairman, we should once again invite hon. Katuntu to further clarify on the matter. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you rose on a procedural point; what is the procedural point?

MR KAWUMA: Mr Chairman, the procedural matter is that it will not be prudent for us to vote on a matter when we are not well guided on how it should be handled in the Treaty. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You have already ruled on the matter.  

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Our rules provide for a motion to be seconded. I was hoping that before the motion for the question to be put is moved, the Chair would have given us the opportunity to second the motion moved by hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: At committee stage, there is no secondment required. (Applause)

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, if at committee stage, like you have guided, there is no secondment required, is it possible to apply the rules of natural justice? Could those of us who hold a different view to the ones that have been articulated by the other side of the debate have opportunity to state our position as well before the question is put?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, the first motion was moved by the chairperson providing for these provisions under the current rule 13. The hon. Nandala-Mafabi then moved an amendment, in essence taking out part (2) - we adopted part (1) already - and replacing it. He spoke to his motion and he justified why the motion should be removed. So, I opened the debate. In the course of the debate, there is a motion that the question be put. That is how far we have gone, and under the rules once that motion is moved, the Chair or Speaker should put the question as required by the rules. 

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have read (1), which you have stated has been adopted, and it says: “The election of Members to the Assembly representing the various political parties and organisations represented in Parliament, shades of opinion, gender and other special interest groups in Uganda shall be conducted after consultation and consensus by the political parties and other Members of Parliament.”

Now, this particular provision is stating that, “Subject to sub-rule (1), the Speaker shall, where consensus is not reached, put the matter to vote.” In the event that consensus is not reached, are you putting to vote this particular provision that has already been passed? What are the ingredients of what would be put to vote in the circumstances if consensus fails? If consensus fails, it means that this provision has already been adopted and there should be something else that should be voted on. So, what would that be? Can I be guided? What would be put to vote? It is what I want to know.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there is a proposal that it should be deleted. So, unless we deal with the proposal that is going to delete it, and if we delete it, then there is no point even bothering to explain it. The proposal by hon. Nandala-Mafabi is to delete what you are raising. So, if by the motion it is deleted, then your issue does not arise. 

MS AMONGI: That is why, Mr Chairman, I want guidance because the motion is to put the question on it, but here -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, the motion is to put the question on the amendment by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, which is deleting what you are raising. If hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s amendment succeeds, then your issue does not arise. If it does not succeed, then your issue will arise. That will be the proper time to deal with it.

MS AMONGI: So, do you want me to bring it after the voting? 

THE DEPUTY CHARIMAN: Yes, because right now it is already in contest; not so?  

MS AMONGI: Yes – (Ms Alaso rose_) -Yes, I accept the information at last. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it Information on procedure? She had risen on a point of procedure; do you want to inform on procedure? Please.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I am rising on a point of procedure. I tend to think, as a debater, that motions anywhere in the world are not uniform. The motion on amendment moved by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, in my humble view, was unique and attracted a lot of debate in terms of political thought. Procedurally, in such circumstances, is it proper for that opportunity of expressing people’s opinions to be averted? Why don’t we have extra opportunity to debate the motion?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, there is a motion that the question be put and that motion can be lost; not so? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, it is very clear I have not applied to delete any provision. I said I am inserting a rule 13(2) – (Interjections) - Please relax, you Independent NRM – (Interjections) - What we are trying to do is to insert this to take –(Interjections) –If I can be allowed to explain - There was 13(1) and now I am inserting 13(2) before you go to (3), which is now supposed to be 13(3). I am not deleting that; I am first inserting this. 

Mr Chairman, why are we bringing this? We are in the Ninth Parliament and the Ninth Parliament is making laws for the future. However, we are prescribing what will take immediate effect because we are going for elections of Members of EALA soon and we are saying for the Ninth Parliament. That is why I was clear and said all the six political parties represented in the Ninth Parliament. I made it clear that it is the Ninth Parliament, and I also agreed with my colleague about including the Independents. That is what I am putting forward now. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, earlier, I tried to refocus the House to what was before the House. I guided that the initial proposal had two parts, part (1) and part (2). I guided that we had adopted part (1). I guided that the substance of hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s amendment, by saying we insert 13(2), would be to delete the existing (2) and substitute it. That is what I said and it was confirmed. 

Nobody raised any objection. I asked the House; please, be fair to the Chair –(Interjections)- No, no; be fair to the Chair. I asked that question; I said, “Is that the proper summation of what is before the House?” You said, “Yes”. Now, if you are saying that that was not the position, that is now another matter. If you are changing it, that is another matter. Now, where is this amendment which you proposed? Where is it supposed to go, because there is 13(2)?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I think we need to appreciate where we came from. The amendments before the Committee of the Whole House are now arising from the committee work, and that is why they were presented by the chairperson of the committee. However, we had a discussion and to the extent of the first parts of the amendment, there was agreement and we do not have to go back to it. During those consultations, however, we had fundamental differences in the second part of the amendment. So, this side came up with an amendment, not necessarily to delete the other, which should be debated on its own merit and decided upon. 

The amendment which we have come up with is exactly as hon. Nandala-Mafabi has put it. We can debate it and take a decision on it, one way or the other. Thereafter, we proceed to the second part of the committee’s recommendation. That was the spirit with which we came with that particular amendment.

MR SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think by your guidance, let us first take the question as per the motion of the honourable member on hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s amendment. Why? When you confirmed that this was citing the earlier amendment, we did not stand up to say “No”, and we presumed we were deleting. Now that we are not deleting, it means he is amending his amendments. So, let us first take the vote then he brings his amendment, maybe to say, “Let us insert in between (1) and (2).” That is my submission.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I think the way this thing came up was clear. Let us be honest. Please, let us not just start – If you want a correction of the initial position, it is acceptable. Let us not change position. I am chairing this meeting and I have followed, and that is why I made that affirmation. 

If it is realised now that there is need to change and make three provisions of 13, then that is a new matter. That was never before the House. I summarised what was before the House and we agreed to it. I am willing to make the issue move forward in the terms you are proposing now, but do not say that this is what you proposed initially. So, please, let us be clear on this. Let us be honest with ourselves. 

The position now is that there is an amendment proposed under (2), which would in essence make the existing committee proposal be renumbered (3) if it is adopted. Is that okay? Okay. So, the motion, which has been moved for closure of debate, would be specifically the motion for amendment proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Rule 68 of our Rules of Procedure read as follows: 
“Closure of debate
(1) After a question has been proposed in the House or in Committee and debated, a Member may move ‘That the question be now put”, and, unless it appears to the Speaker that the motion is an abuse of the rules of the House or an infringement of the rights of any Member, the question ‘That the question be now put’ shall be put forthwith and decided without amendment or debate.”

I have observed the debate and I do not notice any abuse of the process of the rules. There was a debate on this matter and I do not notice any infringement of any right, unless it is said so. Infringement of a right has not been raised. So, the question should be put as asked. I have not heard anybody raising any matter that there is infringement of any right. So I put the question to the motion that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the motion by hon. Nandala-Mafabi to amend by inserting a new part (2) under provision 13, to the effect that all the six political parties represented in the Ninth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda shall be represented in the East African Legislative Assembly, taking into consideration gender and any other special interest groups.

There was an amendment raised by the honourable member for Bulamogi, which was conceded to by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. That makes the final text to read: “All the six parties represented in the Ninth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda shall be represented in the East African Legislative Assembly taking into consideration the interest of Independents, gender and other special interest groups”. So, I put the question to this amendment as proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I seek your guidance. But before you guide me, I want to thank the members of both sides who have participated in this process. I also want to thank the members who read the Treaty very well –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, what point do you rise?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we are happy that a decision has been taken on this rule.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We have not taken a decision on the rule. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I think the bigger point of the rule is this one. I want to tell you, Mr Chairman, that the real meat of the rule was this. This was meat for all of us. Since Parliament, in its wisdom, has found it unnecessary to include this, that shows that with EALA, we do not have the law at heart. We, in the other political parties, shall from now on not participate in the rules making as per the Treaty and we shall not participate in the election process. 

We hereby allow our colleagues in the NRM to continue with the debate. We shall seek redress from the East African Court. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

(Thereupon, Members of the Opposition walked out of the Chamber.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, for the record, this House is at committee stage and no rule had been adopted by Parliament. The House is still at committee stage examining the provisions of the rule clause by clause. We have not taken a final decision in this matter. So, as of now, what we have considered is provision of Appendix B in relation to paragraph 13. That is where we are. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, the committee report in the second part of rule 13, reads: “Subject to rule (1), the Speaker shall, where consensus is not reached, put the matter to vote”. 

Mr Chairman, we propose to vote in order to address the event of an impasse. If there is discussion and consultation and consensus is not reached, there must be a local remedy of resolving that issue. At committee stage, we received a proposal that we can go to court. However, you cannot go to court before you exhaust all the local remedies. So I beg to propose that you put the question that sub-clause (2) of clause 13 do stand part of Appendix B. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I am required to ascertain if we have the capacity to take this decision and I am advised that we have in the House 129 Members of Parliament present. (Applause) We are, therefore, fully constituted. So I put the question to the proposed part (2) of paragraph 13 of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that Schedule 1 to Appendix B stand Schedule to Appendix B. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 1 of Appendix B, agreed to.

Schedule 2 of Appendix B, agreed to.

Schedule 3 of Appendix B, agreed to.

Schedule 4

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend Schedule 4. It is basically a set of ballot papers, and as a consequential amendment to paragraph 13, we propose to provide a single ballot paper for all the categories, which will contain the names of all the candidates and it will have four columns. 

The first column will reflect the serial numbers and the serial numbers will reflect the number of nominated candidates. The second column will bear the name of the candidate. The third column will specifically state whether the candidate is sponsored by a political party or not. Where he is sponsored by a political party, it will be indicated against his name. The last column is “voters’ choice” where the voter will have space to tick. At the top of the ballot paper, there is a requirement that every voter ticks nine. So that is the consequential amendment in 13 and it will be reflected in Schedule 4. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is the amendment proposed to be in Schedule 4 of Appendix B. I now put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 4, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that Appendix B, as amended, stands the appendix to the rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Appendix B, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now put the question that the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, as amended, do stand the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.09 
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, DISCIPLINE AND PRIVILEGES (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The motion is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.10
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, DISCIPLINE AND PRIVILEGES (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House considered the Rules of Procedure for the election of Members of the East African Legislative Assembly, Appendix B, and the Rules of Procedure for the Parliament of Uganda and passed Appendix B and the rules with amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.11
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, DISCIPLINE AND PRIVILEGES (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House do adopt the report of the Committee of the whole House. I beg to move. (Applause)

MR ODONGA OTTO: I thank you for welcoming me back. Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure whether the House has quorum to make such an important decision. I seek your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, at the time of taking the vote, we counted and there were 129 Members of Parliament seated and others standing. I can now ask the clerk to do another count.

(A headcount of Members of Parliament conducted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the result of the count is that there are 140 Members of Parliament. (Applause)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I want to protest and ask that we use a roll call because we have equally counted and the numbers do not tally to what the technical clerks are telling us.

MR BAKA: I rise on a point of procedure. I would like to seek your guidance on whether it is procedurally right for a member who walked out of the House in broad daylight, without your permission, to come back again without your permission and put the proceedings of this House at ransom. Is he procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am not aware of anybody who has walked out of this House in protest. (Laughter) The honourable member is a member of this House and we are taking a decision. (Applause) He has been counted in the headcount. 

MR MULONGO: I also rise on a point of procedure. Mr Speaker, the hon. Odonga Otto, in his effort to contest the information provided by the clerk, said that they have counted and they have different numbers. Procedurally, he needed to substantiate how they had counted and how their counting deferred from that of the clerk.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I rely on the counting conducted by the technical people, my clerks, who are the tallying officers for this House. The number has been confirmed to be 140. I do not rely on any other counts. That is the rule. They have counted and there are 140 Members of Parliament in the House. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, with all due respect, as the Leader of the Opposition -(Laughter)– In utmost good faith, what in Latin we call uberrima fides, I would implore you to conduct a roll call so that no one can challenge the decision of this House basing on quorum. I would implore you that if we are 140, then we are 140 and it is healthy. If we are not, then we are not. I would implore you so that we pass that roadblock now and not later. It is just an appeal. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, the matter is that we are going to do a count. Clerk, do you have a list of the members there? Please, proceed. Honourable members, when present, just say, “present” and stand up for the cameras. 

(A roll call of Members of Parliament was taken.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the members present in the House are 165. (Applause)

4.46
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for putting the record straight, that there are 165 members, including me and the First Lady. Thank you so much. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the final motion was for adoption of the rules as amended. I put the question that the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda as amended do stand to be the Rules of the Parliament of Uganda. 

(Question put, and agreed to.)

The Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, as amended, agreed to.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING FOR THE TRANSPORT SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PROJECT KAMWENGE-FORTPORTAL ROAD

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a short issue. I ask the chairman to take five minutes for the presentation 

4.48
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Birahwa Mukitale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the Committee on National Economy, I would like to present a report on the Government proposal to borrow US$ 75 million from the IDA of the World Bank Group for additional financing for the transport sector development project of Kamwenge-Fort Portal Road.

I would like, right from the onset, to clarify that in the last Parliament - as a benefit of institutional memory from a person who was here - we did pass two loan requests on condition. For the loan for Gulu-Atiak, the condition was to find money for Atiak-Nimule, and that money was found. For the loan for Nyakaihita-Ibanda-Kazo, the condition was that it must be open up to Fort Portal. Therefore, this loan request is a top-up in compliance with the parliamentary decision then, that both roads should be opened up to the end. 

Since this project was already discussed and it is an additional financing of the remaining stretch, I will straightaway go to the observations and recommendations, if you allow me, Mr Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t you just do the recommendations? 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much. Colleagues, the committee observed that while the URA Act, 2008 mandates the Road Fund to collect funds from road users and charges like fuel levy, transit fees –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairman, go to the recommendations and advise the House on what your recommendations are. 

MR MUKITALE: The committee recommends that Government explores the possibility of removal of legal impediments to allow the Road Fund function as a second generational fund as it is in other countries. 

Secondly, the committee recommends that Government, through the Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA, should in a timely manner address all these issues to avoid delays in completion of this section of the entire road project. Valuation and actual compensation for land for the Kamwenge-Fort Portal Road should be done in time so that land acquisition does not delay implementation of the road project. The UNRA policy regarding compensation should always ensure that compensation is done prior to commencement of works rather than during the construction stage. 

The committee also recommends that the Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA should explore the viability of increasing the road reserve from 30 metres to 60 metres, as is the norm in the East African setting, to cater for construction of high embankments. It is also important to take care of other utilities apart from the road itself like the future railway and optical cables plus all other related facilities. 

I hope colleagues are following since I have gone to the recommendations without reading the observations. The committee recommends that Government expedites the action plan to lift the cap on recurrent UNRA expenditures. Uganda National Roads Authority should urgently pursue the transfer of all operational expenditures related to road maintenance to a special account to be financed by the Road Fund as stipulated in the Road Fund Act. 

The committee recommends that UNRA reviews the existing – our recommendations answer the observations, but I will let you look at the observations - procurement process in the roads sector and come up with an alternative process that can be accredited by the PPDA and can be executed quicker, while observing the principles and intentions of the existing regulations. 

This next one is very important, so I will read both the observation and the recommendation. We also observed that most of the district roads that were upgraded to national roads are still in poor condition because of the insufficient funding, with only Shs 50 billion released for the care of recently upgraded 10,000 kilometres of district roads against the requirement of Shs 210 billion. The Committee on Infrastructure had also earlier on raised this concern. This means that there are only marginal interventions to keep the roads open and this cannot cause improvement to this road network. This explains why during the dry season the roads are smooth but the moment it rains, the surface is washed away. 

It is recommended that Government increases funding in this sector if the set goals and targets are to be realised. Improved infrastructure eventually translates into an improved economy and livelihood for the common person. That is why most colleagues have been raising issues of their roads being impassable when there are heavy rains. 

The committee yet again notes with concern the widespread encroachment on road reserves and the acquisition of land by unscrupulous people in areas designated for new road routes, hence increasing compensation costs. The committee yet again reiterates its earlier recommendation that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the Ministry of Works and Transport work in tandem in order to curb this vice. 

I request, before I conclude, to lay on the Table the transport sector development project appraisal document. I request to lay that on the Table, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MUKITALE: I also request to lay on the Table the UNRA and ministry responses when they interfaced with the committee and colleagues. Because of time, we may not have enough copies for those who may want the details.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. For what you are laying on the Table, you do not have to worry about copies.

MR MUKITALE: There is also the brief to Parliament and also some more presentations from the ministry regarding existing projects’ performance, including how they intend to do the Entebbe express highway. I lay -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is not how you do it. State what you are laying.

MR MUKITALE: We demanded the progress report of other projects including the one on the express highway, and also a map indicating the roads under works. The road is going to be worked on to take care of the national outlook and how the government and UNRA are working in all parts of this country. I lay on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the map.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee noted that the Government 2002 National Transport Policy and Strategy hinges on promotion of less costly, efficient and reliable transport services as the means of providing effective support to increase agricultural and industrial production, trade, tourism, social and administrative services. Hence, this Transport Sector Development Project (TSDP) is intended to bridge the gap in the existing transport infrastructure.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee, therefore, appreciates Government efforts and recommends to this House to approve the long awaited and earlier requested assurance from the Eighth Parliament that money be found to complete a loop beyond the Nyakaihita-Ibanda-Kazo, up to the Greater Rwenzori-Fort Portal. I beg to move. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. These matters are clear. This is additional funding that had already been discussed and part of the project is under implementation. Is the minister going to make a statement? Is there any debate on this matter or shall we take a vote on it?

4.59
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I thank the committee for the work they did. However, I am very disappointed to see that my road, Rukungiri-Kihihi-Ishasha, for all these years, is among the roads that they are still looking for money for. I wonder why it is like this. The road has been the cry of the people and there is nobody who does not know about this problem. I thought that maybe, it would be the road they are looking for money for but I am disappointed. For that matter, do not count me among the people supporting this.

5.00
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am sure you noticed that the person who has been speaking is the Woman MP, Kanungu, and I also come from Kanungu. I thank the committee for the report and I want to support this loan request. I have just a few questions for clarification, maybe from the committee or even the Minister of Works and Transport.

On page 3, the committee mentions nine roads that the government considers as priority projects, and then there is a statement that Government is exploring other avenues for acquisition of funding of the remaining seven projects. I just wanted to get an update from the government on how far it has gone in looking for funding for these roads, which include the one my woman MP was referring to, Rukungiri-Kihihi-Ishasha. Actually, it should continue to Nyakishenyi in Rukungiri. So, it should be Rukungiri-Kihihi-Ishasha-Nyakishenyi with a spur to Kambuga Hospital. Therefore, I want to know from Government how far you have gone in looking for funds to start on these roads. 

The people of Kanungu are asking, what does it take to make a road a priority so that it is worked on? Like in our case, Rukungiri-Kihihi-Ishasha-Nyakishenyi Road was promised by Government in 1988 and up to now, it is not worked on. So, what should the people of Kanungu and Rukungiri do to ensure that the road is worked on? That is a major question that we have been tasked with as Members of Parliament. Unfortunately, our third colleague, the Member of Parliament for Kinkizi West, has just stepped out but it is a major question that we would want the Prime Minister or the Minister for Works and Transport to answer.

Lastly, on page 9 the committee comments on the lack of funding for the roads, which were taken up from the local government to the central governments under UNRA and Ministry of Works. It is a big challenge. Some time back, we tasked the Minister for Works and Transport to bring a statement on the Floor here on financing of roads. Unfortunately, this has appeared on business to follow until today when we are adjourning. The minister has failed to bring that statement here. 

One of the challenges we have is that we passed a law on the Road Fund but its implementation is different from the spirit with which we passed it here. Money is being collected through taxation for the Road Fund, but unfortunately, this money is put in the Consolidated Fund and the Ministry of Finance allocates it to other areas. Therefore, we have failed to raise enough resources for our roads even when we put a law and a fund in place to cater for this.

I just wanted to request Government to maybe bring an amendment to the URA statute so that we can protect this money, which is being collected for the Road Fund, so that it is ring-fenced. We would then mobilise enough money to work on our roads. Therefore, I want to ask the Leader of Government Business when he is intending to bring before Parliament an amendment to the relevant laws to ensure that money for the Road Fund is protected and ring-fenced. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the lead loan for this loan request that we are discussing was discussed in the Eighth Parliament and this is supposed to be a top-up. So, when you are debating, be conscious that this is just additional funding for a project that is already ongoing. So, the issue you are raising should be in the context of what is here so that we do not over widen the debate today.

5.05
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising to talk about the road that connects Bunyoro region to Tooro, that is, Kyenjojo-Kagadi-Hoima-Masindi-Kigumba. Government has been promising this road since 1996. (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, we all have bad roads in this country including in our villages. Is it procedurally right for Members of Parliament to continue talking about different roads, other than the one the committee has presented? (Laughter) We cannot stay here until the next morning.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules require us to be relevant to the subject before the House. If you are going to discuss something other than Kamwenge-Fort Portal Road, you risk being declared irrelevant to the subject. Please, contribute to the matter before the House, the US$ 75 million loan that the Kamwenge-Fort Portal Road is seeking. If you have no opinion on this matter, please do not raise it.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I totally support the committee report. However, I felt it was necessary, because ADB was in my district, Kagadi, and I expected our road to come up with this one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For that one, you will prepare a parliamentary question later. 

5.07
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is to essentially thank Members of Parliament and Government for this road. I particularly thank colleagues in the Eighth Parliament who stood with us in putting Government to task. However, we would like to ask Government to quicken the process so that people start benefiting from the road. 

At another level, I agree with hon. Baryomunsi that the roads that were upgraded and taken over by the central government are a menace to our people. The districts do not have money to do these roads and yet the central government is not doing anything. The minister in charge should be serious on this matter and tell us when these roads are going to be worked on. It would be useless for us to make these highways without making district roads which act as feeder roads to the main roads. 

5.08
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): Mr Speaker, I want to move a motion, since all the Members of Parliament who have submitted to this motion have been seconding it, that the question be put.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question to the motion for adoption of the report of the Committee on National Economy on this loan for Kamwenge-Fort Portal Road, US$ 75 million. I put the question.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report Adopted.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDINGN COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO US$ 14.11 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB) AND ANOTHER US$ 5.0 MILLION FROM THE ARAB BANK FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA (BADEA) FOR FINANCING PHASE 2 OF THE TECHNICAL EDUCATION PROJECT AND NAKASEKE TECHNICAL INSTITUTE, RESPECTIVELY

5.10
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Frederick Mbagadhi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to present to this House a report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by Government to borrow up to US$ 14.11 million from the Islamic Development Bank and another US$ 5 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa for financing phase 2 of the Uganda National Education Support Programme.

In the interest of time, I will focus my attention on the most pertinent areas. So, I will not be reading line by line. On page 1, regarding the methodology, the committee held meetings and interacted with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Minister of Education and Sports, and the Committee on Social Services. The committee also studied and made references to the following documents, and at an appropriate time - 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance. The item on the Order Paper, which was read, is different from what the committee chairperson is talking about. The Order Paper talks of “for financing phase 2 of the technical education project and Nakaseke Technical Institute” while the committee report says, “for financing phase 2 of the Uganda National Education Support Programme”, which I find totally different. I seek to be guided; are we on the same page?

MR MBAGADHI: Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is actually the report. It is to do with the loan to be borrowed by Government to finance the Uganda National Education Support Programme, which has two components. We are talking of three colleges, which include Kichwamba and the second component is Nakaseke Technical Institute. So, it is basically the same thing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you then like to re-phrase the title of your presentation? You have to be specific to the request. Here, you are making a general statement about phase 2 of the Uganda National Education Support Programme and yet the Order Paper is talking about phase 2 of the Technical Education Project and Nakaseke Technical Institute, respectively. That is also what I have seen in the brief to Parliament from the Ministry.

MR MBAGADHI: Mr Speaker, I do concede to that. On page 1, the committee studied and made references to the following documents: 
1. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development’s brief on the loan request.
2. 	The Minister of Education and Sports’ brief on the loan request
3. 	The draft loan agreements.
4. 	The project appraisal reports.
5. 	The project implementation plans.
6. 	The Minister of Education and Sports’ brief on the ADB investment portfolio in the education sector.

7. The Minister of Education and Sports’ brief on the progress and challenges in the implementation of IDB, OPEC and Saudi projects for expanding access to quality BTVET

8. The Minister of Education and Sports’ brief on the implementation status of the World Bank UPPET Programme, 2009-2012

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table some of the documents that we referred to during our deliberations. In the interest of time, I do not know whether it is necessary for me to read document by document. Allow me lay on the Table the documents that we, as a committee, referred to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One by one, honourable member.

MR MBAGHADI: Mr Speaker, I have the loan agreement on the construction and equipment of the technical institute of Nakaseke District between the Republic of Uganda and the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa. It is dated 28 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MBAGHADI: Another document is the brief on the ADB investment portfolio in the education sector dated 13 February 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MBAGHADI: Mr Speaker, another document is the implementation status report of the World Bank support to UPPET programmes 2009-2018. It is dated 14 February 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MR MBAGHADI: Another document is the aide-mémoire of the BADEA mission to the Republic of Uganda. It is dated 28 October 2010. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MR MBAGHADI: Also with me is an assessment report on the implementation stages and the national coverage dated May 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MR MBAGHADI: Another document is the Business Technical Vocational Education and Training Act, 2008. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MBAGHADI: The other document is the information on business technical vocational education and training for both public and private institutions dated November 23 2009. I beg to lay.    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MR MBAGHADI: Another document is entitled, “Skilling Uganda District Strategic Plan”. It is dated August 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MBAGHADI: The other document is the Uganda Students Higher Education Financing Policy dated January 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MBAGHADI: Mr Speaker, I also beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the proceedings of the Committee on National Economy held on Thursday 17 May 2012 in Room 12. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MBAGHADI: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, on page -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, you need to go to the recommendations from the committee. 

MR MBAGHADI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. Let us move straight to the observations and recommendations which are on page 11. The Ministry of Education and Sports –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, just go for the recommendations in bold. 

MR MBAGHADI: Page 11, the committee urges Government to consider finalising of the architectural and engineering designs before loan negotiations, and to find means of curbing the lengthy procurement processes as this impacts heavily on charges accruing from undisbursed funds. 

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that Government fulfils its pledge of constructing at least one technical institute per district and later on per county. Further, the committee recommends that Government fast-tracks the Skill Uganda Programme. 

The committee welcomes Government efforts to make BTVET more flexible, affordable and accessible. However, Government should ensure that the reform of the BTVET from the input based training to competence based education and training through the Uganda vocational qualification framework is properly implemented, if these reforms are to go a long way in ensuring that the quality of BTVET graduates meets the labour market demands. 

The committee recommends that Government must now scale up efforts towards changing the public’s perception of BTVET, repackaging and making business and technical training more attractive as opposed to having it perceived as a preserve for academic failures. It must be perceived that any training made is for the job market, largely in the private sector, and so the private sector ought to participate fully in curriculum development. The Directorate of Industrial Training and the National Curriculum Development Centre should ensure that they regularly engage the private sector to develop an up-to-date relevant national curriculum. 

On page 14, the committee recommends that Government institutes efficient and effective measures of promoting science subjects in schools and universities. These should, however, be complemented with a deliberate effort of ensuring that schools and universities are adequately equipped with the relevant laboratory equipment. 

The committee further recommends that Government expeditiously reviews the current secondary schools curriculum with the view of making vocational foundation, practical subjects like agriculture, home economics and technical drawing compulsory in the lower secondary in its policy of skilling Uganda. 

The committee also recommends the setting up of the certified national instructors’ training institution by Government, running parallel to the Nakawa based Vocational Training Institute, with the mandate to enhance the quality of instructors.

On page 15, the committee recommends that Government considers setting up an independent directorate or authority to specifically focus on BTVET and help coordinate skills development across all sectors.

The committee also recommends that promotional activities to popularise BTVET and improve its image need to be scaled up by the Ministry of Education and Sports. Affirmative action to encourage female enrolment and participation should be well integrated within the BTVET strategy. 

On page 16, the committee recommends that Government increases financial support to the BTVET sub-sector. Government should also consider supporting private BTVET institutions to provide the much needed skills through sponsorship of students. Supporting practical skills development of priority sectors such as oil and gas, tourism, construction, agriculture and the manufacturing industry through a PPP arrangement should be explored. More so, a programme to support internship, industrial attachments and apprenticeships should be developed as well. 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the committee supports and recommends to this House to approve the Government request to borrow up to US$ 14.11 million from the Uganda Development Bank and another US$ 5 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa, and  therefore, financing phase 2 of the Uganda National Support Programme. Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the report from the committee, and the matters raised by the committee are clear. So, does the minister want to make a statement or shall we have comments from members? 

5.23 
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do not want it to be a culture, especially from this side and me specifically, that every time we are approving a loan it should be some of us to see it in terms of the composition of Uganda. We are asking for a loan to develop three technical colleges in Western Uganda; what about us? (Interjections) Yes! I will say this without shame. (Applause)

Out of the whole country, -  Kemba Technical College is in Masindi, Kichwamba Technical College is in Fort Portal and Bushenyi Technical College is in Bushenyi. What is this?

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. First of all, I want to give information to the effect that for the time the committee has been scrutinising this loan request, we have availed Members of Parliament a lot of information on the table where we sign. The documents laid on the Table have details of different interventions of technical colleges in different areas. 
Time did not allow us, but there are 14 technical schools at procurement stage in the whole country, and hon. Odonga Otto, one is in your constituency. 

The committee came to your council, and we went up to the site, and the committee raised a concern as to why your technical school is delaying to be implemented. It is in the report. So, we agree with you about the delay. 

The committee has also said that we should find money for the government policy of having a technical school per district for the beginning and later, per county. I request that we focus on pushing the Ministry of Education on implementation. In the documents we gave you - if we had time, I would take you through them - these technical schools are lined up but the delay is in implementation.

Mr Speaker, I thought this information would help members. The Committee on Social Services has the mandate to follow up these projects. The Committee on National Economy’s mandate ends with scrutinising the request but we also give recommendations to guide Parliament and Government on how best to move. If the schooling programme is done, I think that will be the way forward. I thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: In fact, your explanation has even made the situation worse. Why is it that for other people, it is ready and ours is just lined up? This loan is unconstitutional. I want to quote the Constitution.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, as we were deliberating about the loan for the roads, our hon. Odonga-Otto said it was not in order for me to talk about the road from my constituency. Is it procedurally right for the honourable member to say that his constituency is not here yet we are considering something different? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My recollection is, the point raised by the hon. Odonga-Otto is that the national character of this borrowing is not showing. That was the point he was making. But of course, honourable member, you know that we need to deal with the issues as raised by the committee and are a subject of the debate now.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you for your guidance. Our Constitution says, in National Objective XII.
“(i) The State shall adopt an integrated and coordinated planning approach. 
(ii) The State shall take necessary measures to bring about balanced development of the different areas of Uganda and between the rural and urban areas.

(iii) The State shall take special measures in favour of the development of the least developed areas.”

The earlier loan request we passed, which I supported, was on Kamwenge-Fort Portal Road and was a rejoinder to the one the last Parliament passed. The earlier loan on water supply, for which I moved a motion that the question be put, included empowering towns around the Lake Victoria Basin but Ntungamo was added and it is not anywhere close to Lake Victoria. Now, this kind of behaviour happens everyday. We are elected from different constituencies. There are constituencies like those in Karamoja, in Soroti, in Kumi, in Adjumani in Kibaale, name it. 

I will support this loan request but with a lot of reservations. The minister should get up and commit himself and tell us where the other 14 technical schools are. Where are they and when are they are coming? He should tell us in concrete terms so that when Parliament resumes, we shall put you on the spot. They said procurement is delaying them; is it a coincidence that procurement delays the other parts of the country and it is fast in other areas? These are the things we are talking about.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I would like to give hon. Odonga-Otto this information as a member of the Committee on Social Services. First of all, we raised our concerns in regard to this specific loan. I recall that we had an interaction with the Ministry of Education and also in a meeting convened by the Committee on National Economy. We had thought that even in the Budget Framework Paper, something would come that would demonstrate to the rest of the country that beyond Nakaseke, Bushenyi and Ntungamo, there is also the other part of the country called Uganda. Unfortunately, that has not been made visible. 

Interestingly, in the Budget Framework Paper on the sector for education, the information I would like to give you is that it is only in Ntungamo that Government has budgeted for to buy a private school called Star Secondary School. Ugandans are going to pay. I have not seen this before. We are buying a private school as a country, in Ntungamo District, while the rest of Ugandans do not have secondary schools. Some sub-counties in this country do not even have secondary schools. I think that information should help members appreciate that this is a very genuine concern.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Lastly, Mr Chairman, I said I will support this loan request with a lot of reservations. One, the minister should come and tell us when the 14 technical schools are going to be brought here also for a loan request. We must be told in no - (interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Mr Speaker, I have been listening carefully to the argument raised by my colleague, hon. Odonga Otto, and I think it is prudent that at an appropriate time, we bring a comprehensive list to show this House that there are so many technical schools which are being assisted by the Ministry of Education. 

Even on the issue of Ntungamo, it is not buying when it is Government grant-aided. That is not buying. It is not the only technical college or school which is Government grant-aided. I think the only solution is for members to know that different regions are being balanced. We shall bring a comprehensive list and you see how we have tried to balance throughout the country. 

MR TASHOBYA: I have Information.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: No, I am on the Floor. You will have your chance. 

As I wind up, I was saying we are going to approve this loan in good faith on assumption that the minister will bring a comprehensive list. The minister has just spoken but he has not made any clear and firm commitment. Instead, he is crying loudest, as if he is the complainant yet we are the complainants and he is the minister. 

In the circumstances, I want to formally move that we stay over passing this loan request -(Interjections)- until a comprehensive list of interventions in all the other parts of the country is brought before this Parliament. I want to move, Mr Speaker.

5.37
MR ACHIA REMIGIO (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Mr Speaker, while we appreciate what the chairman of the committee has mentioned about the 14 schools, which is true, there is a difference between a polytechnic and a technical school. A question was raised, even with the chairman the last time, and we are really complaining. Whereas, for example, the Karamoja region has been given one polytechnic, we see a lot of concentration of technical schools, where the kind of qualifications differ, in many areas.

The question I am asking the minister is; what kind of schools are you talking about in that region? The information I have is that a number of them are polytechnics, mostly for primary five and six drop-outs. When are you going to put up technical schools with national character, welcoming people from different parts of this country? That is one question. 

In a similar line, I think we need to go into the argument behind this question. The question is, how does this kind of privatisation happen? We have just passed the loan and I want to congratulate the people of Kamwenge and Fort Portal for the road extension; it was long overdue. However, the question remains, for that road, the internal rate of return as done by the African Development Bank and Government of Uganda is 13.2 percent. Muyende-Moroto-Nakapiripirit Road, according to hon. Byandala, was dropped because that internal rate of return was 14.2 percent. I have got the technical analysis report here. How does 13.2 per cent qualify for funding over and above the one which has 14.2 per cent? By the way, that road carries the marble that feeds Tororo cement, the cement we use for building in this country.

Honourable members, mind you, in the State of the National Address and the Budget Speech delivered by hon. Maria Kiwanuka, on page 21 there were 12 roads provided. This Parliament approved Shs 1.2 trillion and Muyende-Nakapiripirit Road was No.1 out of the 12 roads. Along the way, around September last year, we were told that it was among the six. By December, it was not on the list –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I allowed you because it is a matter of great concern, but we finished with the roads a moment back; we are now dealing with technical schools. Now, you are moving away from the subject. So, if the information you have given is sufficient, I will ask –

MR ACHIA: Mr Speaker, let me conclude. In delivering services to Ugandans, let us be sensitive in how we distribute resources and on how we meet the demands of the whole country.

5.39
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much. I rise to support the motion and to say that those of us coming from those districts also become concerned. Every time a road or school is going to one of these districts, it causes concern and dissatisfaction as if we are not citizens of this country. This country is also supposed to use us. 

Very many times we have passed loan requests going to the North; talk about NUSAF, PRDP, and those are billions of shillings. If you go to some of those districts, you would find schools floating without children yet some of our children are learning under trees. So, we also get concerned. 

In Ntungamo, for example, we have one technical institute. Actually, we do not have a polytechnic. But when a matter of a road or a school, like the member was raising – this is a seed school. We know it is Government policy to have seed schools in all sub counties. Why should we be dissatisfied when we are taking a seed school to a sub county in Ntungamo, for that matter, and we keep quiet? 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, the matter my colleague was raising cannot be concluded unless we have all technical schools in the country. Look at the North and the East, they have very many technical institutions – (interjections) – Yes! For avoidance of doubt, let us ask the minister responsible to bring us a list of technical institutions and polytechnics in the country, and then we can conclusively debate this matter.

MR MBAGADHI: Mr Speaker, while I appreciate the concern being raised by hon. Otto, I want to inform this House that we as a committee have many documents that we laid on the Table and many of the technical institutions we have talked of are within those documents. 

However, I want also to inform this House that we are talking of phase 2 of the funding. Honourable members, we had phase I of the funding. We got funds from OPEC, we got funds from Saudi Arabia and funds from the Islamic Development Bank. That is the funding that was used to handle the 13 technical institutes that are being talked about.

One of the documents that I laid on the Table was the assessment report on the pre-implementation stages and national coverage. I request you, Mr Speaker, to allow me read just a paragraph from that document. In this case, I am referring to the funding that was done in the first phase. 

Under the Saudi-funded project, five new technical institutes are to be established and equipped in the districts of Adjumani, Bukedea, Kiboga, Kyenjojo and Lyantonde. Another nine new technical institutes are to be established and equipped under the OPEC funded project in the districts of Amuria, Hoima, Kamuli, Lwengo, Mukono, Nakasongola, Namutumba, Pader and Yumbe.

Mr Speaker, this document talks about phase I funding – areas that were handled. Under IDB-funded project, two UTCs, Elgon, that is, in Mbale and Lira, plus one NTC at Unyama in Gulu are to be rehabilitated and expanded and equipped. That is in addition to the vocational training institutes.

So, Mr Speaker, this other bit of the funding that we are talking about today is the second phase. It is going to handle three colleges plus Nakaseke Technical Institute. The three colleges are Kyema, Kichwamba and Bushenyi. But of course, as I have already mentioned, in all these documents, we went an extra mile to demand for all these institutions. Of course, we were interested in equitable distribution of resources. In this very document, I will also mention – 

MR KASAMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members, for giving way. I would like to say we support this loan request; nobody disputes this loan. However, the biggest contention which members are putting across is that, is this the best we could do? 

When you go to the loan terms and conditions, for example, we are borrowing US$ 5 million under BADEA for a maturity period of 40 years. You can imagine the period we are going through to pay for 40 years to cater for three technical schools. Couldn’t we do a better job, like scanning the entire country, because we need more technical education to re-skill most of our students and graduates who have graduated from the so many schools? What we are talking about is, was this the best? 

Can you clarify borrowing US$ 5 million for 40 years for three schools? Can’t we do a better job so that we widen and cover the entire country? Borrow a bigger amount. The time span we are spending to pass this is so big, considering the amount and the magnitude of micromanagement we are undertaking in far as borrowing so many small loans to cater for so many small projects is concern. We should have a comprehensive assessment of the entire technical education in this country and come up with a comprehensive loan strategy, and we do a good job that will help this country to have skilled manpower which brings bigger manpower development of this country.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I just wanted to give you additional information. The documents you laid on the Table, which probably you thought we would not have time to read, I have just picked one and sampled and it shows the World Bank UPPET Support Programme. The schools per region are as follows: in central Uganda, that loan went to 333 schools. This is the document you just laid. In Eastern Uganda, the support went to 388 schools. In Northern Uganda, the support went to 245 schools and lastly, in Western Uganda, the support went to 401 schools. So, even the document you have laid – maybe you thought we would not read through it - is even having more serious issues than what you are saying. I just wanted to give you that information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members. This trend of debate is not helpful. I insist that it is not helpful. Let us raise the issues but let us not appear to be – because you know this time, it this side and the other time, it is the other side. We are all supporting, and that is why I was listening to the honourable member from Kanungu in her exasperation and desire that her part of the road be done. She comes from Western Uganda as well but she is also in trouble. Let us be nationalistic about these things and change the tone of the debate. 

I would like to have people who have objections to the loan now, if any. If you have an objection, I will pick you but if you are supporting it, then let us just support and move forward. If you are opposing, then you can raise it.  

5.49
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, MUKONO MUNICIPALITY, MUKONO): I thank you. Uganda shall be celebrating 50 years of Independence this year, Mr Speaker, and as you have properly guided, at times the political man in us makes us demand for things that are not beneficial to the country – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have a political man in you? (Laughter)

MRS NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE: Yes. (Laughter) The trend we are taking, when you listen to colleagues, feels like we are trying to come up with tribal institutions in this country. Whereas it would be at higher institutions of learning that the children of Uganda would be able to meet, there were those days when people would meet in big schools like Makerere and at the end of the day, we would have this nation, Uganda. But when we are talking here, it is as if an institution in Gulu cannot be accessed by a person coming from Buganda. (Applause) The last time we were here approving the loan request for municipalities, the call from hon. Ssemujju Nganda was that instead of scattering money in various municipalities, let us put this money together and build one or two municipalities to the level of a city so that we could have a second city for this country. 

I stand here to request colleagues to stop this habit of pulling everything to our constituencies because we are scattering money. (Applause) We should think about building national institutions. For me, the questions that I would want to ask now are: what are the objectives of this loan, the mode of payment, our ability to manage this loan and pay back? Even if we are going to get these big institutions, whether in Kamwenge, Gulu or Nakaseke, as long as they can be accessed by all the children of Uganda. (Applause)  I am against the idea of scattering funds, which we borrow and at the end of the day we end up not doing any tangible work. I thank you.

5.52
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleague in supporting the loan request. I sit on the Committee of Science and Technology and in the past few months, we went out on our oversight tour, and we visited learning institutions including technical colleges. Out of the five technical colleges, we visited four - Bushenyi, Elgon, Lira and Sheema. 

I am seeing a problem in as far as prioritisation is concerned. From what we saw on the ground, the neediest technical college was Sheema, which is a new technical school but they were renting houses outside for the boys to sleep. When you go to Elgon, it is another needy college with students sleeping in the house of the principal and houses of the staff. The Ministry of Works and Transport has even taken some of the structures for Mt Elgon for labour based training. So, they lack structures. I would have imagined that such colleges should have been the ones to be identified. 

Whereas I appreciate the fact that Government would like to put up structures in these institutions, I would also like to remind the House that in these institutions, they are lacking equipment in the workshops. In fact, they were telling us that some of the equipment there was 40 years old. We are now in a new world training these students using old equipment and when they complete, they go to interact with modern equipment.

As we request for this loan, I would also urge Government that they put aside a budget to equip these colleges. I thank you. (Applause)

5.55
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): I thank you. I was going through this report and then I came across a component where this money is going to be spent. If I could point it out, it is supposed to buy 40 computer sets and appliances, 30-seater institute bus, a pick-up truck, a tractor with a trailer, a plough, sports equipment and a 40KVA generator.

Unless my memory does not serve me well, I think the Ministry of ICT took a step to gain computers and here we are borrowing to buy computers, here we are, borrowing to buy buses. These are liquid assets. I would consider borrowing for assets which are fixed and not liquid. 

I also want to put it on record that if we are talking about PRDP, we should remember what Northern Uganda went through. If you are comparing borrowing money and mentioning PRDP, then I think we are going to miss out. The NRM stands for nationalism and the reason why PRDP came into force was to make Northern Uganda also catch up with the rest of the country. So, much as we support this loan request, let us put it in our minds that whenever we bring up issues, we should not make comparisons with the PRDP money. 

This PRDP money that we are talking about was okay in the past years but today, it is just by name. So, I appeal to the whole House that we should stand together whenever we are probing loan request or any kind of programmes. We should be human enough to the people of the North. Thank you very much. 

5.57
MRS JANET KATAAHA MUSEVENI (NRM, Ruhaama County, Ntungamo): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me an opportunity to speak. I want to clarify an issue about this disagreement or misunderstanding about the funding in different regions. 

I happen to come from the western region and I work in the north-eastern region. I know the funding that is due for Karamoja. Let me use Karamoja, as an example, and also talk about Ntungamo because I come from Ntungamo. I want to clarify this issue, and I honestly hope that people will understand this. 

When you talk about PRDP and NUSAF funding in Northern Uganda and in Karamoja, these are two Government programmes that come in addition to the other Government programmes that are happening across the country. In the western region, the programmes that are happening, which include education, health, NAADS and others, are the same programmes that happen in both the northern region and Karamoja without the PRDP and the NUSAF. 

When we talk about education, I am honestly surprised to hear hon. Alaso talking about buying a private school in Ntungamo. I thought there probably was a private school that is being bought; that is why I asked hon. Tashobya to say something about it. I thought probably it is in a constituency that is not mine or that I do not know of. 

Most of the schools in the western region were built 40 years ago or so, and most of those schools are rundown so badly that the children sit outside in the gardens for lessons. If hon. Alaso is talking about the school that is a US school, which I know about, it is a community school that was built in a new sub-county where there was no secondary school. The parents asked Government to take on this school and give it a grant so that it can be used as a seed secondary school in that sub-county. Government is not buying that school.

I can assure you that funding in Northern Uganda and in Karamoja for government programmes – I am surprised to even hear Members of Parliament from Karamoja talking about Karamoja as if there is nothing in Karamoja! I am there all the time and I know what is happening in Karamoja. I know the schools that are built in Karamoja - boarding schools at secondary and primary level – and they are not found anywhere in the western region. I can testify to this because I have been trying to find funding to rehabilitate some of the schools in the western region. I know what is happening in the Northern region and in Karamoja also. So, please – (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable minister for giving way. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister. Nowadays, in Northern Uganda, Amuru District specifically where I come from, for all the schools that are being constructed and for all the health centres and most of the government interventions, they normally term it as the PRDP. Honourable minister, I will make it clear that there is a marked difference between this PRDP and the normal government programmes. I would like to find out whether the normal government programmes have really stopped in my district because all the programmes are under PRDP. Thank you so much. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: I would like to give further information. I have two-fold information. One, as the Committee on Government Assurances, we went to Karamoja sub region. Our report is coming, but just for the record, I think what is being done by the Ministry for Karamoja in that area is commendable. The committee was particularly so surprised about that big dam – I do not remember the name - and the health centres and the nature of interventions. I thought I would put it on record that at least, we found a different Karamoja. 

Secondly, the PRDP money we are getting in the North is not loans. It is donor support. Actually, we have been encouraging the donors to intervene directly not through Government, because we even suspect Government in handling money. So, we have to be very clear that for the interventions under NUREP I, we have encouraged donors to invest directly in the people of Northern Uganda and not through the government. But for Karamoja, I think it is worthwhile commending the First Lady for all the efforts she is doing in the area. That is the information I wanted to give.   

MRS MUSEVENI: I want to add that with PRDP, there is donor funding but there is also Government funding. But what I honestly want this House to know - What is happening in the western region, and I think even the central region, in these regions where people have had this understanding that everything here is okay, it is done, it is finished and it does not need funding, I think there is something that is not being understood properly. I can honestly tell you that even money for water in Karamoja is double the amount of money that is given to Ntungamo. 

So, it is not right, and it is not even true, to say that these programmes only go to the western region, the central or the other region and not the northern region or Karamoja. I think there is a misunderstanding on that. The quicker we understand it, the better, so that we can start talking a national language. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was a motion. Does the minister in charge of PRDP have anything to say?

6.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR NORTHERN UGANDA (Ms Rebecca Amuge): Mr Speaker, as you know, I am the rural minister from Northern Uganda. I would like to say that what we are trying to fight now is not to create another conflict within the conflict area. I know that we can ask for more, but not by castigating other regions.

What is lacking in this Parliament – I also want to take responsibility as a minister – is that when we bring requests here, we sometimes do not give them a clear background. This is very important. What the honourable member who has been holding the Floor said could have come here first. There are plans and some rehabilitation programmes in respect of the old technical institutes in different areas are going on.

They would have also let us know because to me development and planning are also population based. Some areas, for example, Ruhama Constituency, has almost 500,000 people, and that is just one. Sometimes when you are telling people about what you plan to do, let them know the basis of your decision. Why would you chose to have ten schools in one area, for example, yet they are the only ones there. This should be told to the people. I think this is done because there is uniqueness in planning; while some areas have fewer people, others are difficult to access. That is exactly what we are facing.

Can I also clarify that we have different levels of funding for PRDP. One is from the Government of Uganda, which made a commitment to give 30 percent. I am happy that Government has honoured that. Our donors made a commitment to give us the other 70 percent. This is done at three levels. One of the levels is off-budget, and they usually send their funds to the project areas that they chose. Another one is on-budget and that comes directly to Government. The third level is from the special programmes such as NUSAF. 

However, I would like to disagree on one issue. The money we are getting from the World Bank is not free; it is a loan. Mr Speaker, I am at pains to explain some of these things because they might be used against me. But on what the Member of Parliament from Amuru said, I would like to say that let us stop politicising programmes. I am more in your constituency than you, and I know what is happening there. I thank you. 

Mr Speaker, I now rise to move that the question be put to the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honnourable members, the motion is that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion for the approval of the report of the committee and the requests made from it. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC ORDER MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is equally important business. I call upon the House to remain calm and seated.

6.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House resolves itself into a committee of the whole House to consider the Public Order Management Bill, 2011. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I did not follow this Bill from the beginning. I need to be advised. Could the chairman of the relevant committee update the House?

6.12
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. At the time we broke off, I had tabled the report and it was ready for debate by the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That means it is not yet time to move that motion, honourable Minister of State for Internal Affairs. The Bill was for debate. So, I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Public Order Management Bill, 2011” be read the second time and that motion is for debate. Yes, hon. Odonga Otto, are you debating?

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence. I have a loose understanding of those readings, like second reading, and where it ends. Anyway, why I am rising is that yesterday we made a request – (Interjections) – the highest level of education is to know what you do not know. So, that is the area I do not know. I do not pretty much understand those second and third reading issues. 

Well, what I am saying is that yesterday, I requested for the committee proceedings and all the submissions that were made by the stakeholders. At 5.11 p.m. yesterday, we sent a written request to the Clerk to Parliament, a copy of which you received. However, up to now – and I am talking on behalf of the Opposition – we have not yet received the copies of the minutes and all the other records of the proceedings together with all the submissions from stakeholders. If we are to make a law that will help all of us, I would like to request your indulgence that we stand over this matter until those documents have been availed to us to run through them, so that we can make adequate consultations. I am saying this because the way the law has been drafted, we are the potential clients, and that is why we need to consult. 

In the circumstances, I would like to move that you suspend any further business on this matter until we obtain those documents and make informed debate. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, indeed, it is true that a request was made yesterday. However, the information I have just got from the clerk-at-the  Table, Mr Paul Wabwire, the Deputy Clerk in charge of Legislative Services, is that he personally passed on the documents that were requested for to the Office of the Leader of the Opposition today at about 11 a.m. He has just been informing me that he did that at about 10.30 a.m.  So, hon. Otto, if there is another request which is not really –

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, that is good news, that at 11 O’clock today when we were in Parliament, the minutes were submitted. Basing on that, I would now make a request to you that you give us more time to peruse the documents and make further consultation because at 11 O’clock, we were all in the Plenary. I beg to request that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, would you like to handover now to the – (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, hon. Otto, has the full mandate as the acting Leader of the Opposition when I am away, and I am still away. What I wanted to come and confirm –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are away on the Hansard. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  Mr Speaker, it is true the Clerk has passed the document over to us, but it came late. It is also true that we have not perused through it. I was trying to go through it, but it is bulky. So, he is right to ask for some time until we have gone through the document. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the request made. This matter was for general debate and for fair debate, you need both sides to be able to make contributions on this matter. We do not want controversy at this level.  

MR BARYAYANGA: Whereas I heard that the Clerk had passed on the documents to the Leader of the Opposition, what about us, the Independents? Where are we getting our documents? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, those documents were laid on the Table. They therefore became the property of Parliament. I even guided yesterday that it was even not necessary to ask for them from the House because once documents are laid before the House, you know exactly where they go. All you need to do is to go there and ask for them and you will be given, if you really need to look at them. 

The report of the committee was circulated to all the honourable members. What the Leader of the Opposition requested for, through hon. Odonga Otto, was the minutes and submissions of the people who appeared before the committee and not necessarily the report. As for the report, honourable members, you got the copies. But if you found that the report was inadequate for your purposes, then you could have gone to the Clerk’s office to ask for the minutes and all those other things. Is that clear?

In the interest of moving together on this matter, we do not want controversy at the beginning of the discussion. This matter was for general debate. Unless members would want to debate from one side only, I would allow debate, but it might not be in the interest of the House to proceed when the Opposition has made it clear that that is the situation.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you. The Bill we are talking about is the Public Order Management Bill. It is a very urgent Bill. I also agree that we need to move in harmony and therefore support that time is given to them. 

However, I request that we put a timeframe because yesterday when we adjourned I stood up and asked hon. Odonga Otto to confirm to the House that this afternoon they would have accessed the minutes and that we shall transact business. I appreciate that all of us were here. Therefore, Mr Speaker, can we put a timeframe so that when we get back here we will consider the Bill as a very important Bill so that we do not repeat what happened. That is my humble request. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, do you want to say something?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I do not want to contradict the advice you have given to the House but I only want it on record that these minutes and the supporting documents were laid here in the House about two weeks ago. I remember the House was suspended and I had to go and look for these documents. So, our colleagues have had two weeks to get the minutes and the supporting documents, which they did not. From yesterday, for some reason, they have not been able. 

While I do not object to your position, it should be on record that these documents have been here for more than two weeks. Even yesterday, there was a bit of time but for some reason or the other, they have not had time to read them. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is now 6.20 p.m. I am advised that on Tuesday next week, both the chair and the vice-chair of the legal committee, and I think hon. Otto, are travelling. Is that true? Mr Chairman, would you like to advise us on this? 

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Speaker, the travel of the chairperson and the vice-chairperson cannot stop business of Parliament. In the opinion of the leadership of the parties we belong to, an arrangement can be made and the travel is postponed for either both of us or one of us. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for the chairman and vice to travel at the same time? We can understand sickness. The reason why we put a chairman and a vice is so that in case one is not there, the other is there. That is why we have a vice. This must stop. Is it procedurally right for the chairman and vice to travel when we have business?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you will recall that according to the original schedule, this Parliament should have been prorogued yesterday. By the schedule, it should have been 17th, which was yesterday. According to the parliamentary calendar, it should have been prorogued yesterday but because of the business that has been continued, we did not. I am sure arrangements were made on the basis of the calendar of Parliament that was given in advance, but the situation has changed. Honourable members, this House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.24 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 22 May 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
