Tuesday, 17 May 2005

Parliament met at 2.34 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, I do not have any substantive communication to make apart from only welcoming you back and to thank you for the work you did yesterday. I hope we shall remain together until the end of the week and accomplish what we agreed upon. Thank you.

2.36
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Madam Speaker, I am seeking guidance from the Leader of Government Business on a matter, which is troubling my constituency. I wish to convey the answer according to this guidance as quickly as possible. The concern is that we have learnt reliably from embassies, from the media and other persons knowledgeable on matters of foreign aid that our donor community has expressed concern and have even issued a threat to the effect that they are going to cut back on aid to Uganda yet at this material time we are in preparations for the budget. I would like to receive guidance from the Government as to whether this information is accurate. And if it is accurate, what are they doing about it and how do they plan to proceed with a sustainable budget without foreign aid? 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the Prime Minister wish to say something about it?

2.37
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to assure the whole country that there is no cause for alarm at all. I wish to also point out that what you saw in the New Vision is not correct because that was a mere recommendation from a researcher. When a consultant makes a recommendation it does not necessarily mean that the World Bank accepts the recommendation.  

Indeed at an appropriate time you are going to get an exact statement from the World Bank authorities. So, there is no cause for alarm. We are getting on very well indeed and as you may know, I do meet many of our financial partners and they raise important issues and we clarify these issues. However, there are a few occasions that we agree to disagree. There is no cause for alarm. I thank you.

2.38
MS BEATRICE KIRASO (Woman Representative, Kabarole): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I rise on a matter of importance and I would like to give this information to Parliament and indeed to the country regarding a possible loss of funds, which this government is about to incur. I seek your indulgence that we pronounce ourselves on this.

I will give a very brief background. In the Sixth Parliament there was instituted a select committee to investigate the privatisation process. Among other things it was established that Tahar Fourati, the company that had bought or taken over Nile Hotel, had breached the contract and actually the Government of Uganda had a case against Tahar Fourati. 

During this Parliament once again the Sessional Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, on which I sit, looked into this matter. The committee was advised by government through the Minister in charge of Privatisation that Tahar Fourati had no case against the Government and that even if we went for litigation there would be no risk of government losing a case against Tahar Fourati.  

Further to that, the President was also advised in the same way and among the documents, which were availed to the committee, is a letter from His Excellency the President to the late Attorney-General, hon. Francis Ayume, advising that government has a good case against Tahar Fourati for breach of contract and that in short - I will not go into the details of the whole letter – the President was advising that no settlement of this suit can be contemplated other than unconditional withdrawal by the plaintiffs of their claims without any compensation being paid.  

Having given this very short background, it has now come to the knowledge of our Committee of Finance that Shs 3 billion is about to be paid by the Privatisation Unit to Tahar Fourati. I thought I should bring this to light so that as Parliament, which had earlier pronounced itself together with government to say that Tahar Fourati has no case against government, we said that they should not claim anything and they should not be paid. But now we are surprised to see that things are turning and Shs 3 billion is about to be paid.

I think that this House should once again pronounce itself on this matter and see how this payment can be stopped and how any further fraud can be stopped.  Madam Speaker, I thank you.

2.43
MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, when we made a report on the lease of Nile Hotel, one of our concerns was that before a lease agreement is signed Nile Hotel Complex must be free of any encumbrances. The minister assured us that they had a case. Finally when we made a report to the House it was on an understanding that actually there would be no further litigation. Thus we are very surprised that now things are turning around, and the minister needs to explain. I thank you, very much.

2.44
MR NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri County West, Sironko): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I always refer to the book by Prof. Stigliz who says that privatisation is briberisation. This Parliament has made a lot of pronouncements on privatisation but we have not come up with concrete issues on it. 

On the issue of Nile Hotel, I recall I was among those who said that we were going to give these people tax exemptions, which are blanket, and they would use them to kill us, and that is exactly what they are doing. 

In our report of the National Economy Committee we wrote about the sale of Nytil; they paid about US $2.1 million, out of US $7.1 million. The Government transferred the title to Nytil - the Picfare guys - they went and got a loan using a government title yet they could not pay the loan. Eventually government had to pay the money to retrieve the title from Nytil. When they retrieved it the same group used another name to get Nytil at a cheaper price and when the Minister of Finance was responding to the query -(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, hon. Kiraso has read out a very specific issue and I believe this specific issue could be an eye opener to many other issues, if they are there. My procedural question is, could the minister first of all be allowed to address this specific issue and we see the way forward other than bringing in these other debates at this point in time? I thank you.

MR NANDALA: I was trying to drive at the point that the privatisation, which is being run by the Ministry of Finance, is a very dangerous thing. Even if we talk about this, unless we take serious action concerning the minister or we endanger - today I was reading in the papers that government has signed a contract allowing the guy from Thailand to come and take over the Diary Corporation and at the same time a committee of Parliament is investigating the matter. It has not concluded and they are dealing with the Executive. So in this Parliament of ours, because of this issue of collective responsibility under NRM/O caucus, we are getting a problem. These guys should be in Luzira by now. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

2.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PRIVATISATION (Prof. Peter Kasenene): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. The report that hon. Kiraso is making is correct. This is what has happened. 

In January 2004 we came to Parliament seeking permission to divest Nile Hotel International and this august House gave us permission to go ahead and divest Nile Hotel International. According to the Hansard, one of the recommendations of this House was that Government should expeditiously settle the Tahar Fourati case against government without resorting to court. It is in the Hansard; you can check it. 

It is true that when we divested Nile Hotel International Tahar Fourati was suing government and Nile Hotel for breach of contract or a contract that had been earlier signed between government and Nile Hotel and Tahar Fourati to manage Nile Hotel. What the committee has reported about our position – our statement to the committee is correct. Our legal officers in privatisation studied the case and according to them there was no court case; Tahar Fourati did not have a case. Madam Speaker, our legal officers do not give legal guidance to Government. 

In August of last year the lawyers of TPS, that is the company that won the concession for Nile Hotel, wrote to us expressing their uncertainty about the continued case in court of Tahar Fourati challenging the divesture. They expressed their concern about the investment and whether they should go ahead, expand and renovate Nile Hotel or suspend the process because of the pending case. 

It is true that the President earlier on, as hon. Kiraso said, had guided that this case should be handled by private lawyers. But when the lawyers of TPS expressed their concern with the danger of withdrawing from this divesture, again guidance was sought. The President’s guidance was that the Attorney-General should guide us. We consulted the Attorney-General and his guidance was that Tahar Fourati had a case and that we should go ahead and settle the case.

MS KIRASO: I am sorry to interrupt the honourable minister. The position, which the minister is giving, unless he is talking about round two, in this letter that I am going to lay on the Table the Solicitor-General in October 2003 had already said, “Yes, we acknowledge liability”. And he went ahead to instruct the Privatisation Unit and the Minister of State for Privatisation to negotiate with and pay Tahar Fourati. That was in 2003. 

After that, in October the same year the President said - his letter is here with his signature, I am going to lay this on the Table. “I am, therefore, directing you to instruct external lawyers of Nile Hotel International - the external lawyers had already said that even if we went to court Tahar Fourati had no case against the Government of Uganda. Actually even if we went to court the Government of Uganda would win the case. So, the external lawyers were saying, “If they insist let us go to court. We will still win the case”. And the President is saying, “I am directing you to instruct the external lawyers of Nile Hotel International to protect both the interests of the hotel and government in the court against this claim.”  And the letter I read was written in 2004 on the 20th of September. It is also here. These are documents, which were not smuggled to us. They were given to the committee officially.  

In September 2004 Fox Odoi Onyoro wrote and said, “I have been directed by His Excellency the President to retaliate the position earlier taken that no settlement of this suit can be contemplated other than an unconditional withdrawal by the plaintiffs of their claims without any compensation being paid, failing which the court proceedings must be defended in the manner indicated above.”
That was in September 2004. Unless the honourable minister is saying that after September 2004 there were other series of meetings and consultations and the Solicitor-General stood by his earlier position, the President retracted his earlier position, which might be true but I think it would be prudent for us to get those documents before Shs 3 billion is paid out of privatisation. 

So, the minister could also come up with his information or at best, if this House so accepts, he should come back to the committee with this new information so that we review it against the old information and come up with something, which is - because we are saying the President said this, but he changed his mind! I have got these documents, which I am going to lay on the Table. Thank you.

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker, I am not refuting the documents hon. Kiraso is referring to and I had already accepted that these documents exist. That guidance existed in August 2004 when the lawyers of TPS raised concern and there was a day –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is TPS?

PROF. KASENENE: TPS is the company, which won the divestiture of Nile Hotel. In full it is Tourism Promotional Services, which is owned by the Aga Khan Group. So, there was that concern and this concern was brought forward by His Excellency the President who guided, as I said earlier, that this case should be handled by the Attorney-General and not the Solicitor-General. The documents and the earlier guidance that hon. Kiraso is referring to is contained in the decision that had been taken by the Solicitor-General on the matter.  

After the guidance of His Excellency the President, I wrote to the Attorney-General and put the case to him. I explained and gave him the background, and the Attorney-General wrote to me -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: It appears that His Excellency the President gave his guidance twice. The first guidance was, “Defend the case all the way”. I want to find out from the minister whether he complied with the first guidance given by the President that government should defend the case and by accepting the second guidance the minister had failed to successfully defend the case. Why was the President saying, “Do not consult the Solicitor-General; consult the Attorney-General?” I thought that the Solicitor-General is a constitutional position as much as the Attorney-General is, and they both work in tandem. Why is it that it was necessary to consult a particular individual rather than another on a matter of such great importance?

CAPT. GUMA: I think this is a substantive matter. I would request your indulgency to push this matter to the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, because Prof. Kasenene does not seem to be very sure about his facts in the head and we do not want to roast him here. The matter is –(Interruption)

PROF. KASENENE: Hon. Kiraso has read out a number of issues. I have responded to these issues and clarified on them. At no point was there an issue I did not answer to. Is it in order that hon. Guma says that I do not seem to have my facts?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have the facts but please, set them out sequentially so that we can finish the matter.

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker, I was about to complete actually and to answer the last question by hon. Mwandha: “Why did the President give different directives?” It is because the scenario changed. By the time we divested Nile Hotel International there was a feeling and a belief that there was no case for Nile Hotel to answer. But after the divestiture of Nile Hotel the investor was concerned about the continuing court case and because of that we did not want the investor to pull out of this divestiture. We went back to the source who had given directive. We went back to the President and said, “The private lawyers do not seem to be able to complete this case. What should we do?” Madam Speaker, the President guided that I bring this matter to the Attorney-General.  

MR ERESU: I would like to give the following information to the honourable minister. We have with us a letter from the President’s Office signed by Fox Odoi Onyoro, the Principal Private Secretary to His Excellency the President, dated 20 September 2004. For purposes of clarity I should read it; “His Excellency the President has instructed that the Government should defend the suit brought by the lawyers of the Nile Hotel International, M/S Mugerwa and Masembe Advocates.” 

The information I am giving is that this is a communication with the express authority of His Excellency the President to the Director of the Privatisation Unit. Can the minister, therefore, tell us whether there was another correspondence after that?

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I just want to seek a supplementary clarification. According to the honourable minister the scenario had changed and that is why it warranted the President to give subsequent guidance. But did the scenario’s changing also change the facts of the case? Would it no longer meritoriously be pursued in court? What facts changed that forced you to divert from the advice of the Solicitor-General?

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker, I did not deny the guidance from the President, nor did I deny that there was a communication from Mr Fox Odoi. But in legal matters, it is not the Minister of Finance who takes the decision. The letters they are referring to, the letter of the President was not directed to the Minister of Finance. The letter of the President is directed to the Attorney-General; he was guiding the Attorney-General. It is the Attorney-General who decides on what actions we should take in legal matters, and I have guidance from the Attorney-General that we should settle.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think this country is tired to hearing about losses in courts, and unnecessary settlements. These are public funds! In fact we do not know what you people are doing with the money, which you receive under the Divestiture Statute under section 35. So, this country would like to save some money. If we can save this Shs 3 billion and it does some other thing, we would be happy. Who is trying to pay whom so that we can lodge a caveat on that payment and then – I want to know who is paying whom so that we lodge a caveat on that person.

MS KIRASO: The Government, through the Privatisation Unit, is paying Tahar Fourati, which Tahar Fourati breached the contract between themselves and government. And this letter says that there is a very strong opinion that the claim of Tahar Fourati is lacking in both merit and legal basis. So, because of this change of heart there is this and the other opinion. And there is the Solicitor-General, the Attorney-General and the external lawyers of Nile Hotel. 

The minister is saying that we are going to pay Shs 3 billion so that we do not scare this investor who is already here and who is already doing work on Nile Hotel, which I find ridiculous because by the time this investor came this case wad already there; it was outstanding. Given this kind of scenario I would like to urge Parliament to take a decision that this payment be halted and we look further into this and come back with a report to this House. Meanwhile, I will lay this on the Table because we do not know if there is any further communication from the President made after this one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Minister, can you restrain the Privatisation Unit from making this payment? I think the world will not come to an end for a few days.

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Speaker, I have no objection. If this is the wish of Parliament and they want to look further into this matter, it is in order. I have no objection.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I know from the Attorney-General whether he intends to say something about this because this is advice is from his office?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, I have just been confronted with these facts in this House. I will go back to the chambers and investigate the matter and report back to this House tomorrow. In the meantime I agree with the Minister of Finance that payment should be stayed until the facts are properly ascertained, and this House will proceed on the advice of the Attorney-General.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have now got those commitments from the Attorney-General and the Minister of Finance, but we have to carry out our oversight role over this matter. So, could our Finance Committee handle this matter and report back like you have been doing before?

MR AWORI: I am seeking your guidance, Madam Speaker. You have made a ruling on a matter - I am not pursuing it as it is but this is supplementary information, which could have come up. I wonder if it could be handled at the same time? 

We have two similar cases coming up whereby the Government through the Ministry of Finance is about to make a settlement out of court to the tune of Shs 4.3 billion to another company, which the Attorney-General had actually advised that it is contestable in courts of law and that we have got a case to win. Now the Ministry of Finance, outside the parameters of the advice of the Attorney-General, has agreed to settle it out of court. 

I am referring to the matter of Nile Roses Ltd, previously related to Uganda Commercial Bank (UCB) but it has been brought back. I am seeking your guidance, can we bring this under the same consideration or should we bring it separately on the Floor of Parliament? There are several other cases, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, you have your ordinary oversight role and no one takes that away from you. If you feel that there is something that must be investigated, you take it to the right committee. So, you can take it the Finance Committee as well.

MR AWORI: Much obliged, Madam Speaker, I shall bring it to the attention of the chairperson and I hope the Ministry of Finance will come up with pertinent information because we learnt that the money has been paid and yet the recipient has not received the full amount.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I just want to guide the senior legislator on a procedural matter. That is a very substantive matter over which he should raise a question to the Minister of Finance and if he is not satisfied then Parliament, in its wisdom, could refer the matter to the same committee. But to get a matter that is about to be concluded and then you bring in another matter, then I could also stand up and say that in Mukono there is somebody who is about to die. Procedurally, is that right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The work of our sessional committees is ongoing so these can come in at any time. Let them look at it and they will let us know.

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, just to add on something to your ruling, when money is changing hands it does so very fast and sometimes is fast tracked as hon. Babu is advising. So, sometimes there is no time for substantive questions to be put and there is no time for the minister to get information but things are happening. And for us when something comes and we think it should be stopped, it is the duty of all of us to bring it here.  

Having said that, I do not want to take the place of the Chair of the Finance Committee but being an old member I am glad to inform this House that we have finalised looking into the Dairy Corporation as this House instructed us. Madam Speaker, we will be very glad if you gave us a slot any time from now to present the report on the sale of the Dairy Corporation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, we shall find a slot for you.

3.12
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Madam Speaker, I want to raise a matter of great concern to Ugandans at the moment. Last Saturday I was on Radio Kiira trying to explain the implications of the Referendum Bill, which we passed recently. I was asked this question by many callers: “Why is it that some government officials, including the Presidential Advisor in the name of Maj. Kakoza Mutale, are saying that they are now going to fight against the referendum?” 

The President has made it very clear that he is going to campaign for the return to multi-partism but Maj. Kakoza Mutale and his network - and I have been told that some Members of Parliament have joined Kalangala Action Plan - that these people want to fight against what Parliament has decided. Since the National Political Commissar is here can he make a clarification on this? Is government prepared to denounce Kakooza Mutale or they are working in harmony with him?   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether the NPC is in position to answer; apparently he is ready.

3.14
THE MINISTER WITHOUT A PORTFOLIO/NATIONAL POLITICAL COMMISSAR (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, madam Speaker, and I thank my brother hon. Nabwiso for raising this point. As everyone is aware, government pushed very hard to ensure that we move to this referendum. Honorable members are also aware that the Movement National Conference did recommend that we must open up political space through the referendum. So, my first point is that the Government is firm on campaigning for the opening up of political space. (Applause). 

It is true that there are stories that some people, including Kakooza Mutale, have been going around to take a different position. As you know, the Movement moves on the basis of facts so what we are doing is to investigate this issue and if it is confirmed that anyone in the Government, including Kakooza Mutale, is actually taking that position, immediate and appropriate disciplinary action will be taken. So I would like to tell my colleague, hon. Nabwiso, to assure the population that we remain firm on the issue of opening up political space -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and hon. National Political Commissar. Could you confirm to this august House whether the so-called Maj. Kakooza Mutale is a serving officer in the UPDF? If he is indeed a serving officer in the UPDF, is it proper, in accordance with the military regulations, for him to issue orders contrary to the Commander-in-Chief’s directive?

DR KIYONGA: Well, as I said, if our findings point at any particular officer or any particular individual, disciplinary action would be taken. That covers everybody, including Kakooza Mutale, and I would like to confirm that Kakooza Mutale is a serving officer of the UPDF. So in the event that the investigations point out that he is involved in this exercise, he will be subjected to disciplinary measures.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, last week –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is that about, Mutale? 

MR MWANDHA: It is a matter of great concern –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no.

MR MWANDHA: Last week, Madam Speaker, you directed the Prime Minister to explain to this House about the so-called Ugandans who have been recruited to go to unknown destinations, including Iraq. The Rt hon. Prime Minister was supposed to have answered this one last week but he has not given any explanation to this House up to now.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am raising a point of procedure. I was looking at the Order Paper and after item No. 4 I expect that we should move to item No. 5. However, the issues that are coming up after the conclusion of item No. 4 are issues that would arise after the communication from the Chair. I am wondering whether we are moving forward.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think members want to know why the Minister of Internal Affairs has not yet responded to the request made last week. Hon. Otto raised the matter and he wanted to know whether we are allowing Ugandans to go out of the country to Iraq. I said I did not know how to handle that and I want the Minister of Internal Affairs to tell us. That is where we are

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am certain that you never called upon me to answer this question –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it was Internal Affairs.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: If the sector ministers did not do their work I would collapse and I would be a poor team builder. I happen to know that the Minister of Internal Affairs, who is an ex-officio Member of Parliament, was given permission to go away because he has not to vote. I gave him permission to go away. There was an urgent matter to attend to, therefore, -(Interjection)- yes; he had an urgent matter to attend to, which I am not going to divulge to you. 

I am not a machine. If I realise that a colleague has a problem I have to handle it in an appropriate manner. So, I have no hesitation in requesting the Minister of State for Internal Affairs to handle that question. I give him about four days because he must do research and report to this House. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Madam Speaker, I have just received a communication that the minister is meeting His Excellency the President and so she is unable to come.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, for the nth time I rise to protest and to seek your guidance on a matter of the procedure. Many a time ministers have been expected to come before this august House to explain matters of national importance and matters pertaining to their terms of services, that is, to work for this government. From time to time, as members of this august House they are expected to report whenever we call upon them. 

Once again, the honorable minister, who normally receives the Order Paper a minimum of two hours before we assemble here and who could have advised you through so many other channels: personal, telephone and one of the colleagues who has been here with us from the beginning of this sitting, never made an attempt to even send you a note. The Leader of Government Business, the Prime Minister, who is also familiar with the Order Paper, could not send you a message that, “I have seen item No. 3 on the Order Paper calls for the Minister for the Presidency to make a statement, but I am aware that at this material time she is consulting with the appointing authority”. Really I take this is as contempt of this House and total disregard for members of the august House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, for how long should I remove it from the Order Paper; for the rest of this week?

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, hon. Awori has made a very strong statement. The honourable minister was on her way to Parliament, her statement was ready and she received that urgent invitation to go to State House. Otherwise, the statement was ready - as I have been corrected by the Rt hon. Prime Minister. Tomorrow she will be ready to give the statement that she was about to give today.  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UNITS OF ACCOUNT 27.010 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK FOR FINANCING THE ROAD SECTOR SUPPORT PROJECT (KABALE-KISORO ROAD)

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this House passes the motion for a resolution authorising government to borrow 27, 010,000 units of account from the African Development Fund (ADF) of the African Development Bank Group, for financing the road sector support project. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the resolution be in the following words:

“WHEREAS a loan agreement for 27,010,000 units of account is to be concluded between the African Development Fund (ADF) of the African Development Bank Group, and the Government of the Republic of Uganda for purposes of financing the road sector support project; 

AND WHEREAS under Article 159(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda government is authorised to borrow money from any source subject to other constitutional provisions; 

AND WHEREAS under Article 159(2) of the said Constitution, borrowing by government has to be authorised by or under an Act of Parliament; 

AND WHEREAS in line with the above stated constitutional requirements, government has laid before Parliament the terms and conditions of the stated loan for your approval and authorisation;

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by Parliament that the Government is hereby authorized to secure the said loan of 27,010,000 units of account from the African Development Fund (ADF) of the African Bank Group upon the terms and conditions therein stated.”

As honourable members may know, Government has been implementing a ten-year road sector development programme. This programme was developed in 1997. It is supposed to cover the entire national road network. The total cost of the project is supposed to be US $2,280 million. If this money were raised, the entire national road network would be covered. To raise this money the Government is negotiating with various sources and a number of donors. 

In order to implement this programme, the Government formulated what is called the Road Sector Support Project. This project has three components but the main one, for which this particular loan is being sourced, is the upgrading of the Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana-Kyanika road to paved standard, with concrete asphalt. 

The second component is to carry on the feasibility study and prepare engineering reports and tender documents on the Fort-Portal-Ibanda-Nyakahita road. That is a distance of about 208 kilometers. These roads are in South Western Uganda. 

The third component is for drawing engineering plans for the rehabilitation of roads in 12 districts of South Western Uganda. The project will support efforts of the Government in poverty reduction through improvement of the road infrastructure especially in rural areas by providing all weather access for the supply of farm inputs and marketing of produce from the rural areas to the major market centers. 

It will also promote regional integration and economic operation with neighbouring countries, especially the DRC and the Republic of Rwanda. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, this loan is highly concessional with a maturity period of 50 years, including ten years of grace. It carries a service fee of just 0.75 percent on both disbursed and outstanding amounts. 

This is a very noble project. I beg honourable members to support the project and pass the loan. I beg to move. (Applause).

3.29
THE CHAIRMAN, STANDING COMMITTEE OF NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Nandala Mafabi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, this is a report of the Committee on National Economy on the loan request from the African Development Bank to finance Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana-Kyanika road. This loan request is for 27,010,000 units of account, with a grant element of 1.49 million units of account. It is from the African Development Bank. There should be that correction: it is not IDA but the African Development Bank. 

It is under the ten-year road sector programme - that is a good loan - and we had a meeting with the Ministries of Finance and Works, and the Committee on Works, Housing and Communications. We looked at all the documents, which included draft credit agreements, project implementation plan, project implementation manual and the agreement between the Government of Uganda and the African Development Bank. 

This is a very good loan and what the money got from it is supposed to do is the Kabale-Kisoro road. The feasibility study was done in 1993 and it was found to be a viable road.

The development partners endorsed it in April 2002. 

What is it supposed to do? It is going to link us to three countries, that is, Rwanda, DRC and Burundi.

The project will be implemented in 36 months to cover 98.7 kilometers. 

The road will be a two-lane asphalt, concrete road of 6 meters wide and 1.5 meter of the shoulder. 

The project has a component of carrying out feasibility study and detailed engineering of 208 kilometers of the Fort-Portal-Ibanda-Nyakahita road. 

It will also cover the detailed engineering reports for rehabilitation of roads in 12 districts in South Western Uganda; and it will be supervised by the Road Agency Formation Unit of the Ministry of Works. 

The total cost of the project is US $31,760,000 of which the loan is US $27,010,000. The ADF grant is of US $1.49 million, and the Government of Uganda will contribute US $3.26 million. The loan has a grace period of ten years and maturity period of 50 years with interest of 0.75 percent per annum. 

The observations are:

This is very strategic because it connects Uganda to the neighboring countries of DRC, Rwanda and Burundi. It is, therefore, both economically and politically strategic for the Great Lakes region and at the same time for us. 

The road serves two important National Parks with the rare mountain Gorillas in Mgahinga and Bwindi Impenetrable National Parks. 

The road also traverses a mineral rich area with huge deposits of iron ore in Muko that in future we would need better transport facilities. 

The road is also linked to two district headquarters, which is proposed in the wider inter-district road network to promote inter-district communication. 

This road was identified by the PTA as a potential inter-regional road, which would promote cross border trade and regional integration. It is a very good project. So far this is the best. 

Recommendations:
This is a viable project in line with the Road Sector Development Programme, and the committee recommends that the House approves this loan.

The committee urges government to meet her obligations to compensate the affected people in line with the Resettlement Action Plan.  

Government should get counterpart funding and of course put in place a system to get resources for other roads taking into consideration what they were saying in the papers about transition.

In conclusion, the committee begs this House to approve this loan without debating it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairperson. I think it is presumptuous of you to say that we should not debate it. However, I would like to introduce guests. In the distinguished strangers’ gallery we have a team of Parliamentarians from the Austrian National Assembly. (Applause). They have come to Uganda to assess the impact of Austrian development support on the ground. They are here with the head of the Austrian Mission in Uganda, the Managing Director of the Austrian Development Agency and a big team of journalists. 

I have also noticed Rotarian Robert Ssebunya and a senior citizen, Israel Mayengo. They are also in the gallery. You are welcome.

3.35
MS BEATRICE KIRASO (Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion for the loan request and to thank the committee for this report and the observations, which the committee has made in support of this loan request. 

I will start from where the chairman ended. He ended by urging government to find counterpart funding for this road, and to meet its obligations. In our analysis of the budget framework paper for the coming financial year and the medium term expenditure framework for the coming three years, the Budget Committee discovered that for all the loans, which we sit and pass here, more often than not our own government has not put aside the relevant funds to meet its obligation in terms of counterpart funding. 

So, what happens? That money is contracted by government from the time we passed it and sometimes it is withheld and not disbursed. For some of these loans counterpart funding is a condition even when these funds are disbursed and government has not come up with its part of the obligation. In most cases government is required to compensate people along the places where the road is going to pass. So, this money comes in and starts collecting interest, which brings a bigger burden on the Budget. That is the point on which the chairman ended his submission. 

Actually, the recommendation to His Excellency the President in the report, which the Budget Committee presented this last week, is that before any loan request is brought here, like we do with Bills, government should come up explicitly to show us its commitment by confirming that the funds for the counterpart obligation are available. Otherwise, a loan like this, with good intentions, very important for the nation, very important for that region, money comes and sits there because government has not put into the Budget its own obligation to be able to utilise this money. So, I hope that this will be taken very seriously.  

The other issue, which was pointed out, is that when government is negotiating for these loans it should endeavor as much as possible to negotiate for a bigger percentage of the grant element. Of course we are highly indebted; we need these funds because our budget is not self-sustaining, but we could negotiate larger percentages of a grant element of a loan. That will go a long way in releasing some of the pressure on the budget.  

Having said that, there is a government policy, which is a very good policy, to connect district headquarters from one district to another. That is the priority that I think the Government has in as far as road sector development is concerned. We welcome that very much because it opens up so many other opportunities not only between districts but also along the roads to those district headquarters.

We are saying this is going to be a private sector driven economy but there are some responsibilities, which the Government cannot run away from. Supporting the private sector and road development are some of them because there is no private investor, however much he falls in love with Uganda, who will come and put his money on the Kabale-Kisoro road for example, or the Fort-Portal-Bundibugyo road for that matter. 

The private investors will come, they will invest in hospitals, they will invest in schools, but they will not invest in roads. So, any support that we as Parliament can give government to get funding to open up the country and give it a good infrastructure network in terms of roads, should be given. For that matter I support this loan and I thank the committee. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.40
DR ATWOOKI KASIRIVU (Bungangaizi County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to support the motion on the proposal that we pass this resolution. For any member of this society who has been in Kisoro will agree that this road should have been tarmacked yesterday. It is such a bad road that tarmacking it is the only option. Sometime the Committee on Agriculture was in Kisoro, and we were convinced that it would be better if we passed via Rwanda to connect to Katuna and they felt that that one was really a very big shame to us in that, in order to go back to Kampala, you had to go through another country, because the road was bad.

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance was presenting a request, he cited the ten-year development programme for the roads, which he said started in 1987 and that means by 2007 more or less 2006, that programme should have been complete.  And, I am sure this ten-year road development programme had another important road, which seems to have been lost on the list. This is a road from Kyejonjo to Kagadi, to Hoima, to Masindi and Kigumba. At that time, that road was among the highly rated roads, because it was assumed it was connecting Queen Elizabeth National Park and Murchison Falls National Park. It was actually labelled, tourist road. And since we are promoting a lot of tourism, has this road been forgotten, can the Minister of Finance give me more light on where this road is lost?

Madam Speaker, in the report of the chairman, he cited that this road would take 36 months. I want to caution that actually 36 months becomes 36 or even a bit less, because experience on the Busunju-Hoima road is so bad. As per the records or the documentation, this road should have been complete by now, but it is going slowly, it is not even 50 percent. I hope the same bag does not creep and go and affect this road when the work starts.  Otherwise, I support and call upon our colleagues to support this request and we pass the loan. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Omach, hon. Kubeketerya, hon. Wopuwa. Let us be very brief, please.

3.44
MR FRED OMACH (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. There is nothing as good as a good road. Even if you were bad, when you get a good road you become good. I am speaking from experience; the road from Pakwach to Nebbi to Arua is now fully tarmacked and it is very good. (Applause). We are now very good, we used to look like Asians because of the amount of dust that would be supplied in the whole town and we are a town people, but now we are all shining and when you look at the ladies, you just wonder at the beauties. (Laughter).

So, I stand here to support this motion for the roads from Kabale to Kisoro to be built so that they can also become good like the Jonam people.  Madam Speaker, I wish also to urge that the road from Karuma to Pakwach, the work that is ongoing be speeded up so that at least we have the goodness all the way from Kampala up to Arua, and we also pray that the road from Arua to Moyo will also soon be tarmacked.

MAJ KAZOORA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I respect hon. Omach and that is why even I voted him to our Parliament in Pan Africa. But when he says that they used to look like Asians because of dust and he is at that level, I do not understand him.  Do Asians look like dust? (Laughter)

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, you can see how dark I am, and I am actually blue black. But when there is dust, I look brown and that is what I am referring to. 

Madam Speaker, the construction of these roads is very important. But many a time, the compensation to the affected people do take extremely long. So, I believe that in the case of Kabale-Kisoro road, when this loan is approved and the work starts, the affected areas will be paid in good time.

Finally, Madam Speaker, we have the Great North Road, which comes all the way from Cape Town to Cairo and it passes through Soroti-Lira, and we would also like to urge government to have the Soroti – Lira road tarmacked. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, honourable members, before the honourable member contributes, I have got some good news for Members of Parliament. Our colleagues hon. Okumu and hon. Ocula have been granted bail and released from prison. (Applause). They posted substantive sureties in the person of hon. Ken Lukyamuzi and hon. Wandera for hon. Okumu and hon. Salaamu Musumba and hon. James Musinguzi for hon. Ocula. So, we hope to see them in the next few days.

3.48
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (Bunya County East, Mayuge):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just have brief comments. First of all, I would like to support the motion for government to borrow money and make this road. However, I just have a few clarifications I am seeking from the chairman and the minister. On recommendation two he says the committee urges government to meet her obligation to compensate the affected people. I would like to find out, Mr Chairman, is part of this cost supposed to cater for the compensation and if so, what is the estimate? How much are we going to spend in as far as compensating the people is concerned?

Then two, Madam Speaker, you will agree with me that when passing these loans we are always excited. But I remember in 2001, there is a loan we passed to construct 30 landing sites in this country and that was an ADB loan. So, I would like to seek clarification from the minister, was this just a welcome to the 7th Parliament, because I have not seen even a single landing site constructed?  And in line to this one, when are we likely to have this road started on, is it going to be started in 2010? 

I would like to get assurance from the minister, especially hon. Rukutana, he has always come for loans here but when it comes for implementation, he does not inform us what has gone wrong with these loans.  

I would also like to get clarification maybe from the Minister of Works, Transport and Communication whether having looked at the bad state of Jinja-Bugiri road and I think the other report was telling us by 15th the procurement is likely to start – so, as we support our colleagues to construct or to pass this loan to begin on the road to Katuna, are we (from the eastern side) also very safe that we are likely to begin because I am sure these funds are available.

Lastly, as we look at tarmacking this road, I would like to inform the minister that the tarmacking of the Musita-Majaji road is long over due because it holds heavy trucks which bring sand and which bring fish from Busia, which could even act as an alternative route. So, as we pass this loan, I would like to urge the minister that next time, we should be passing a loan to tarmac the Musita-Majaji road. I thank you very much.

3.51
MR GEORGE WILLIAM WOPUWA (Bubulo County East, Mbale): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion. The problem I have is that, my people in Mbale normally ask me, “When there is need for voting and supporting, what are we getting?” In the President’s manifesto in 2001, he promised us that we are going to have a road from Nabumali to Akaka to join Kenya and the Republic of Kenya is working on their road. When I looked at the bank loan and all the loans we have been supporting, this area is not mentioned and yet if that place was done, we would be able also to join Soroti and be able to reach Sudan.  

Madam Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to appeal to the minister because Mbale generally, NUSAF we are not there, Luweero we are there mainly on the mass grave and most of the things we are not there. At water we are 21 percent and yet we have many rivers. I want to appeal to the minister that in these ten years, that present manifesto if it could be brought on board so that we can also have at least 60 kilometres of tarmac road so that our neighbours in Kenya do not laugh at us and then our people at home will also be satisfied that we are working together as a team. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.53
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I am the Vice Chairperson of the Works Committee and this road has been appearing on the policy statement since the year 2001 and for that reason, we had to lose our honourable member who left the committee because of this road in protest, hon. Annette Mukabera and she said, she will return to this committee only when this road starts. I am happy that she will come back this time.

Madam Speaker, I support the motion but I have got a very big problem when it comes to funding the roads. The big problem I have is that, we have a lot of money which we have already borrowed for the development of roads and we have failed to get the counter funding and this money is accruing to interests. We have a very big problem when it comes to the government counter funding. As I talk of now, we have got a funding gap of about 99billion, I am happy the Minister of Finance is now collecting more revenue, I understand we have over short by 76billion and I hope you will direct this money towards road construction.

Then the question of settlers: Even Ibanda road which was constructed in 2000, they broke buildings of the people, they cut their land, they took their murram but up to now they have never compensated them. They are ever in the office here.

MR MULENGANI: Thank you very much, hon. Byabagambi for giving way. I also sit on the Committee of Works. The information I want to give you, honourable member, is that the issue of compensation in this country is being derailed by the Ministry of Works. I will give you an example. The Entebbe road was worked upon and compensation was done but the compensated buildings were not broken down. Some years to come in future, this country will want to widen that road again and those very premises will be compensated again. 

The other thing is, upcountry roads - the Bugiri-Busia-Malaba road was worked upon but there is usually a tendency of cheating people upcountry who live along these roads. They pretend that they are compensating them but the real fact is that, we Members of Parliament coming from those areas are faced with the problem of chasing up again monies to compensate these people who were assumed compensated. So, the Minister of Finance should come out to tell us whether they have released money for compensation on all these roads and who has monitored the breakage or the individuals that have been compensated. I thank you.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I want to conclude, Madam Speaker. I want to support hon. Kiraso that we should not approve any more loans unless the counter funding is on our account. Otherwise, we are not even absorbing the money that we are borrowing because of the counter funding, and yet we have got the need where to put that money. So, I support, but those are the problems I have. If the Minister of Finance can address those ones then really we can have better roads. Thank you.

3.59
MR AVITUS TIBARIMBASA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to give another information to this House, that I sit on the Committee of Public Accounts and in the first year of Parliament, we realized that government had compensated the owners of these buildings on Entebbe road around Namasuba and we requested the Minister of Works to organize a visit so that the Public Accounts Committee would go and ask the owners of those buildings why those buildings were not put down. But up to now, that visit has not been arranged. So, I agree with hon. Mulengani, Member of Parliament from Bugiri.

Madam Speaker, I stand up to support the motion and also to thank the chairman and his committee for having been very prompt, for the first time, in bringing back the business to the House. We thank you, Mr chairman.

Secondly –(Interjection)– no clarification – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order.

MR NANDALA: Madam Speaker, I am not a student as people claim. I am a graduate of economics. We have what we call scheduling of jobs and we have done a good job, as far as I am concerned, under my leadership. I have been here for four years. Is it in order for the honourable member to come here and lie to the House that the Committee on National Economy is not working while we know very well? We have worked and we have brought here loans to the tune of US $1.5 billion and they have been approved.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would not really want to rule on that, sincerely, because I might say things that may injure your committee. So let us leave that matter, just proceed.

MR TIMBARIMBASA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling, which was done cleverly. I am supporting this motion because of some two reasons. 

One, about two years ago a Member of Parliament from Kabale District wrote in the papers – I think it was in the Monitor – that the people of Rubanda County and the people of Kisoro District were not prepared to give votes to the Movement Government in the next elections. The fact that this request has come to the House and the way members have contributed so far show that we are going to support the motion so that the people from this area can benefit from this lot.  

I want to support the views expressed by the Member for Jonam –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: The information I want to give to my colleague is that I am the person who said that really this road is so important to the people of Kabale and Kisoro and my constituents. Actually I am the biggest beneficiary of this road. I would have made a contribution to the report but I am a member of the committee. I gave that statement at that time because since 1986 this road had been promised and the people of Kabale and Kisoro are jubilating as I speak now, and their support to this government is guaranteed. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If something has already been mentioned by other members, we do not have to go back to it. Just support or object to it quickly.

MR TIBARIMBASA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The point I wanted to make, hon. Banyenzaki has made it that the elections are at the doorstep. The people of Kisoro and Rubanda County will overwhelmingly vote in support of the NRM Organisation.

Lastly, the Vice-Chairperson of the Works Committee reported that one member in the name of hon. Mukabeera had left the committee in protest because this road had not been given the attention she expected. I hope when she comes back to the committee she will also come back to the NRM as an organisation. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.06
MR DAVID WAKIKONA (Manjiya County, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I have to thank the Chairman of the Committee on the Economy, hon. Nandala Mafabi, for the job well done. I generally support loans and grants. When we borrow it is okay; it is good for us as a country. But when we borrow money and we wait for one year, two years, without it being used or without seeing the results, it is a bit upsetting to me. I support this motion to borrow money for the Kabale-Kisoro road.  

I went to Kisoro via that snake-like path sometime back and I fear to go there again because I thought I was hanging and would drop any time. So I sincerely and strongly support that the road be constructed so that people there also travel well. In this regard, some time back here we borrowed money for the study on the improvement of the East African Civil Aviation Academy and that money was to take precisely 12 months. It is now over 12 months. I have been in Soroti and there is no study made. I am wondering what is happening to that money. It is the type of money I am talking about that we borrow it and nothing takes place.

Hon. Omach Fred is the one who provoked me to talk. He said he was brown and now they have tarmaced roads to his village he is now a true African, implying that it is now Wakikona here who needs tarmac roads. I am talking about the Bududa circular road, leave alone that main road, which passes along the boarders of Mbale and Soroti. In Mbale there is no road. Mbale connects Kenya and Uganda through Lwakaka, as my honourable colleague has said.  

One time I went to Kapchorwa in that area, actually the Swam-Kapchorwa road, and when we travelled in one direction we could not come back to another because it had rained and we could not make it. We had to go through Kitale and come through Malaba. These are roads, which the PTA should have also identified so that they get the carpet they deserve to enable most of us move ahead.

Economic gains are only known when there is something good on the ground. You cannot talk of what you gain from a particular area, like the timber and wheat say in the case of Kapchorwa, or the farming in Soroti and Lira, unless you have done the roads. Look at what they look like – (Interruption)

MRS KULANY: Madam Speaker, what hon. Wakikona is mentioning is very true. These mountainous areas have very difficult terrain. Not only that, they are also very fertile and very productive. If we are talking about improving the economy of this country, we should make sure that good roads are in these places where there is fertility and people are very hard working.  

On Kapchorwa-Swam road, we were told it was funded by the East African Compensation Fund and that this fund has not been exhausted. I am wondering and I need clarification from government on why Kapchorwa-Swam road is not completed. We need to join our friends in Kenya, and the other side of Kenya is tarmac but this side of Uganda there is nothing. So what my friend is raising is that we should have a network in the whole of East Africa, whether with Rwakaka or Kapchorwa. Let it be tarmaced. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR WAKIKONA: Thank my sister for that valuable information to enrich what I am trying to pass on to this House. This ad hoc way of doing things, choosing a road here and one there, is not very healthy. The Minister of Works should know that in ten or 15 years they will tarmac so many roads and come here with a programme to be known to all Members of Parliament that in such and such a period - so that we keep the time table. We will know that this time is this side and the other time is for the other. Then we shall know that within ten or 12 years so many roads would have been tarmacked or constructed with the funds borrowed. 

Otherwise, the way we come here, one makes noise then you go and borrow; another makes noise then - it is not a very good managerial way of doing things. I strongly suggest that the Minister of Works should come out with that programme especially on tarmac roads. I also strongly support the request for the loan for the tarmacking of Kabale Kisoro road. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.11
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Northern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and I would like to support the motion. Before I went to Kisoro I thought we people from West Nile were the only ones suffering. However, when I went to Kisoro in 1998 I said, “There is also another part of Uganda, in the West, which is neglected and that is Kisoro”. The road is extremely bad! Definitely this loan has come in time and I hope Kisoro will be able to raise your part, which is required. 

These far away areas like Kisoro, Koboko and Kotido, when you start travelling to them you worry because of the distance and the roughness of the road. Until you arrive you are not happy and by the time you reach you stay for two days to nurse the pain you received from the road.

I would like the Minister of Works to be serious and consider the main towns so that they are all connected by good roads. We have the road from here to Arua, the one from Karuma to Pakwach is going to be tarmacked, then the one of Arua to Nebbi is tarmacked but we still have another road from Arua to Kaya. That means by the time you reach Arua and you are continuing to go to Koboko, you must suffer. So, I would like government to also tarmac this road up to Kaya so that people of Koboko can enjoy the road until they reach home. 

Then another bad road is from Kampala through Moroto to Kotido. I hope government has a plan so that people living there also enjoy a good road. Madam Speaker, the roads, which are made are not only for vehicles. There are pedestrians; there are people with disabilities moving along those roads. I would like to request the constructors who are going to construct it to ensure that the roads are wide enough. They should have places where the wheel chair persons, pedestrians and cyclists can travel easily. I have seen that these roads are constructed very narrowly. When the time comes for you to branch off you find that the pedestrians suffer,  especially persons with disabilities. I would like you to bear it in mind when these roads are being constructed. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, so far I have heard no objections to this loan and some of the matters being raised can ordinarily be raised in your sessional committees and you are about to begin the budget process. So, do you mind if I put the question? Oh, let the minister respond.

4.15
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am really concerned about the amount of money we have to pay in compensation whenever we construct roads. I want to find out from the minister whether there is a law, which requires people not to build so close to  roads? If not, can we not come up with a law so that there is a given road reserve in which nobody should construct; and if anybody constructs in a road reserve then he or she has no right to claim anything in terms of compensation. 

But what happens is that even in the city of Kampala there are so many people building on road reserves and one wonders who is supposed to ensure that nobody builds on road reserves. I do not know whether the Minister of Works just looks on or whether there is a person responsible, but I think this is a matter, which must really be examined. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRANSPORT (Mr Andruale Awuzu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will begin by answering hon. Mwandha’s question. It is true we have a law against people building on the road reserve but this is a very old law. It was made in the 60s and our types of roads have changed. We are now in the process of amending this law to bring in a new law whereby we shall demarcate all the road reserves in the whole country with concrete, marked stones. When we do that, if anybody builds within those road reserves we shall destroy those buildings without compensation.

On this loan, the minister and chairman of the committee have both mentioned the two other aspects of this loan. I will now only talk about the major aspect, which is the Kabale-Kisoro road.

I think all of you know that this has been a very contentious road for a very long time, which has come on and off and as you have just heard, people say that they do not want to vote, and so on. However, I am glad that this road is now going to be constructed at long last. The design for this road has been completed. 

On the supervision contracts, we have requested for expression of interest which should have been in by yesterday, that is, the 16th of May. 

For performance contracts, we advertised for pre-qualification. In other words, we want contractors who want to do the road to apply, then we will choose the few whom we think can do a good job and then they will be asked to tender. This pre-qualification also was supposed to be in by yesterday. We expect the contract to be signed by March 2006 and the road works to start by June 2006.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Madam Speaker, I want the hon. Minister to clarify to me. He is talking about demarcating all reserves, but there is a problem. When the roads have been made, after one month they collapse.  Look at the Natete Road; look at Wakaliga road, the shoulders are already dilapidated; the same with Sir Apollo Kaggwa Road. What about the sustainability? Who is supposed to sustain them?  We are getting the loans, good. Maintenance, sometimes even the shoulders are not made; the drainage is not made. So who is supposed to do all those things? 

MR AWUZU: Thank you for that question.  The Natete – Wakaliga Road, my Minister was here in the House and he answered all those questions. But I can tell you briefly that that road according to our standards is no longer a road because it was supposed to last for about 15 years, it has now lasted for more than 20 years.  What we did on it was just minor repairs so that it is passable. I would like to inform you that we are going to rebuild the northern corridor from Kibuye up to the Rwanda border, up to Katuna and in that exercise we are putting a dual carriageway from Kibuye up to Natete. So that road is being taken care of, so you should not worry.  

But roads like Wakaliga Road, which you are talking of, it is true government got a loan from Japan for this road and the road was built, it was one of the roads, which have been very well built. I do agree that the shoulders have not been well done, but we have the contract for repairing those shoulders.  But you should bear in mind that this is a City Council road, and once we have built the road for the City Council or for any other local authority, it is the local authority, which is responsible for the maintenance of those roads.

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, According to the submission by the Minister earlier on, he stated that there is an old law about the road reserve, but the Minister has not said, and this is clarification I am seeking from him, whether really this law is being enforced. The reason being for example, when you take Najjanankumbi on Entebbe Road, the construction of that house after the Shell Petrol Station is going on and yet it is just at the roadside. I imagine in future when this road needs to be expanded, such a person who has undertaken such a big construction will seek compensation when he is directly violating the law.  

May we know from the Minister whether this law is really being enforced? There are so many culprits, if I am to mention them one by one, which I cannot do now here, Madam Speaker, you will just bow your head in agony.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, why don’t we complete the loan? You know your sessional committee are in session. You can take this question to the Sessional Committee really.  Others will start asking about my road in my village and all that. Please, can you address that road and then Jinja-Bugiri?

MR AWUZU: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  As I had said, there is an old law, but it is not adequate. In those years, our road reserves were very narrow. So we have put in place new limits for road reserves and when we bring this law here, we shall follow the new limits and then we shall enforce as soon as Finance gives us money for that.

Madam Speaker, as you said, there are a lot of questions concerning the construction of roads which are not connected with this project, and it will take a long time to answer them. These will be answered during our budget statement.

Finally, I would like to answer only two questions by hon. Baba Diri and two other Members who asked about the Lwakhakha – Mbale Road. Our policy is to tarmac all roads connecting district headquarters and to the borders of Uganda. Therefore, the Lwakhakha – Mbale Road will be tarmacked in due course and the Arua – Koboko Road also will be tarmacked.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister of Works, on the 15th of May, something was supposed to happen on the Jinja – Bugiri Road. Today is the 17th.

MR AWUZU: Yes, Madam Speaker, we have a contract for the maintenance of this road, and I know that this road actually broke down. There was a spot where the culverts collapsed and the road was virtually closed. We have worked on that, we have got our district engineer from Jinja who worked on this road over the weekend. I believe by now that road is open for all types of –(Interruptions)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, when a Minister representing an elected government gives information to the august House, it has to be checked in advance. It could be very improper for a Minister to come here and give us information, which has not been double-checked. Is it in order for my hon. colleague in charge of construction of roads to stand up and declare that the road is now proper when I passed there yesterday, less than 24 hours, and it was not? It still had a detour of ten kilometres? Is he in order to give improper, inaccurate and misleading information to the august House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, perhaps you will go and inspect and come back and tell us, because your minister made commitments here for the 15th of May.

MR AWUZU: Madam Speaker, I am not talking from no information, because yesterday was when I read a loose minute saying that the district engineer in Jinja had worked on half of the road and it was now passable and we had mobilized them to work on the other half. So I expect by today they would have finished the work. So I am not talking of anything I did not know; I am talking from facts, which we have received from the ground.   Thank you.

4.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I only wish to thank the honourable members for the overwhelming support they have given this motion, and to say that this time I wish to undertake that your concern on counterpart funding was envisaged and provided for. The amount agreed upon as counterpart funding was Shs 9.04 billion. It is a conditionality for the effectiveness of this loan that this amount be provided annually during the implementation period. I want to assure honourable members that, that amount is properly captured in the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework of 2005/2006 to 2008/2010. So, the issue of failing to provide the counterpart funding will not arise because it is one of the conditions agreed upon.

I think the last concern was by hon. Wakikona when he says that when we borrow money we should not take long to utilize it. Of course, because there is some small charge on money that is not utilized.  It is equally our concern, but sometimes the gestation period of some projects is quite long, by the time you go through the processes of bidding, design making, procurement of equipment and services, time has gone. But we try to do our best and on behalf of the Ministry of Finance, I want to urge the line ministries to ensure that the moment we pass loans, the loans are utilized in time so that we save on –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: I thank you, Madam Speaker, and the Minister for giving way. You have said counter-funding will no longer be an issue starting with this financial year. What about the on-going projects, for instance, the Kiboga road has been bogged down by non-payment. Are you holding their counter funding? Take an example of Kapchorwa road, you owe them about US$5 million; you have not paid it, they are also demanding. There are other roads like Soroti-Lira road has not started because of the counter funding. What do you talk about those ones? I have mentioned a few, but I know there are more.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, before we borrow for any project that requires counterpart funding, it is of course envisaged that we must provide the counterpart funding. But, honourable members, it is your resource envelope that becomes a problem during the implementation of the projects. I said that for this particular loan it is a conditionality for the effectiveness of the loan that the counterpart funding is provided in the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework of 2005/2006 to 2008/2010, and I can say that the amount is properly captured in the medium-term expenditure framework.

While we are committed, I may not be able to guarantee that for reasons not known the resource envelope may for some reason not cover the counterpart funding. But we shall cross that bridge when we reach there. As for the other projects, which are on-going, Government puts a lot of effort on ensuring that when we are budgeting we provide for all the money that is required to provide counterpart funding so that the projects can continue.  I think I have clarified everything that I had and I want to thank hon. Members for your overwhelming support for the motion. Thank you very much.

4.33
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Nandala Mafabi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I thank you for the support you have given the report of the committee on this loan request. I have a few questions, which were asked by my brother from Mayuge. 

Well, the compensation of the people is under the Government of Uganda fund, it is not part of the loan. It is good you have raised a very good issue about landing sites, which were approved in the year 2001 for US$ 34 million and have not been utilized. It is true that Government has a problem and that is why we made this very clear in our report. By the time we made the report we had approved Shs 1.2 billion and we had only used Shs 200 million, and those are the reasons you are right to question. I would ask the Minister of Finance to come up quickly to help us on that issue.

Rwakaka Road: I think the Ministry of Works should come up with a programme as requested so that we avoid these problems whenever there is a loan request on a specific loan. Because if you say that, even me in 2001 during the presidential campaigns, even in the manifesto it is clearly stated that Namagumba to Budadiri, Budadiri to Sironko road would be tarmacked and the time is running out. So we shall also not vote the Movement System until the road is tarmacked.  

In conclusion, this loan request is a very good one and it is not being made by NRM/O but by the Movement System; there should be a distinction between the two things. It is the Movement System and not NRM/O making it, so when I also come to ask for votes under my party, please know I participated. But I want to thank you again for supporting the committee. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: With that very serious campaign by the chairperson, I now put the question that this House do approve the motion as moved by the Minister of Finance.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT NO. 2) BILL, 2005

(Debate continued)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, at one stage when the Minister was missing in this August House we were made to understand that when and if she comes, she would make a statement in accordance with the Order Paper, and now I discern her on my extreme left next to the hon. Minister of Defence. Does she have any information at all for us as promised in the morning?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was not sure that she would surface in this House this afternoon, so I had taken a decision to move that matter to tomorrow. Yesterday hon. Kabakumba was about to contribute when we adjourned.

4.36
MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this motion. I would like to start with the object of the bill.  The object number one of this bill is to make various amendments that have been felt to be necessary having regard to the experience gained in operating the Constitution since it was promulgated. 

There has been a concern from various quarters as it has been pointed out in the report of the committee.  Unfortunately, the report tends to concentrate on just one part of this nation leaving out the concerns of other parts of our nation.  

I would like to tell this House through you that Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom did present a memorandum to the committee to the effect that all the three districts agree to form a regional tire –(Applause)- and that they should be deemed from the on set. Unfortunately, this does not seem to appear. It is not reflected anywhere and my fears are even compounded by recommendation by this committee, recommendation No.8, that the committee had representations from hon. Kizige. Recommendation No 3, that while the deeming of the districts of Buganda, Buganda was already agreed to in the 1995 Constitution, the committee finds no strong reasons for changing a status quo. 

The committee has found no compelling justification for accepting the proposals of hon. Kizige on deeming the districts of Busoga and from hon. Mao on deeming the districts of Acholi and Toro Kingdom deeming the districts of Toro.  The proposal should, therefore, be dropped. The districts should be able to proceed by resolutions in future to create regional governments. 

I want to challenge this House and Government and the committee because for the districts, which agree they are not deemed, for the districts, which do not agree to the deeming they are being deemed.  I would like to challenge this House to put this to the districts of Buganda and let them be given the democratic right to choose whether to form a regional tire or not.  I can assure this House and I bare say without any fear of contradiction that some of the districts in Buganda will opt out from the regional tire which they are trying to be forced into.  

This one has a historical perspective even when you tried to deem Buganda then in the Constitution they did not want it; they failed to utilize it.  Busoga took the advantage and formed the charter but up today you are saying there are no strong reasons to deem these districts.  What strong reasons are there for Buganda to be deemed and other not to be deemed? I would like that thing to be clarified. As for Bunyoro we still have a case in court against –(Interruption)

MR KIWAGAMA: Thank you, honourable member from Bunyoro.  I would like to inform you that under the charter arrangement Busoga took the advantage and went ahead and organized themselves and formed a charter.  They came here to the Parliament, presented the charter and Busoga has been ignored. Now we are presenting that it is wise that Busoga should be deemed because they have even demonstrated that they want to be together, unlike Buganda who did not take the opportunity, although they were deemed but they did not utilize that chance to form a charter.  But Busoga is saying they must go back to the drawing board and agree afresh to form a regional government.  

MRS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, what more evidence do we need? Mr Chairperson, through you, what more arguments do you need from Busoga for it to be deemed? (Applause)  Anybody who has bothered to read history and especially of Bunyoro will know this; we were unfairly treated by colonialists. (Applause). 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kabakumba, I think give me a minute. I had informed you that our colleagues are out on bail. But, let me take this opportunity to welcome them to their usual seats and to the House. Hon Okumu and hon. Ocula- (Applause)- we are discussing the Constitution (Amendment No. 2) Bill of 2005.

MR KABAKUMBA: Congratulations upon your release honourable members! I hope you will be with us throughout.  As I was saying Bunyoro still has a claim and it wants this Government and this nation to address the injustices, which were meted out on Bunyoro. If you have read history five and half of our counties were parcelled out and the Banyoro there conscripted into Buganda.  These counties are Buyaga and Bugagaizi, which have been fought for and returned to Bunyoro.  But, Buwekula is still in slavery, Bululi –(Interjections)- yes, these are historical facts and if you want you can go and read history but you will not change the facts.  Bululi –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, members.

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Speaker, before Uganda attained independence the question of lost counties was looming. After the negotiations in London Lancaster House and the making of the Constitution the people in the referendum resolved the matter. This referendum was held, the people in the counties that preferred to break away from Buganda opted; Buwekula opted to stay were they are.

Is the honourable member from Masindi in order, Madam Speaker, to say that the people of Buwekula are still in captivity when they opted for themselves and they are very happy and they have never made any petition anywhere; even during the constitutional making process?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, you know yesterday we talked a lot about people who are dissatisfied.  We said we should try to calm them, allay their fears and find solutions. I think she is still dissatisfied, that is why she is complaining about Buwekula.

MR BAGUMA: Madam Speaker, this information goes to hon. Kabakumba that it is a fact of history that the Lord Molosson Report 1960 did mention that the majority of the people in Buyaga-Bugangaizi were Banyoro and the counties upon which the referendum was to be held were the remaining counties including the ones she has mentioned. So, the Buyaga and Bugangaizi case should not have been decided by referendum. The referendum should have been on the counties starting from Sezibwa up to the other river. The counties are more than five. So, this is a fact of history, which should not be erased. In fact ,manipulation of reports of Commissions of Inquiry started before Independence. (Applause).

MRS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much for that information. I was still continuing for purposes of the records. Buwekula-Buruli, the present Nakasongola and others, Bugerere, that is Bunyara and parts of Singo; they were parts of Bunyoro. As far as we are concerned, so long as that mistake is not corrected, we consider that our land is still unfairly being considered as part of Buganda.

Bunyoro and the Banyoro have opened cases and we are studying it to know whether this bill is not subjudice because what we are trying to do is to claim for a lost glory and to get back our land and to nullify the 1900 Agreement which took away our rights. 

If you look in the objectives of this bill No.8 (3), it is mentioned that consultations were made between Government and the various communities and representatives of traditional and cultural leaders. I want to put this on record. Bunyoro Kitara Kingdom was never consulted and we should not be taken just to window dress that all those who had concern were consulted. 

A few people two or three were invited from Bunyoro Kitara Kingdom together with Toro and Busoga and they were informed that this is the agreed position for Buganda. I do not know whether that was construed to mean that Bunyoro, Toro and Busoga were consulted for all intentions and purpose. Bunyoro was not consulted and we are still waiting to be consulted by Government and the agreed positions to be included in the law. Otherwise, as we sit here whether you want to accept it or not we are here debating a sectarian bill intended really to take care of the Buganda interests against the interests of other people in this Uganda. I think this is unfair. I lost my case and I reserve my support to this until I am clarified- (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But she has finished. 

4.50
MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI (Bulamogi County, Kamuli):I thank you Madam Speaker. I am very glad this afternoon to have an opportunity to support this Bill. Since 1966 the people of Buganda have not been well adjusted about their place in the whole of Uganda. I am very glad that the NRM Government in its wisdom has taken the cries of Baganda very seriously and to some extent has listened to the Kingdom areas, those areas which actually cherish the issues of Kingdom very seriously and has listened. 

Therefore, the promise, which the NRM gave to the people of Uganda is coming, at last its fruition by actually implementing a law which empowers people to form a bulk so that they address their issues in a way which they have traditionally understood. 

It is true the central government is giving back all the powers to these regional governments, but I think it is time now for us to form the LC1 equivalent for people who want to call it Buganda Kingdom to call it Buganda Kingdom. I do not think that is something, which is bad. The people of Busoga when they want to form the LCVI they address their problems in their Lusoga traditionally and they cherish their Kyabazinga. I think they should be allowed to form their tier without ado. (Applause). 

In the same form I expect that the people of Bunyoro, yes, we the people of Busoga would believe that what they call current Bunyoro - Bunyoro was big initially up to the rift valley and Karagwe. But war was war, there were wars among brothers, it is a historical fact that we fought; we will not even accept this –(Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, I have clearly demonstrated where Bunyoro fought with brothers and sisters and land was settled using that means. Buhweju was part of Bunyoro, Tooro was part of Bunyoro, Kitagwenda was part of Bunyoro, Kyaka was part of Bunyoro, but that one was settled as you know.  I am saying these five and a half counties, it was not through war, these were cut off from Bunyoro by the colonialists and given to Buganda for their own reasons.  

Is it in order for the honourable member when the facts are so clear- I will lay this on the table- the Bunyoro’s claim on their lost land which dates as way back as the 1880s and 1900- Is it in order for the honourable member to distort the historical facts which are clearly known? 

I appreciate he is an engineer, he may not have read history, but he should not come here and express or deliberate on a subject on which he is not so competent and does not have all the facts and therefore misleading this House. Is it in order, Madam Speaker? (Laughter). 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I think I will just advise members to acquaint themselves with those historical documents, which are in this Parliament.  Those reports are here, please acquaint with them and do not mix conquest with those commissions.  They are here in this House, please read them.

MR BAGALANA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I have listened to honourable Gagawala Wambuzi from Bulamogi County.  We have to form a constitution, which will stand a test of time and will be referred to just as they refer to 1967 Constitution. The consensus, which must be built, should come from individual constituencies instead of saying “we Banyoro, we Basoga” - who represents Busoga in this House; who represents Bunyoro in this House?  

In the Directory of Parliament, I see hon. Gagawala Wambuzi, Bulamogi County; Bagalana Tom, Bunya South; and Kabakumba Matsiko, Bujenje. I have not heard of anybody representing a region.  So, that is why I would like to appeal to the House to bring views of their constituents instead of meandering with things that are going to be  -(Laughter)- Thank you very much.

MR WAMBUZI: I thank you for your information.  I will start by answering honourable Tom Bagalana. Yesterday, I was in Bunya when honourable Hajati Nakadama was celebrating. I was not meandering when I took my vehicle, I put in fuel and I drove through those poor roads of Bunya to go and attend to issues in Bunya.  
When we are here as brothers and sisters and colleagues debating issues of national interest, it means we should listen to each other. When laws are made, they are not made only for Bulamogi; they are made for the whole of Uganda.  

Therefore, when we are articulating issues here about the regional tier, we are articulating issues, which are going to affect the whole of Uganda and I am debating here because of the issue of the whole of Uganda.

MR ERESU: I seek clarification from the member holding the Floor.  The honourable member, Gagawala from Bulamogi County, has been at the forefront agitating for a district for Bulamogi. The Prime Minister yesterday stated that one of the good points for having a regional tier is for economies of scale. I see the honourable member arguing for a regional tier.  May he clarify to the House and people of Bulamogi at large that he has now abandoned the idea of pursuing a district in favour of a regional tier. (Laughter).

MR WAMBUZI:  I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I am not surprised that my colleague has never studied a subject called differential calculus –(Laughter)- and he has never heard of another subject called integral calculus.  The two subjects are very important and anybody who wants to claim that he is a leader, he must learn to differentiate issues and to focus on particular problems and then integrate them in order to get a better function.  So, the two subjects are interrelated, you must differentiate to govern and you must integrate to govern.  

In this instance of Kaliro District, we are asking for a district for a particular reason as a result of differences. Then there is a reason that there is a regional government in Busoga, which the people of Busoga want actually to come together and form a Lukiiko. I would expect the honourable member from Teso to actually know that the people of Teso have got certain issues they cherish though there are several districts in Teso.  

So, I think he is misdirecting his force to start persuading me that I should not ask for Kaliro District, yet he knows that there are differences which must be addressed carefully so that they are solved.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, honourable members, I think let us settle this matter this way. This particular bill relates to what is called a regional tier; of necessity the region includes several districts.  So, definitely members must talk about a region and several groups. So let there be no argument about it.  Please conclude.  Have you concluded?

MR WAMBUZI:  I am concluding.  I think it is very, very important at this stage and at this material time in the history of Uganda for us to do what we want.  If the people of Busoga say they will govern themselves better if the six districts – expect Kaliro to become a district- actually come together and do their things in the way they all want harmoniously.  

Obviously, Madam Speaker, you know Jinja Hospital is rotten. The people who are coming from Kampala to attend to Jinja Hospital, which is a regional hospital, it is a rotten case; many secondary schools are not attended to.  I cannot travel from Kaliro just eight miles to honourable Mpongo’s constituency because there is a road which links me to Iganga and Kamuli.  

Until recently, Madam Speaker, you know, I could not cross the swamps from Kaliro to Kamuli because there was no regional tier.  Now that there is an association, I will be able to go maybe to the constituency of honourable Mpongo.  So, the issue of regional tier is something which is very important, and it is something which is going to improve governance in the country.  

I beg to persuade my friends and my colleagues in this House that I think this is the way forward, we should go for it and pass this law quickly so that we attack other issues, which will help us to develop our country.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, just a minute.  Honourable members, I had given the opportunity to honourable Kawanga, but I have been informed that honourable Mbabazi was the principle negotiator in all this business.  So, he says he wants to clarify certain things before debate proceeds.  So let us hear from – and please be brief, honourable member.

5.00
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Honourable members, with your permission, Madam Speaker and with the indulgence of the members, I just wanted to- before I touch this point, to say that this Parliament had asked me to respond to a matter which was raised by honourable Jane Akwero about an incident in Padibe where soldiers were supposed to have misbehaved. 

I just wanted to say that the time which I was given has passed, but I have now received a report. We are doing a few things. I wanted to seek your permission to allow me to report next week, Madam Speaker, on that incident.  Thank you for your indulgence.

Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

First, may I make a clarification? Yesterday I was in Sudan, that is why I missed the sitting of Parliament. I was told the question of the letter of the Katikiiro was raised. I would like to make the following clarifications on this point.  

It is true, as I am sure most members know here that the Katikiiro did write to the Attorney General, Chairman of the Legal and Parliamentary Committee and myself, raising a few points.  The newspapers reported that Buganda was making fresh demands on federo.  

The first point I want to make is that it is not true that Buganda was making any fresh demands, not any single one- (Applause). In that letter, the Katikiiro raised issues within the bill where Mengo felt that the bill was not consistent with what we had agreed. I am happy to say that in every point the Katikiiro raised he was right- (Applause)- the bill was inconsistent with the agreed position.

Secondly, there were some points, which the Katikiiro raised in the letter as points that had not been negotiated. This is also correct. All the points the Katikiiro raised in the letter as not having been negotiated were points indeed that were not negotiated but which were in the bill. This came about because the Attorney General found when he looked at the agreed positions gaps and the Attorney General obviously could not bring a bill with gaps. We cannot have a law with gaps.  

Therefore, the Attorney General made proposals to complete the particular points that had been agreed and so when Buganda made comments on these as positions that had not been agreed surely they were entitled to give an opinion.

The third point I would like to make is that the Government negotiating team has since met the Mengo negotiating team. But maybe before I say this, I want to say that there was only one point were Mengo was right but in a way it is me- I think I should take the blame- it is me who had not accurately presented the position of Cabinet and I have since corrected it.

I am happy to say that since the raising of that letter, since the committee discussed it, the Government team has met with Mengo team. We have gone over all the issues and we are in agreement on all the issues as I said, which they raised which had been the subject of discussion. We have agreed on them. There is no difference on any single issue, except that single issue where the communication from me did not fully present the Cabinet position.
Secondly, Cabinet has indeed met. I did report to Cabinet the consultations between the Government negotiating team and Mengo negotiating team. Cabinet did consider these positions and Cabinet has also resolved all these issues and they have come up with decisions on each one of them.  I have been waiting for Cabinet meeting tomorrow to confirm. Those of you who know the workings of Cabinet, Cabinet is going to confirm the decisions it took on this matter tomorrow and will be able to communicate it to Mengo. Thereafter I do not expect that there will be any difference or any point of dispute.  

The next point I want to make is that regional governments –

MR DOMBO:  Thank you very much Madam Speaker and honourable member for giving way. I have listened attentively during the course of this debate. I have discovered that there are many regions that are actually interested in the regional tier- (Applause)- I have listened attentively to the Ministers explanation and he is telling us about the negotiations with Mengo. Will he also later involve other regions in other negotiations so that he could report later or Mengo is representing the other regional governments that would want to participate in the regional tier?

MRS SENINDE: I have heard the Minister explaining about the letter and so forth.  I just want to seek clarification from the honourable Minister because when he says there are certain issues that are going to be discussed with Cabinet about what we are discussing now, does it mean we do not need to proceed such that we proceed after we have got the information?  Does it mean we are wasting time now because we need to be clarified and proceed when we know what position we are proceeding on?

MR OGWEL: Thank you Madam Speaker for giving me this chance. I would like to seek the following clarification from the honourable Minister who participated in the negotiations. You are telling us that tomorrow the Cabinet will be meeting to discuss some of these issues that have been raised. Does it mean that the law that we are making now, because this is a constitutional amendment, not a Mengo amendment, and when we are laying down the principle of the law of this country it must be the law that must be cherished by Ugandans and for the entire country, it is not part of the law for favouring the Mengo or part of the law favouring other parts of Uganda.  That is the clarification we want you to make.  
 
DR OKULO EPAK:  Madam Speaker, our rules do not allow us to anticipate any issue. I am sorry I cannot quote this specific rule but it is there. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is Rule 60, 

DR OKULLO:  It is there, so if you are asking me which rule then you have not studied your rules properly- (Laughter)- I do not need to quote. This is a very important rule in our Rules of Procedure particularly when we are debating a bill and making a law.  

Now that the Minister has informed us there are certain decisions which are pending on the subject we are discussing now, it is immaterial. It is only with respect to the Buganda situations because we are discussing the Buganda situation in the contest of entire tier; it is a component. Are we right to proceed in anticipation of a decision, which is supposed to influence the very subject we are discussing? We cannot discuss in ignorance of what is coming. Can we suspend the debate until that position which the Minister has been negotiating under closed doors and which will be submitted to the Cabinet also in a secretive discussion and how will it influence the bill which is before us?

 I mean how will it be accepted in the bill we are now discussing. Could you guide this House? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is not to say that I am opposed to anything, in fact I am in support of a greater thing than Buganda accepting to ride a donkey instead of a horse. I would rather go for a federal system. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, there are two things. First of all, there are two phases to this bill. We are doing general debate; at a later stage we shall have the committee stage where if there are amendments, changes and variations they will be brought by whoever is interested. 

But in case there are those who really feel very strongly, I draw your attention to Rule 116. If you do have a matter on which you wish to petition, you can proceed under that Rule 116 of our Rules of Procedure before we go to the committee stage. 

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Okullo Epak, the rule he quoted obviously does not apply in this case. If he had read it well, he would have seen that what is prohibited is discussion of a motion dealing with a subject of a bill on a day before the appointed date for the consideration of that bill.  Today is consideration of the bill; it is not before the consideration of the bill. So this particular bill does not apply.

Hon. Emmanuel Dombo, obviously jumped the gun because the questions he asked are questions for which I was about to provide answers.

Hon. Seninde, raised a question: “Are we therefore wasting time to discuss the bill” No, we are not wasting time.  I was specifically talking about the letter of the Katikkiro and the issues the Katikkiro wrote or raised.  If Karamoja had raised issues, I would have talked about them. But since I have not received their letter, I will not anticipate the issues they will raise.  

So, I am responding to the issues and giving clarification on a letter that was written to this House because it was addressed to the Chair or to the committee of this House.  I was saying that all the issues they have raised are not new, they had been discussed, and all the issues are in the bill. But there are some errors, which are in the bill and which need correction and these errors do not touch points of principle.  

I can give an example. In the bill there is a clause, which says that there shall be a regional cabinet which shall not have more than six ministers.  It is true that we had talked about a regional cabinet and agreed on it, but we did not say that we should have in the Constitution the number of ministers.  

We said we should have a cabinet and the question of numbers of ministers should be handled by subsidiary legislation by an Act of Parliament.  So clearly this is a correction, it is, for instance, correcting that particular clause to remove any reference to the number.  So, the principle remains, but you make a correction to be consistent with the agreed position.  To continue, therefore, debating this bill is to do the right thing because the matters which have been discussed do not touch the points of principle which are covered in this bill.

My second point, Madam Speaker, is that this regional cabinet idea is not for Buganda, it is not for Bunyoro, it is for any two or more districts which want to form regional governments – (Applause).  We have carried out negotiations with all parties that were interested to negotiate – (Interruption) 

MS KABAKUMBA: I thought the Minister had followed me correctly. If you want to say you have carried out consultations with all the interested parties, you should qualify it to exclude Bunyoro.  Bunyoro is interested and it has its concerns. It wanted to negotiate and also to put its concerns, but it was never invited to negotiate.  This one I know for a fact and the good thing the chief negotiator also knows it as a fact. You should remember that I am not very far from the kingdom. I am an insider and if there were any consultations I would know.  Actually if I was available I would be part of the team.  

The team, which was invited, I was very clear, Madam Speaker, was only informed - and together with the others Toro, Busoga, Bunyoro. I would not want to say those groups were not interested in negotiating.  They were informed that this is the position we have arrived at with Buganda.  Is it in order for the hon. Minister to mislead this House that actually Bunyoro was consulted whereas not and yet we are an interested party?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if the Banyoro were not consulted then it is wrong for the Minister to say that they were consulted.  Hon. Kabakumba, in your view who was the right person to negotiate with?

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, the team of Bunyoro is supposed to be led by the Katikkiro and the Katikkiro assembles a team of people to negotiate.  The team members were not assembled because they were not called upon for consultation.  The few people, the Katikkiro, Eng. Katahoire and another one who went, they were only three and they did not go for consultation. They were just informed and not consulted.

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, I want to be clarified. I thought that the Minister said that those who had concerns expressed them and when they expressed them there was opportunity for consultation.  

I want to find out from my sister from Bunyoro whether other people expressed these concerns and if they did and they expressed them to the Government and the Government did not heed to their concerns for consultations. Because I think the way we are moving it looks like maybe it was only those who expressed their concerns that they were consulted.  I think then the Minister is very right in this particular respect because the Baganda expressed their concerns.

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, the Banyoro expressed concerns and those concerns have not been integrated here for the mere fact that they were not involved in that process of consultations and negotiations.  How would we then put these concerns?  Thank you.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, please tell us who you consulted, when, how many times so that we end this matter.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. It is true that in the many months that we negotiated regional tier, I did not meet hon. Kabakumba Masiko at all in relation to the negotiating the regional tier.

My team only met those who were sent by – (Interruption)

MR BAGALANA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here on a point of order. We have a substantive Minister of Local Government who may be in charge of these issues of regional tier. How come it is the Minister of Defence negotiating issues of Local Government?

DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think in some Governments sometimes special tasks are assigned. So I believe the Minister was given that assignment notwithstanding the existence of the Minister of Local Government.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The simple point I was making is that I was not responsible for selecting the teams that represented the districts, or the regions that wanted to negotiate regional government. I do not even know the details of the inner workings of these teams, how they were constituted, who was to lead what or who was left out.  

For Bunyoro certainly I am hearing for the first time that there should have been a more democratic process of choosing representation than was the case.  I want to inform this House that in fact, contrary to what hon. Kabakumba Masiko is saying, and she knows it very well because I have told her very many times.  We met a delegation of Bunyoro Kitara headed by the Katikkiro of Bunyoro. I have told her many times that in fact we held a meeting, Madam Speaker, up to 4.35 a.m. in the morning – yes - and this meeting was not with me. It was in fact under the chairmanship of the President in State House, Nakasero. (Applause).  

So, I simply want to state the obvious which anyone who has followed what has happened knows that there was consultation with those- we did not meet people of Kigezi, for example, because they did not show any interest. We were meeting only those who were interested and they sent us representation which we met.  

So, the idea of regional government is for any two districts or more districts that wish to form a regional government. As you can see in the bill, the functions of such government are clearly spelt out. Anyone who is interested, the procedure for doing that is also clear.

Let me talk about “deeming”:  The question of Buganda being deemed is historical because already as you know in article 178 of the Constitution, Buganda districts being deemed is there and we all know the reasons why, because there was a demand for it by Buganda.  

Even during the Commission of Justice Odoki, the demand for Buganda as a regional government was there at that time and there is a report by Sempebwa Commission. These people have made representation in writing. The district councils passed resolutions so the deeming of – I have no doubt about it. By the way, it is a fact, except those districts, which did not exist at that time. Some people should remember that some of the districts they are talking about were not in existence at the time.

Now in the case Bunyoro, as an example, it is true that Government has received demands from Bunyoro, from Busoga, from Toro that they be deemed like Buganda. I would like to inform this House that Government has no objection to that at all.  We have only said that all those districts, which want to form a regional tier and they want to be deemed, let them express it through the procedure that we have outlined. That is all, and there is no problem at all.  This Government is not opposed to Bunyoro districts being deemed at all.

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you very much the honourable Minister.  Honourable Minister, you have rightly said that those districts, which want to be deemed they can go ahead and be deemed.  I am seeking clarification. What about those districts that do not want to be deemed in the regional tier. What should they do?

CAPT BABU:  Madam Speaker, I was in the Constituent Assembly, I was representing Kampala central division and I still represent Kampala central. We had 40 meetings with the representatives of the people of Buganda and we were the people- this particular group are the people who requested for Buganda to be put on the map and be deemed.  They got all the districts at the time to accept and it was clearly put in the Constitution.  The people who are talking now at the time did not even come to negotiate on these issues.  

It is extremely important to realize that what preceded the 1995 Constitution and therefore its passing was very clear and that is the only reason why Buganda today is deemed in that Constitution. This is why the honourable Minister is saying, if others wish to do so, nobody is stopping them.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  So honourable members, I hope that puts to rest the position of yesterday because the committee had declined that recommendation. Now the Government says that there is no problem. So, I hope that is the Government position on deeming.

MR MBABAZI:  I have said, Madam Speaker, that the Government has no objection to deeming districts that want to be deemed like Bunyoro if they follow the procedure that has been outlined for that request to be made and they are aware. 

MS KABAKUMBA:  Point of clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, this is now becoming- (Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA:  Madam Speaker, I am really sorry, but I beg for your indulgence. It is because if we had had some consultation some of these things would not be on the Floor. But the honourable Minister is giving two positions. He is saying those who want to be deemed will be deemed.  But through the outline given in this bill, the outline is a long one by the district councils and sub counties.  But you cannot set double standards. You deem Buganda, start off on your marks, go, the others are still on hold, be patient- (Interruption)- Honourable Minister, I know you are in charge of Internal affairs, and therefore in charge of my security, anyway.  

My concern is, let us not create double standards, you deem others then you tell others hold on and first go through the process.  Yet those you are saying hold on are already organised and ready. I will at an appropriate time lay down the resolutions of the districts of Bunyoro on this Floor.  But those you are saying you deem, some are even- they are dissenting voices.  If it is deeming, let it be unconditional deeming but on condition you go through a, b, c, d. It should be uniform that is our concern.

DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, I think let the honourable Minister explain and then other members contribute. 

MR MURULI MUKASA:  I would like the Minister to clarify. What about those districts which do not want to be deemed, like Nakasongola; could he clarify the Government position on that?  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us hear the Government position.

MR MBABAZI: I normally do not speak double language and I am not doing so even now. I did not say that they should follow the procedure in the bill, because as hon. Kabakumba knows, I could not ask them to follow procedures which have not been passed by Parliament.  I said that this matter has been brought to Cabinet, Cabinet has considered and Cabinet has taken a position that those districts that want to be deemed can be deemed if they follow a certain procedure.  

Now I went ahead to say that in the case of Buganda, even when we deemed it in 1995, it was after they had made representation and they had made resolutions of district councils and it was on the basis of that that we acted.  

So similarly, we have sent a message to Bunyoro, for example, that, “Please Bunyoro, we have no problem with deeming you.  Ask for the deeming.”  How does Bunyoro ask for the deeming?  Let the district councils pass a resolution and send it to us. That is all.  

Now obviously districts –(Interruptions)

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you honourable Minister for giving way.  The clarification I am seeking is that if tomorrow as a result of bureaucracy or some administrative problems the districts discover that the regional tier is encumbering them, does this bill provide for exit?

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Hon. Bright Rwamirama knows that once we pass the bill and therefore the Constitution is amended, then it becomes part of the Constitution and the amendment of the Constitution, the procedure is well established and it must be followed.  

Similarly to answer hon. Muruli Mukasa, those districts that may not want even a regional tier, at the moment if Kigezi, for example- I give Kigezi as an example because that is where I come from- wants a regional tier, it can have it, but it may not necessarily want to be deemed. They may want to go and use the procedure in the Constitution as it is established.  The districts meet, they take resolutions and if all of them agree, they form a regional government without being deemed.  It is up to them and it is easier for them to come out because they can make resolutions to undo what they did.  

But if you want to be deemed by operation of the law, meaning it is within the Constitution, then you are going to be deemed unless you amend the Constitution and deem yourself.  Clearly that is the meaning –(Interruptions).  Now, I want to finish my presentation and then clarifications can come.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, I think we shall give members time to contribute.

MR MBABAZI:  Let me finish the point so that there is Floor- I want to give the Floor so that you can clarify any matter that needs to be clarified and is within my power to clarify.

Now there is the question of minorities in regions, or even in districts and this question was very well addressed and you will find it in the bill in one of the clauses. There is a whole clause which deals with recognition of diversity and equitable distribution of resources. This was to protect the minorities in regions to ensure that resources in regions are equitably distributed and that cultural diversity is recognized.  

This was addressed and it was really to answer the question. How about us who are a minority in the region?  What are we going to gain?  What are we going to benefit? We agreed on this in the negotiations that there would be a formula made by Government in consultation with regional government, which ensures that there is recognition of culture identity or diversity and that there is equitable distribution of resources within the region.    

It is very, very clear and we have said that in fact it is one of the grounds, if any, of these minorities, or people of the various cultures are neglected, or if they do not receive resources equitably, it is a ground for the President to take over regional government.  It is a very serious matter.  All this was to ensure that should you find that in a region, their cultural diversities are not marginalized.  

So, Madam Speaker, I thought I should make these clarifications in light of the well publicized letter from the Katikkiro and the various issues that had been raised.  

All the issues in the bill, the principles have been agreed; there may be one or two where we need to simply amend in order to give a detail or to get rid of the detail.  But I just wanted to make the point that Buganda was raising no new demands and in fact they were right in all the issues that they raised except in the one area where the error was not with Mengo, but actually with me.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.  Honourable members, I hope that put to rest the fears of members about the Katikkiro’s letter because it caused a lot of furore here.  So, I hope members have understood and we can proceed.  

5.37
MR JOHN KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka):  I thank you, Madam Speaker.  I rise to support this motion.  One fact that we recognized when we were making the 1995 Constitution was the fact that a constitution is a social contract, a social contract that involves the communities that are going to be guided by it, and we acknowledged that in this country there were communities.  In fact, that is why we went to the extent of even naming tribes.  We acknowledged that there were communities and these communities wanted to be guided by the Constitution and we wanted their consent.  

So it is right that we look at all the communities that existed in Uganda and we even named them.  So it is absolutely necessary to recognize that certain communities which before independence were autonomous communities, now agree to live together in one country but with various diversities.  This we must take into account, and it was because of that account that certain things were considered.  Even historical facts that some communities had actually gone into separate agreements with colonialists and that at independence, when the Independence Constitution was being negotiated, these communities had actually participated in the negotiation of that Constitution. It is that Constitution which had been abrogated; in making a new one, we have to take all those historical facts into account.

As a matter of fact, some of these communities had had sub-constitutions in the 1962 Constitution, particularly Bunyoro, Ankole, Buganda, Toro and Busoga had scheduled separate constitutions of their own, but the abrogation of the Constitution had deprived them of these rights.  

Now, if that is a fact and we are leaders of this country, we should please take into account the diversities of the various communities, their various interests and demands, and try to incorporate them in a constitution, which will work for all of them harmoniously. This is the spirit, which I want honourable members of this House to take into account.  

Not everybody will have what he or she wants, but let us find a way of accommodating some of these factors. I think the question of a regional tier is an attempt to try to accommodate certain communities, which actually wanted to have separate governments.  

But then the feeling was, if you have to work together, we may not be able to give you all that you want, but let us attempt to cater for certain interests and be able to accommodate you within that community. That is why the idea of a regional tier now comes in.  It will not satisfy everybody, but at least it is a step in the right direction –(Applause)- and that is the spirit within which various people have accepted this, and this is after negotiations.  

We must commend the people in Government who have had to spend sleepless nights meeting all kinds of people to come to this.  But it looks like after all that effort we want to come here and just tear it apart because it may not have catered for what we want as individuals; surely that is not nationalistic enough.  

So, it is in this spirit that we should debate this bill.  For some of us it does not go as far as we want, but we ought to know that we have been part of a destruction of our community and we are just reconstructing it. As the saying in my area is, “Ebidawo tebyenkanankana,”-  reconstruction can never rebuild what you had before.  These are facts we have to take into account. 

In my view the attempts are good; we should be able to build on those.  For those who do not want it, do not take it; leave it for those who want it.  But if somebody wants it, you do not want it and you say, “You will not also have it.” What is the spirit?  You create a situation as if hell has fallen on the ground.  The idea is to accommodate those who want this kind of thing. It is meant to cater for those interests. If you want harmony, surely handle those things peacefully so that we shall all live peacefully together.  

So, it is in that spirit that I think we should be able to look at the amendments.  I am happy I have spoken after a minister has clarified some of the fears that had come out of Mengo.  My feeling is that the draft also has a lot of limitations, which I think will be improved.  

One of them, for example, is on page 5, which refers to regional governments under six, which says: “The regional assembly shall be a body corporate.” I am sure you do not want the assembly to be a body corporate. You want the regional government to be a body corporate.  

The Committee itself has made reference to Mengo Municipality and saying it should be handled under a separate Act of Parliament.  I do not see any need for it.  Under this bill itself, you only have to move (4) from where it is and you put it under Article (5) and then just say: “There shall be established a municipality out of Kampala in Buganda to be known as Mengo Municipality.”  You put it under (5) and it would fit there and there would be no need to make the kind of amendment that the Committee referred to.  

If all that has been catered for, I think it is absolutely necessary that we put a time frame within which the Acts of Parliament that we think shall be establishing this thing.  There should be a time frame within which we should be able to say a regional government can start operating now, and the ones who want to come later can take their time, but the ones who want to go immediately should go ahead.

I find that for those districts, which want to be deemed, I think everything should be done to deem them before this bill is passed.  It looks like Busoga has indicated; it already has a charter. It may want to be deemed, why don’t you go ahead and deem it.  The way Bunyoro speaks today looks like they want to be deemed. Why don’t you go ahead and deem them and then be able to move with those that want, and then be able to start immediately.  With those remarks, Madam Speaker, I support the motion.

5.50
DR MATOVU BYATIKE (Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much indeed, Madam Speaker.  I will begin with thanking the Committee for a good report. As usual I very often find their reports very good.  

Secondly, I find that the report was wide. According to their report on page 3, it looks they did quite a number of consultative meetings; they interacted with many people.  I believe whatever they have put down, that list there, they must have met them. I do not think they concocted anything or left out anything.  So, I think that was good, and that shows that the whole idea was appreciated much more widely than people had been thinking.  

I feel that the regional tier reduces the competition on the resources as compared to the small mouths for the national cake.  If all 56 small mouths - I am talking about districts now – all went for the national cake that would be something or has been something difficult.  

So, I think the competition is now going to be reduced in the sense that not so many people – some of them, five or six districts, will be represented by one person from the regional tier. So the pressure is going to be reduced.  My feeling is that the small cake is too thin and too widely distributed as it is right now.  

What I am talking about is this. Within the regional arrangement some two or three districts can postpone their development programmes in favour of their more needy brothers and sisters.  If the money was put into the region there, they can do it much more easily than at the individual district level.  

I cannot imagine Mpigi postponing their programmes in favour of Wakiso or Wakiso postponing their programmes in favour of Mukono, but within a region, this is something that can be thrashed out and they pool their resources. 

 To bring it down to the normal kind of arrangement, in the Constituent Assembly and in Parliament here, there have been groups of Members of Parliament, five or six of them, pooling their allowances together, but at the end of the month only two or three get the whole amount until everybody has been served. Rather than getting Uganda shillings two or three million, you get these six until everybody has been served.  So, I think this kind of arrangement for development purposes is very well accepted.  

Culturally the advantages of having a regional tier are too obvious. I do not need to elaborate on those so I am not going into details.  

Finally, I am sure the regional tier is surely another of the many sensible steps that the NRM Government has taken to take the services nearer to the people. My feeling is that, if I can reduce it to a smaller scale, the in-tray on the desk of the Commissioner for secondary schools is going to be emptied much faster than the point right now.  If the secondary schools are going to be catered for by the regional tier then everybody does not have to rush to Kampala to have their concerns taken care of.  

So, I think this is a sensible idea of a regional tier to take the services nearer to the people. I support the motion.  I support the idea of a regional tier.  Thank you very much.

5.55
CAPT FRANCIS BABU (Central Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I stand to support the regional tier for the various reasons.  One, we are brothers and sisters in this country. In fact when hon. Kabakumba Masiko was talking about Bunyoro-Kitara, I was surprised why she did not give you the extent of the powerful kingdom, which went all the way up to Congo, Karagwe, Rwanda, and Kooki. In fact half of the clans of Buganda came from Bunyoro. So, if we go on those basis- [An. Hon Member: “Information”]- I will take the information let me finish making my point.  If we go on that basis you might find that we are an inter-tribe in one way or the other.  

When the British came here, they came and realized that we had such powerful communities and they decided the method of rule would be indirect rule unlike those other colonies where they had direct rule. In fact the culmination into a protectorate was because our communities were so strong that the British realized that the only way to rule these communities was to go through the people themselves. 

Madam Speaker, these preceded today’s decentralization, which everybody is talking about in the international community forums, that good governance requires decentralization.  The Africans had already decentralized before these people did so. In fact, it is now that Britain is beginning to devolve powers to the regions of Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and in England.  This is the same thing that existed here before the British came. When the British walked in some of these royal palaces they were surprised by the kind of institutions that the Africans had.  

It is, therefore, very important to me that we should not come here and take ourselves two steps behind using the very philosophy they left behind of divide and rule. We should build on what we already had because we are the same people.

At independence, a lot of these things came up and when they were in Britain they sat down and discussed. These arguments came and they agreed on certain positions. Those positions did bring about a referendum in 1964 and eventually something was done for the rest of Uganda. 

The formation of the present day Uganda is a culmination of different communities and we must respect them.  This new amendment, all it says is that if two communities or two districts want to get together and form regions, they should go ahead.  The little things like deeming, if we need to put them forward, let us find a way to do them but we should agree with a concept. 

Somebody has been fighting from the making of the 1995 constitution to the present day that there is a gap. Whilst we have no problem with the district we are going to leave them their powers. We are saying now let us have that gap, that gap which is called “region”.  We think with that gap we cannot only reach the people quickly and our districts, together, we can join forces and be able to take the services to our people. 

I do not want us to split here because if we go in territorial problems now- in 1963 in the OAU they decided that the borders that existed there at independence would remain.  Even now if we started going back in history you will find that Uganda went up to a certain point but some people changed the borders. This is not the time for that; the time now is to consolidate the gains. Let us try and create a situation and see that we come out with a very strong entity. If there are small differences we can sit around the table and talk. 

In 1993,1994,1995, when we were making the Constitution there people who were really pushing for a regional tier, some people were laughing at them. But today everybody wants a regional tier and I think they should. I think others should have it, because what has happenned is that the districts remain as there. What is happening there will be another level, which will get power from the Central Government and, therefore, you will now join the powers that you have and those of the region and run that area very well.  

If there are small problems and the misconceptions that have been created, we are brothers; we can sit around the table.  I have talked to my great friend, hon. Muruli Mukasa, many times. I have said, there is no problem, that is a very simple problem we can find solutions to. I have even asked him to talk to different groups so that the different groups can look at your position and see how we can resolve the problem.  

Therefore, Madam Speaker, as I support this, I would like to request that this House, and since we are nowadays on media, we must be seen to unite this country and get away from that philosophy of divide and rule. Let us beat them at their own games. Let us unite this country and our strengths are in our communities.  If the communities are strong enough and communities join other communities we form a very strong country.  

I beg to support this motion. I would like to appeal to all my colleagues that let us get the regional arrangement and thereafter, any other thing that we can discuss, let us sit down and find the solution.  Thank you very much.

6.02
CAPT. MIKE MUKULA (Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Madam Speaker, honourable colleagues, I rise to support the motion very strongly. (Applause). 

This Government has a historical mission, this historical mission was to make sure among other things that we establish the rule of law, maintain peace and stability and consolidation of national unity. 

His Excellency the President and most of our people have always wondered why this Government has lasted now for 19 years and is still going to consolidate the unity of this country. There is no doubt that in the coming elections, confidence will be given to those who have maintained the stability in this country. 

We have been able to balance very clearly three key things: The economy, politics and security. It is good politics for this country for us to move towards establishing regional tiers in this country. 

The national objective is very clear. It reads:” All organs of the State and the peoples of Uganda shall work towards the promotion of national unity, peace and stability. Every effort shall be made to integrate all the peoples of Uganda while at the same time recognizing the existence of their ethnic, religious, ideological, political and cultural diversity”. (Applause). 

In 1962 at Independence, Uganda was faced to the challenge of integration and building of a nation as a State. Uganda was faced with that, no doubt about it. Building cohesion in this country entails the art of statesmanship. We have worked as a state in creating and establishing new districts in order to accommodate ethnic and cultural identities –(Applause). There is no doubt about that. 

There are districts that you even see cannot even exist if they are left alone to hold and to build their own internal resources but because of the factors of building internal cohesion in this country, Government and we in Parliament have had to submit.

It is important for us to understand that civil, political, and economic rights must be seriously enhanced in management of the State. These are fundamental and you cannot negotiate. 

I do understand that the underlining issue in this debate is the creation of a regional tier for Buganda. Buganda is being given a special status and we are creating what we call the Buganda hegemony. This is superfluous. It is wrong, it preposterous.  

I want to say very clearly that regionalism in Uganda has historical linkages in administration under the colonial rule. Regional tier does not imply monarchy. Regional tier in the other ways also is not ethnic based. Decentralization and regional tier are compatible: Compatibility in resource allocation, compatibility in supervision and compatibility in monitoring. 
In the past, when hon. Ken Lukyamuzi had a debate on federalism, I know that there were a number of people who feared that non Baganda would be chased out of Buganda. Some also feared that Buganda would take Kampala and all the properties of those non Baganda. 

This bill and this motion are not sectarian. Some people argue that you are creating a government within a government. This is not correct. Some people argue that it is only good for Kingdoms. That is also not correct. That it is terror to work in certain past, no. Some people also argue that it failed to work in the past so it can also fail now. That is not correct because this Constitution has many other things that protect the interest of many Ugandans. (Applause).

Honourable colleagues, this regional tier –(Interruption)

MR MBALIBULHA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable member for giving me an opportunity to be clarified. 

He has told us that regional tier is not ethnic; it is not tribal. I understand those people who are negotiating for this are cultural leaders. Yes, Buganda is known for having championed the negotiation between Uganda and Buganda- (Interjection)- it does not matter. 

Now the way I understand cultural institutions- these are cultural matters- they are supposed to handle cultural matters and leave politics aside. A regional tier, federo, decentralization, these are political arrangements. How come that these regional tier is being negotiated by cultural institutions entering into a negotiation with Uganda and yet we come here to pretend that they are not tribal; they are not ethnic. Can I be clarified there?

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, through you, I would like to know from the honourable Minister of State for Health whether Government has any study to indicate that service delivery to our people will improve or our people will be best served if we create regional tiers? I do not want anecdotal information; I want a study. Because government changes policies based on studies. I am a student of public administration and that is what I was taught that before Government changes policy there must be some study. 

Secondly, I would like to know from the honourable Minister when did he change position? For a long time I used to hear him make strong arguments against federo in favour of districts or decentralization. Now today he is saying the best way to deliver services to people is through regional tiers. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please, respond and conclude.

CAPT MUKULA: I wish to first respond to my colleague hon. Prince Kibanzanga. It is quite clear, that in politics there are no permanent friends and enemies. It is the interest that changes. And if it is the interest of your people, you go in that direction.  A good politician must be able to read the feelings of the people. The moment you fail to read the feelings of your people, you are losing direction.  

I want us to understand very clearly, and I join this position with the observation raised by hon. Wandera to say why have I shifted position from a republican approach or strong position against federalism and progressed towards regional tier. There is no conflict between decentralization and regionalism -(Applause)- none at all. In actual fact, what you have is better supervision, more people supervising and monitoring resources closely. 

It is also important for us to understand that for our regions for example Teso, we have Katakwi, Kaberamaido, Kumi, and Soroti.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think wind up.

CAPT MUKULA: Once this bill is passed into law the council procedures have been laid down, we have the provision to move to that direction.

Madam Speaker, I strongly support this motion and I urge hon. colleagues to support this motion for the unity and stability of this country.  I thank you.

6.15
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I rise to support the motion - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion as presented by Government and the report of the committee. I appeal to my colleagues like hon. Princess Kabakumba. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister is submitting.

MRS MUKWAYA: When you read page 3 of the report item 1, 2 and 3 you see that the committee was conscious of the feelings and articulations of all those people who appeared before it. When you add those three points to what hon. Kawanga appealed to this House, I want just to add that the Baganda were unfortunate that we were found here by God.  If we had been in Bunyoro and the Banyoro were here, I do not think that they would have done something different when the colonialists were here.  

So, let the Baganda not be penalised for the past, because we have moved progressively with the rest of Ugandans and we have been very accommodative. Madam Speaker even when our hearts have bled, we have stopped this bleeding and we have moved with the rest of the country.

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI:  Point of clarification.

MRS MUKWAYA: Can I finish?  My vice chairperson, I have been quiet, allow me to finish; I will allow you to seek clarification.  

Madam Speaker, I have also heard people say, why didn’t the Baganda have a charter like Busoga? I want to submit that we did not move because Article 178(1)(c) did not answer in real terms the issues that are critical to Buganda that the Bill has answered. I will give you an example. 

Madam Speaker, as the Banyoro representatives are here, we Baganda representatives have to confirm to our people that Kampala will not eat up the rest of Masaka and Buganda. This is what they have been telling our people; that Kampala is going to grow, it will eat up Mukono, Luweero, it will eat up – this is an issue. Our people are concerned. So, this Bill has addressed that issue in real terms, because what is embedded in this amendment is going into the Constitution. And because this article is an entrenched provision, we are comforted that no government will wake up one day and erase the achievements, which we have gained, overnight. These are assurances to our people. People must also be mindful. 

The fact that the Kampala issue has been resolved and we know that this is Kampala, which is a territory for every Ugandan, but development can grow without encroaching on people’s land because this is private property. (Capt. Guma rose_) Madam Speaker, I will allow him to clarify when I have submitted. Yes, allow me to present.  

Madam Speaker, I want also to submit that this Bill recognizes that in Uganda there are kingdom areas, but there are also republicans. It does so and it has provided for kingdom areas to have a regional government integrated within their kingdoms. This is a unique situation, because we are a unique country. I have not seen a republican country that also accepts kingdoms, but this is unique, even our Constitution is hybrid. We have married Parliamentary practice with presidential; it is unique. We do not need to imitate anybody, we are Ugandans and we have the capacity to write what we want as long as it means moving forward with all of us. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I want also to finally submit that collective responsibility of Government also entails – for us who have not disputed when our Katikiiro led a delegation and met severally with government, I would have demanded that I should be there as a Muganda, my father would also have demanded that he should be there as a Muganda. But Madam Speaker, for the record, I want to mention that the Katikiiro of Bunyoro, after meeting severally with the Minister of Defence as a chief negotiator, met the President – and let me tell you Madam Speaker and the House, there is submission that why –(Interruption)

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Madam Speaker, is the honourable Minister in order to keep misleading this House that the Katikiiro was consulted? Madam Speaker, I had kept quiet because I wanted to contribute. I, Kasirivu Atwooki, was one of the team that was being constituted to negotiate with government and I did not participate in the so-called meetings. Is Madam Minister in order to mislead this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, please stick to what you know. If the Baganda met the negotiating team please, let us stop there, the other areas will explain whether they met or they did not meet. Let us not go into those. That is the committee, not the government.  

Honourable members, the members were complaining about not having been consulted by the Government, not the committee. So let us concentrate on the tier, leave the consultations alone. 

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I respect your ruling but I am just two months old from being Minister of Justice and I was guiding this process only yesterday. So what I am talking about is not fabricated, I was in these meetings and what I am submitting - I cannot stop here. I was there effectively and I saw.  Now, that you have ruled I will rest my case at that, Madam Speaker.

Finally, Madam Speaker - (Interruption)

CAPT. GUMA: Madam Speaker, I was in the Constituent Assembly from March 1994 to November 1995 with hon. Hajati Janat Balunzi Mukwaya. The Leader of Government Business was a Presidential Appointee in the Constituent Assembly, and he convincingly put an argument for a federal administration of Buganda - actually, for a feudal government. I am using the word “feudal” because it was an argument of fusing political powers with the Kabaka of Buganda. 

Madam Speaker, during the National Resistance Council, there were demands for the return of the Ssabataka of Buganda. The demand then in 1991, 1992 towards the days of Constituent Assembly were demands for the Ssabataka. It changed in the Constituent Assembly and became a demand for a federal status for Buganda, and the little knowledge of Buganda - I do not want to claim too much - is that the majority of Baganda want a federal administration. Is it in order for the hon. Janat Mukwaya from Mukono to even misrepresent the requests of her people and argue for a regional tier when actually they want federal?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have heard a very eloquent contribution from hon. John Kawanga who said that he is not satisfied with what he has received but that it is something that can be accommodated. In the same spirit hon. Mukwaya has evaluated the situation and moved away from federal and said, let us get this one and move on. I think that is what Mukwaya is doing.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you Madam Speaker, I would like to correct the record of Parliament. I have never ever articulated feudalism for Buganda; never. I am a professor of political science, I know the difference between federalism and feudalism; I am not that stupid. I thank you.

MS MUKYAYA: Madam Speaker, the people I represent respect very much anybody assigned by the Kabaka to do things on behalf of the Kingdom and my King has endorsed what is being presented, so as a subject, I just have to bow. 

Having done that, Madam Speaker, I want to end by requesting other Ugandans to support us, to support this arrangement because it is very accommodative; it caters for everybody’s interest. There are things that are lacking, but when we come to the committee stage, going clause by clause, we can address those issues. I want to thank the committee for the good job.

6.29
MR MURULI MUKASA (Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister and the committee for this Bill.  Madam Speaker, even today as late as 2.00 p.m., I was still having consultations about this Bill with some of my constituents. They counselled us that go there, listen, take sensibilities of Members of Parliament but in a humble voice say what Nakasongola would like in this arrangement, say it. If you have respected what others want and they have got theirs, then definitely, those people will also reciprocate and respect what you are saying and they will give you what you want. 

So I would like to say it here that Nakasongola says well, for those who want a regional government, so be it, and those who do not want it, let them also be. After all those in regional government are going to be accommodated in Uganda, those who do not want a regional government are also going to be accommodated in Uganda; Uganda is going to remain the same. So those districts, which want, like we have heard on the Floor of this House today, well and good. Those which do not want, well and good. 

For Nakasongola Madam Speaker, it has been very consistent. Right from the Odoki days, Nakasongola, in the times of Odoki was not in for a federal government. The people of Nakasongolo in Odoki’s report say, yes, the majority of the people in Buganda wanted a federal government, but there was that small group and part of that small group was Nakasongola. 

So, we are saying fine, if people want a regional government, it is okay, but those areas which do not want, let them for the time being be left out, and Nakasongola should be considered. And we are saying this in a humble voice, it is not for anything malicious, it is not for anything untoward, it is what the people of Nakasongola wish. They are requesting this august House that the people of Nakasongola have honoured the wishes of other Ugandans, let this august House honour the wish of Nakasongola. 

Madam Speaker, we are not oblivious of the obvious reasons. The good things, which may come out of a regional government, have been very ably expressed here. Some of those we have been told are peace and stability and so on. We sincerely hope that this arrangement will bring about peace and stability in this country, and we hope that there will be no more fresh demands, some of which may even be outrageous three, four, five or six months down the road.  

Madam Speaker, the Bill obviously has in-built guarantees about equitable distribution of resources, cultural equity and so on; this is very good –(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, in this respect since my time is limited, I would request hon. Lukyamuzi to spare me that piece of information, we can share it at a cup of tea after here up in the canteen.  

Madam Speaker, yes, the guarantees are there, they are very good. But to make these guarantees meaningful and durable, and if they are going to be translated into reality and they are of benefit to the beneficiaries –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: I am standing humbly on a point of order and I believe I should be given that opportunity. I would like to thank hon. Muruli Mukasa for giving way.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you said you have a point of order.  

MR LUKYAMUZI: I am standing on a point or order.  Is hon. Muruli Mukasa in order to make us believe that after he has expressed the need that Nakasongola be freed from the shackles of the regional tier, he can be forced to belong to that union when they are already procedures, which can be applied to free him and Nakasongola from the regional tier? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, this is the third time I am appealing to you not to antagonize other Members of this House. Let the hon. Member present his case, he is talking about his people in Nakasongola and their feelings and their desires.  Do not antagonize him.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling. When they talk to the people below, those above are also hearing, and I think they have heard.  

Madam Speaker, for these guarantees to be translated into reality, we are told that the Central Government will come in with a formula, but I am proposing that in addition to the Central Government, let Parliament also participate in bringing about this formula so that these guarantees are tangibly translated into reality and they will be durable.

Madam Speaker, the Bill does not allow for a safety valve in the case of repeated and gross mal-administration –(Interjections)- Yes, I know it is in section 13. But supposing the President takes over a regional government and then they allow to operate, and the same thing happens elsewhere and there is another take-over, there should be in the Bill a safety valve that says if this goes on continuously then the aggrieved district should have an option either through a referendum or through an Act of Parliament or some other means to get out of that regional government. Otherwise, if this does not take place, then that is creating a recipe for violence, that the only way that people can get out in case of continued abuse is by expressing themselves through violence.
Madam Speaker, there are sanctions for the President and for the Member of Parliament. What about for the Chairperson of the regional government? I have not seen the sanctions there. So, they should be there as well, either censure or impeachment or recall. These should also be in-built in the Bill so that the administrators at the region are also responsible people and are held to account in case they go wrong.
Madam Speaker, in regions where there are more than one cultural leader, I would propose, again in the Bill, that let there be a forum for the cultural leaders in that region and they meet from time to time to exchange notes on cultural matters within their region. For example, in Buganda there is His Highness, the Kabaka, His Highness, the Kamuswaga, His Highness, the Sabaruli and you never know. So let there be a forum for them where they talk about cultural matters.

Madam Speaker, as I wind up, hon. Amama Mbabazi was saying there is a way, which can be followed for those areas, which want to join a regional tier, and I wanted him to clarify so that I know it exactly but he stopped short. I am saying for the case of Nakasongola, I am requesting that let Nakasongola be allowed to use that way to join the regional tier; let there be consultations, let the people take a decision as people of Nakasongola, which at that time was part of Luweero. But now as a distinct entity, a district of Uganda, let the people decide; and when they decide, there will be no problem. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.
6.35
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report, and I also support the Minister for his motion. I support the regional tier, Madam Speaker. The district of Kibaale, and I represent Bugangaizi, passed a resolution to be deemed for Bunyoro. 
Madam Speaker, having said that I thought in this Parliament we want to build consensus, and I still believe we want to build consensus. If that is the case, since I have heard nobody saying the negative, and as a colleague the other side said, let us listen to each other.  Let us listen to each other, if we have got concerns, which are pertinent, we should bring them up and they should be listened to and addressed.
Madam Speaker, I feel so hurt for Government to continuously insist and deny that Bunyoro was consulted; Bunyoro was not consulted at all. I would have felt better if Government came up with humility and said we could have had an oversight, then there I would have said, “If there was an oversight can we sit, since it is not yet late, and we discuss?”  But for somebody to continuously come and say we consulted, I feel so hurt.
Madam Speaker, if calling a small group of about four or five members is consultation, then people could have been consulted. But I believe Bunyoro has got concerns. It is not good to think that because something is positive to you, therefore things are going well, and when they seem to be going against you then things should not be spoken. It is bad politics because it is a historical fact that Bunyoro has been wronged for a long time. We had thought, Madam Speaker, - Madam Speaker, I need protection from hon. Mugerwa of Masaka district. 

DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do not harm the Member when he is contributing.

DR. KASIRIVU:  Madam Speaker, these concerns I have always-(Interruption)

MS MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, I am wondering whether the honourable member on the Floor is in order to confuse the House that actually the size of the delegation would also imply the content of the message. Depending on the size of the delegation sent to see the President, and how many were sent to see the Minister of Justice, the size should not mean much; it depends on the message that was carried. 

I am wondering whether the Member on the Floor is right to confuse the House that actually the size should actually be the issue of what was discussed with the consultative committee. I think we should not be confused, Madam Speaker, with that. So is he in order really to wonder about the size because Buganda actually came in a bigger size given the population and Bunyoro should also think of how many they are in Bunyoro to constitute a delegation.  So is he in order, Madam Speaker.

DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now honourable members, yesterday we agreed that in our submissions no community should try to be superior to the other. This is a matter, which is going to require a vote, and everybody will require everybody else. So if you are going to say that Baganda are many so they must be consulted many times, the Banyoro are fewer they should be consulted one time, this is not fair. Please, let us not antagonize one another. The Members from Bunyoro have said they were not consulted, that is what they believe. Please leave them in that belief.

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a statement that history repeats itself. I see history repeating itself. In the 1960s negotiations before independence, the government then concentrated on negotiating with one part of the country ignoring others. It seems to be repeating itself, because as I have said, for us in Bunyoro, however few we are, we can be ignored, but our concerns are genuine and we want them addressed.

CAPT BABU: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member who is contributing in order? Every time he stands up he has this tendency of threatening and intimidating. Really is he in order because he has voiced his point nobody has disturbed him. Last time he made a statement here about Buganda and we kept quiet. He has now made another statement; we have listened to him very carefully and he has this tendency of intimidating other societies. Madam Speaker, is he in order? Let me also end by adding that Buganda was represented by five people and Bunyoro by five.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us be tolerant. I cannot rule about what numbers because I was not in those meetings.

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the record, I have never talked about Buganda and the Hansard is there for everybody to read; I have never talked about a region. Why don’t people read their Hansard? When I say we have been ignored, does it mean that I am now threatening another region? I am talking about myself and the region I represent; and I am saying that for us we seem to be getting ignored and does that, Madam Speaker, mean I am threatening anybody?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are appealing for attention; it is not a threat.

DR KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, you know old women become uncomfortable when dry bones are mentioned, and that is the problem.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What about the old men?

DR KASIRIVU: That is a proverb.

MRS MUKWAYA: Yes, I am an old woman and I have not laughed about bones, is he in order to insinuate that every other old woman does that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is out order; the old women are totally alright. It is the old men who are a problem.
 
DR KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, that is a proverb.  Unless we are saying that we should do away with proverbs.  

Madam Speaker, yesterday hon. Kutesa when he was contributing used the term give and take, and I was very happy and had thought in this discussion we should give and take. For us who have our concerns, we put them on the table and they are listened to and then we shall move together.

Madam Speaker, I want to support the proposal of the committee that somehow the municipality of Mengo should be created not in the Constitution, but somehow, and the reasoning has been that, the Kabaka of Buganda, and this is the first time I am using the word Buganda, should reside in his Kingdom and the historical sites should be in the Kingdom and I support that one entirely. 

On the same note I want to tell this House that the consecration of the Omukama of Bunyoro begins on Nyakahuma Hill behind Mubende town and it is a historical fact that all the consecrations of the Omukama begin on that hill. It is a very important historical and cultural site of Bunyoro Kingdom.  We want that hill in Bunyoro Kingdom; and therefore, when other people are saying they want theirs, we should also want ours. So that is the give and take I am talking about. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.52
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I rise in support of the Constitution Amendment Bill No.2 and the regional tier arrangement, which is being proposed.

Indeed I would like to thank the Committee for the clear and concise report, which they have tabled before this House in support of this Constitutional Amendment Bill.  

Similarly, I would like to register appreciation to the Mbabazi Committee for the long and protracted negotiations they have had with various local entities to reduce the gap between government position and the position of those entities. This will help us to resolve this constitutional matter.  

Madam Speaker, this debate is all about enhancing the harmony, unity and prosperity of our country. I am hoping that when we are finally done, we shall transfer the enthusiasm with which we have debated here to the grassroots and explain to the people these important and historical decisions we are taking.  

Madam Speaker, of how to handle and cater for the different groups in Uganda under one political entity first manifested itself in earnest in the period preceding our independence in 1962. This threatened unity of our country and the attainment of independence. At that time, we had three clearly distinct groups. We had the kingdoms of Buganda, Ankole, Bunyoro, Toro and Kyabazingaship of Busoga.  We had another group constituting the districts without any monarchical set up, but with local administrations governed by laws passed from time to time by the colonial government. 

The third group was of the political groupings organized around political parties. These groups participated in the Lancaster Conference. Unfortunately under the 1962 Constitution, the resultant arrangement they come up with affecting local governance was undefined and ended up in having entities which were simply competing for influence in affairs of government.  It is this that partly led to the 1966 crisis.

Madam Speaker, the matter we are dealing with today is as weighty as it was at that time. Indeed those who have read the writings of Prof. GLO, he had clearly anticipated the kind of situation in which we are.  

Madam Speaker, the 1966 crisis led to the abolition of the monarchies and putting in place of the 1967 Constitution which sought to bring parity of treatment between the Central Government and various local entities. Much as an attempt was made to introduce parity, the arrangement was not arrived at democratically. We are aware of the pigeonhole Constitution of the 1967 and the way it was brought into being. It was a major source of dissatisfaction amongst some of the legislators at that time and other stakeholders. Madam Speaker, debate of this Bill, which we are having in this manner, helps us to avoid the mistakes, which were made at that time. 

Madam Speaker, the 1995 Constitution, which is a child of the NRM Government, presented an opportunity for the people of Uganda to review what form of local government they would wish to be governed under. At the same time, during the Constituent Assembly, the issue of social status, which has been emerging here a bit, presented as federo, featured strongly in the discussions. 

It is clear the 1995 Constitution came up with two main outcomes for this debate. The first one was that the issue of parity between local governments was for the first time solved and resolved. Uganda was divided into districts whose powers are the same under the Constitution and under the Local Government Act. Two, there was deepening of democracy under the local governments as exemplified under the local councils (LC) system and regular and elective arrangements, which we are having.

Madam Speaker, the provisions of the 1995 Constitution, which involved devolving power to local governments and to ensure that the local governments are elected by the people and remain accountable to them, is one of the most important innovations in local governance. The Bill we are debating seeks to maintain this. It goes further and seeks to put in place regional governments with specific cross responsibilities and functions. It recognises the importance of cultural and heredity, religious and goes ahead to operationalise Article 246 of the 1995 Constitution. For the first time, there will be an endowment package for cultural leaders in those regions, which choose to have them and this is a major breakthrough.

The Busoga region, where I hail from, had earlier on supported and designed the charter of cooperation under Article 178 of the 1995 Constitution.  In our view, the regional tier is a major improvement of what had been provided for under the charter. As per the submission of the Katukiro of Busoga and hon. Kizige to the Oulanyah Committee, our region is ready for the regional tier. As you are aware it was ready many, many months back. (Interruptions)

MR WANDERA: Madam Speaker, I come from the region of Busoga as prescribed in the Constitution and I have never known any forum where the people of Busoga decided that they are ready. If you consult in Busoga and you do not consult me, is that consultation? (Laughter) On the contrary, the people of Bugiri where I come from are opposed to it.

MS RUTH TUMA: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to claim to be a representative of the people of Busoga and yet he represents workers in this Parliament? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I looked at the Hansard, and you are a representative of workers, not of Busoga, but of Uganda.  So let those who represent those speak for them what they hear from there. Please conclude.

MR WANDERA: Madam Speaker, I would like to know from you whether henceforth you are declaring that I will only speak on Workers’ issues. As far as I am concerned, Madam Speaker, I am a Member of Parliament of Uganda, how I am elected does not matter, I have the mandate to speak on any matter, including matters of Busoga.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you stood there and said if you, Wandera, are not consulted, Busoga has not been consulted; that is what you said. So are you Busoga?

MR WANDERA: Madam Speaker, I am part of the people of Busoga, so I want the Minister to tell me which consultations were carried out that I did not know about.

MRS MUKWAYA: Madam Speaker, I wonder where the Sergeant-At-Arms is because the Chair is threatened and the Sergeant-At-Arms is seated. You cannot speak to a Speaker like that.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will soon start invoking my other rules.

MR MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, this is to give information that Busoga was consulted and the equivalent of the Prime Minister, Mr Musumba Martin, did lead the delegation of Busoga and incidentally they wrote, and I can produce a copy of their communication, to say that they were happy with the positions that we reached in the meetings that we had; and that, that consultation was under the chairmanship of the President in State House.  Thank you.  

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, it is a fact that several rounds of negotiations and consultations have been taking place both in the region and in Kampala.  

Madam Speaker, the regional tier arrangement, in our view, permits attraction of more resources to the districts, but it is also one sure way of having an optimal way of utilizing these resources for the communities, which opt to be administered under a regional tier.  

Madam Speaker, our next assignment in my view, as those who have accepted the regional tier arrangement, is to ensure that these viable administrative and economic entities are turned into wealth and income-generating centres to make a greater contribution to our nation, and thereafter to the East African integration process. I support the Bill and the report of the committee. I thank you.

7.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, INVESTMENT (Prof. Semakula Kiwanuka): I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I rise to support the motion. I would like to begin by recognizing the statements made by the honourable member who said that we must build consensus. This is very important for the business, which is before us.

Madam Speaker, the regional tier is available to whoever so wishes, and it is important for us when we discuss the tier to bear that in mind.  Yesterday, Madam Speaker, I stood here and said in respect of the Bill, that the Movement Government is a listening Government and it has built consensus. It has stayed in power for this long because it is a listening Government. It was in view of that, that His Excellency, the President, way back in the late 1980s and early 1990s listened to the yearnings of the people of Buganda when; 
(a)	they said we are going to have Sabataka,
(b)	they said we are going to negotiate ebyaffe,
(c)	in 1993 the Kabakaship was restored.

The restoration of the Kabakaship was the beginning of the restoration of the traditional rulers in this country because the Movement is a listening Government. The ideological foundation of the Movement is the people, and because of that ideology, the Movement has been listening to the demands of the people.  The regional tier framework is a very good one because it is available to whoever so wishes. I would like to appeal to our colleagues from every corner of Uganda and the honourable members of this august House to support this motion.  

Madam Speaker, when we were negotiating way back in the 1980s and the 1990s for the restoration of the traditional leaders, we in Buganda spearheaded it, but we did so for those who wanted it. And let me tell you honourable members that we the people in Mengo took 15 buses to the coronation of the Omukama of Bunyoro and we spent a weekend in Hoima because we support these institutions, because we believe that when the Movement listens to the people, that provides the foundation for the stability, which we have all enjoyed.  

Madam Speaker, on Mengo Municipality, we have justified the creation of the Mengo Municipality; it is not a new thing. Nothing has been invented about Mengo Municipality by this Government; Mengo Municipality existed before independence, Mengo Municipality existed up to the time when the kingdoms were abolished. The existence of Mengo Municipality does not hurt anybody simply that within that small territory is a collection of the cultural heritage of the Baganda, and we have said that let us have jurisdiction over the centre of our culture – the Lubiri, Kasubi, the Masiro, Butikiro, etcetera. So, because the Movement Government is a listening government, we thank them for that because it has provided the stability here.

Finally, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, we think it is a good thing to have a regional tier. It devolves powers to the regions and that is a bedrock of democracy. We think it is a good thing for those who so wish to adopt it. But even those who do not wish, we beg them to support this framework because it is for the good of our country. I thank you.

7.08
MS UDONGO PACUTHO (Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I come from the only region that has its name in English, the West Nile, and I stand to support this motion on the regional tier. The only reason why I do so is that for the first time it is going to give visibility to our traditional leaders, especially the Rwot.  Madam Speaker, some of you probably did not know that we have a cultural leader by the name of Rwot. I would like to let you know that very soon we shall call upon Government to support us for the enthronement. Actions speak louder than words, so we hope this Bill is going to be a test of what Government is saying when they support us. Thank you.

Madam Speaker, there has been a lot of problems because we did not understand most of the terminologies being used. First of all we heard of federal, then feudal system, and then federation, and then regional tier, and then regional government, I think that has been a bit of confusing phraseology, that is why probably a number of people are being confused. But I want to say that from what I have heard –(Interruption)

MR NORBERT MAO: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Actually when countries are designing their administrative structures, there have been two models: where power is concentrated at the centre like in Spain after the dictatorship of Franco, then power is devolved to lower units. The second model is like that of the 13 original States in the United States of America. They were more or less countries in their own right. They had all the power; they met and decided what amount of power to give to the centre. 

I think in the case of Buganda, it was an established authority. In 1962 there was some arrangement, it actually gave away part of its powers to the Central Government; in the 1962 Constitution, it was negotiated. 

I would like the honourable member on the Floor to take note of our unique situation, namely, that power was centralised after the abrogation of the 1962 Constitution. What we are doing now is more or less like restoration, and therefore it is not a Federal Republic of Uganda we are constructing, otherwise the Government would have told us. Uganda remains a unitary state; it is in the Constitution. So, anybody who is talking of a federal republic would have to amend that Constitution, which says unitary. Federalism is the highest stage of decentralization. I think those who are supporting this motion are saying it is now a tendency through which perhaps federalism could be achieved. So there is a total distinction. 

There are many ways in which –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mao, you are happily making your submission on her time.  

MR MAO: I will stop here.

MS UDONGO PACUTHO: Thank you very much, hon. Mao, for educating us slightly, I hope you will have time to educate us more. But I think what we have On our hands now is the regional government and that is what I stand to support. The details, you will tell us when we get out.

Madam Speaker, I want to say that while I support this, there are certain things that I think Government needs to look into seriously. For example, I belong to a tribe that is a minority, we are just two percent, and so there is fear of marginalisation, and the Bill does not come out very clearly on how that can be addressed.  

Actually one of the reasons why some people are resisting, especially the minority groups like us, is that the very people we had run away from we are going back to them, and so they might marginalize us again. So, we should come out very clearly on that so that we would be able to trust them. So, that I give to Government to look into.

Secondly, while the Government is saying, “Okay, you will be in charge of your resources,” it seems to keep its hands on some of the valuable resources. For example, in my district the forest, especially the one that Government would like to manage and is managing, is one of those resources that we would want to keep for the district or for the region. So, we think that Government should look into that. 

On the whole I believe for West Nile we have a lot of resources that if we were organized we could actually develop faster. You know, if your neighbour is rich, you can also be rich by just rubbing shoulders. Southern Sudan and Eastern Congo are rich countries, and if we had good road network, good airport system, good tertiary institutions like the Nile University, the University of Juba and Kisangani and we also federate in that way, we would develop. So, I support this motion, it is a step forward. Thank you.

7.15
DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was a Member of the Constituent Assembly and I happened to be on a committee with hon. Prof. Nsibambi, which was discussing Local Government together. I still recall that when the issue of decentralisation and creation of districts came up, so many people demanded districts and they were accepted. I recall warning that the way we were proceeding with creating districts would mean a proliferation of districts and it would become inevitable to form a regional tier in order to coordinate these multifarious districts as they would become impossible to coordinate from the centre. So the fact that, that observation is coming true at this time gives me a lot of satisfaction.

Madam Speaker, I also recall that I supported, with many other colleagues and delegates a motion for creating a federal Uganda. But what we are having now is definitely much smaller than the federal form of administration, which I would support even more strongly. Consistent with those positions, Madam Speaker, I support this motion without reservations.  

However, I want to state again for the purpose of record and history that the way we are proceeding to establish the regional administration is not correct. I had moved a motion, which I am surprised the chairman of the committee or the committee would not even mention that this thing should be deferred until a good study was conducted and we make a transitional provision for that purpose that this matter will be considered in the year 2006. It is not mentioned, but nevertheless, I would beg the honourable member to be a little more polite because if I have come to take his position and he is making that noise I think he isn’t being very courteous. 

Madam Speaker, I have already abandoned that position, but I want to mention it for purpose of history that if we ever run into trouble with this arrangement it should be recalled as some people had foreseen that. 

I would also like to refer the House to observation number 4 on page 5 of the committee report, particularly the sentence which reads: “The other concerns are that two districts are too few to form a region and that making this optional would leave governors in a state of uncertainty and instability”. This is the very reason I had said we should defer this position because as we proceed now we are going to leave governance in an uncertainty and a bit unstable. I support this observation very, very, seriously. 

Madam Speaker, I would also like to refer to observation number 8 on page 6 of the committee’s report, which says the committee had representations from honourable Moses Kizige. In short, there were petitions for deeming Busoga, Acholi and Toro. I am advising that even our friends from Bunyoro instead of making a lot of noise here actually be considering moving an amendment at the Committee Stage for Bunyoro to be so deemed. I support that those who sought to be deemed now should be added to Buganda and at the Committee Stage I will be moving that Lango should also deemed to have formed the regional government.  
I think this is important, Madam Speaker. My colleagues the people of Buganda should accept because this would avoid the reservations of other people in observation that the deeming of Uganda alone at this stage appear to be sectarian and we would like to escort Buganda so that it ceases to appear to be a sectarian issue. So, those of us who would propose at the Committee Stage to be deemed as regional administration should be supported in order to alleviate this fear. I thank you Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have noted those Members who wanted to speak; debate on this matter will continue tomorrow. So, the House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. Honourable members, I am prepared to sit for the next two weeks so that all of you speak. 

(The House rose at 7.21 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 18 May 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)


