


Wednesday, 13 May 2020

Parliament met at 2.34 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I have just two issues to communicate. 

The first is with regard to the National Social Security Fund (NSSF) Bill. Last week, I instructed the joint committees of finance and gender to work expeditiously and complete the Bill. I would like to clarify that the committees must sit together but for purposes of reporting, the chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development will be the one to present the report to the House. This is because the Bill was sponsored by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. So, let them work together but the report will come here through the chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development.

Secondly, I have received a number of requests for matters of national importance. However, as I keep on saying, many of these issues can really be dealt with by way of questions. Therefore, on today’s list, I will only allow two matters of national importance which are related to COVID-19 from hon. Lilly Adong and hon. Abala. For the others, please bring questions and we shall ask the Government to answer them expeditiously.

2.37
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Over the last few days, I have been in my district doing my oversight function on this COVID-19 pandemic prevention. When I was on radio in Gulu, I got a call from several people, especially the technical staff, who were complaining of the conflicting guidelines that have been issued by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Local Government.

Madam Speaker, the districts are failing to use the Shs 165 million. When I interacted with the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) of my district, he said that the finance ministry has given only three areas on which this money should be expended - on allowances, staff welfare and fuel. However, the Ministry of Local Government gave detailed guidelines that included staff welfare, allowances on fuel, vehicle maintenance and then details on how it should be spent up to the subcounty.

The biggest challenge is that when they try to log into the financial system of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which the districts prefer to use, it is not active. It is only active on these three directives of the finance ministry. As a result, up to now, the districts are stuck with this money. They cannot use this money on vehicle maintenance, for example.

In my district, there are 15 vehicles that have been given for COVID-19 activities. About nine of them have broken down and so, the district is left with only six functioning vehicles. In the circumstances, they cannot even maintain these vehicles using part of the Shs 165 million. I took time to find out from the management of Gulu District - They have a fleet of 25 vehicles, most of which have broken down, except only about seven, yet they cannot use part of this money for vehicle maintenance. 

At this point, I would like the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, as fast as they can, to harmonise and give the best way forward. If they prefer the local government system to be used, let them keep it active on the financial system. If they do not do it, then it is as good as having this money not there. 

Secondly, I request that if the money being given by Members of Parliament is to be used in the districts, let the ministry make it clear as to whether it is supposed to be used or it is supposed to be banked, in line with section 44 of the Public Finance Management Act –(Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, yesterday I attended a task force meeting in my district, whose women you represent, that is, Kamuli District, and we had two scenarios.

First, the materials for the education system that were sent to the district have not reached the grassroots simply because they have no means to deliver those materials to the last point. The District Education Officer (DEO) said he has no facilitation to take the materials down to the grassroots.

Secondly, there is a donation that was received at the district and it is supposed to go to Namasagali and Butansi. During the meeting, the head of logistics said he has no facilitation to take that donation to the respective beneficiaries. 

The money was received on the account and the guidelines were sent by the ministries of local government and finance, but the districts cannot still access the money. Thy have tried to access it by entering the code but they have still failed to access it. So, the money is stuck there and they cannot progress. 

Some members of the task force no longer come for the meetings because they said they have no means to reach the district headquarters to attend such meetings. That is the information I wanted to give.

MS LILLY ADONG: Madam Speaker, as we speak, the health workers and Village Health Teams (VHTs) are on the verge of striking because their allowances have not been paid.

Related to that, I also inspected the stores and realised that the supplies that were sent for the isolation centre contain expired milk. That milk is supplied by Lato. The district received it on 27 April but by 5 May, the milk had expired. I do not know whether the ministry can replace that consignment.

They also supplied milk, posho, salt, sugar minus beans to the isolation centre. So, I do not know whether they will put salt in the posho for the people who are in the isolation –(Interruption)

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give, Madam Speaker, is that the guidelines are not only conflicting but they are also not flexible.

My district, Amuru, got a donation of fuel from some partners. They requested the ministry to divert the money for fuel and use it to fence off the quarantine centre because very many people were escaping from there - it is a school, which is open. However, the ministry objected to that request and said Amuru District must use all that money on fuel.

That is where the problem is. That is the information I wanted to give you. Thank you very much.

MS LILLY ADONG: Finally, Madam Speaker, I beg the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to quickly harmonise these guidelines because as we speak, the task force is only depending on donations ever since it was put in place. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Ministry of Finance, can you please clarify this? This matter has been coming up on the Floor and this is probably the fourth time.

2.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, it is true that the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Local Government issued some guidelines on how this money should be utilised. The Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury also issued guidelines on how this money is going to be used, namely to cater for fuel, welfare and other items. It is within this money that we hoped that they can actually distribute education materials to the lower levels.

We have seen that many of the administrative officers, despite the fact that our offices can be reached, tend to give different excuses. Therefore, we are going to meet tomorrow and issue clear guidelines, combining the guidelines from the Ministry of Local Government and ours. Tomorrow, all accounting officers at the districts will receive proper guidance on how this money can be utilised. 

From our side, however, we know that if there was an active accounting officer at the district, they would have reached us after facing any difficulty. Since that is the situation, however, we are going to issue new guidelines tomorrow and by 10.00 a.m., they will be received across the country. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

2.46
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity. I am raising a very critical matter concerning the recruitment exercise that took place in Ngora District last Friday. 

The district service commission interviewed different applicants for various jobs that had been advertised previously. As we all know, Uganda is under lockdown, meaning that no transport system is operating, whether public or private. Unfortunately, last Friday, there was an interview process in Ngora District. 

I have a few questions to ask. One, I do not know whether they were cleared by both the President’s office and the Ministry of Local Government to hold this interview. Other districts like Butaleja have postponed their interviews until the coronavirus pandemic is over. Unfortunately, Ngora District decided to hold interviews last week. Some time back, we talked about some people who were needed, unfortunately they were adamant. 

Madam Speaker, I need to know whether these results are legal. I want the Attorney General to tell us whether these interviews were legal. 

Secondly, I am sure that there was a Kenyan truck that came all the way from Kenya to collect oranges from Ngora. The people who came on that truck were put under quarantine because we do not know who they are. We are unaware of where the people who did the interviews came from. We are also not knowledgeable about their health status. I wonder whether they do not qualify to be quarantined to determine whether they are safe or not. 

Finally, I would like the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Public Service to come and help us understand whether interviews can be done during the lockdown or if these interviews are null and void. I need to be helped. I am raising this matter because other districts may borrow from Ngora and that will perpetuate the spread of coronavirus. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Other than the Prime Minister, who is in charge of enforcing the lockdown? 

2.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, enforcement of the guidelines put in place by His Excellency the President is done by a number of agencies. Security agencies are handling issues related to security and the Ministry of Health is concerned with health issues. However, we shall follow up the issue that hon. Abala has raised and inform the House accordingly, very soon.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us go to Item 3(1). Yesterday, the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance produced a breakdown of the radio stations in the country. However, we wanted the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to tell us the actual distribution of the FM radios in the homes. I do not know whether you would like to present on this, honourable minister. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE CENSUS OF FM RADIOS IN THE COUNTRY

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we have circulated this information on the Members’ iPads. The information has three parts: the first part shows the distribution of ownership by households and by regions - households that use mobile phones, households that use FM radios, households that use television, and households that use computers. 

Schedule No. 2 shows the main source of information for households. I would like to give an example. As per 2020, out of 9.5 million households in the country, 5.285 million households access information using radio; 1.8 million households access information using word of mouth; 600,000 households access information using telephone; 38,000 households access information using print media; and 18,000 households access information using post-mail and hand-mail. 

Out of these households, 699,000 people access information using television; 200,000 people access information through community meetings; 47,000 people access information using the internet; 400,000 people access information using the community announcer; and 277,000 using other forms of communication. 

Madam Speaker, 55.2 per cent of households access information using radio and 7.3 per cent access information using television. Another area of interest is that 7.2 per cent of households access information using telephone. This means that if the education ministry is targeting our children, then we can assume that either a household has a radio or they can use their telephones to access a radio. They can also use television, which comes to almost 68 per cent of households using these types of media.

Madam Speaker, I have gone ahead to distribute - It would be of interest to you, honourable members, to know how your constituents are accessing information, not only about COVID-19 but even for other activities that will come in future, so that when you are communicating with your constituents you know which medium to use. All the constituencies have been listed and uploaded on the iPads. You can check your constituency and see how they access information. 

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether there is any question. We think that if the Ministry of Education and Sports or the Ministry of Information, Communication Technology (ICT) and National Guidance can use this, we will be able to see how best we can target different households across the country, using different media.

However, in terms of ownership, we see that 60 per cent of our households own a radio, 14 per cent own a television, 3.8 per cent own a computer and 65 per cent own mobile phones. This information has been shared with ICT and will be shared with the Ministry of Education and Sports so that we can see how best we can target different households using different channels - radio, telephone or television.

That is how the distribution is and this is according to the census of 2014 and projected. It was done through a scientific method and this is the institution that all of us depend on when it comes to data. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, this is very good information; first, about the 14 broadcasting regions. You can check where your area falls and also check which ones are being used for the education materials, so that you see whether the children are receiving them. Secondly, there is the timing of the lessons.

2.56
MR ABDULTIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Our major concern is about the education media. 

Madam Speaker, we are still under lockdown, and according to the Minister of Education and Sports and the Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB), they are circulating these materials so that our learners continue studying as if they are in school, and that will be the basis for UNEB exams. Therefore, if we are talking about 68 per cent who access these programmes, what will the fate of the other percentage be, yet the exams are going to be national? 

I think that is where our major emphasis should be. If there is a great percentage who cannot access these materials, even if it is less than 30 per cent, yet when the exams are set, they are going to be national, how are we going to navigate that?

2.57
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise to add to the emerging issues that concern the media. 

While we appreciate all efforts that the Government is doing, when digital migration was accomplished, Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) was directed to ensure that implementation of all TV channels and radios is done. However, to our amazement, all Ugandans are paying for free-to-air channels and yet they are supposed to be accessed for free by all Ugandans. To date, if you switch on any channel, whether NTV, UBC, if you have not paid for them through DStv or MultiChoice, you cannot access them, yet under the broadcasting licences all these local channels are supposed to be airing for free.

Madam Speaker, we seek for clarification from the minister in charge of ICT and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as to why this irregularity is there, yet these children, however small the percentage is, should be benefitting from these free-to-air channels.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I hope the minister will be able to answer.

2.59
MR CHARLES GUTOMOI (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My constituency is not benefiting from this at all. While the online learning system has been encouraged in this country, when we endeavour to ask why this cannot be stayed until further notice, this has not been taken seriously. 

The 32 per cent, I think, are mainly in the rural communities. This is now a test between the poorest of the poor and the richest of the rich. Therefore, I agree that the poor have been left behind. 

When parents paid school fees for their children in Government schools, we were happy that nothing was going to interfere with their learning, but now the COVID-19 pandemic has come in. Here, we now have a situation where the children who were in private schools have not been catered for. Are they Ugandans or are their parents Ugandans and citizens of the - (Member timed out.)

3.01
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the information he has given to us. My problem or the issue I have is on the coverage. 

In Kagadi District, we have three radio stations but none of them was picked. I tried to ask the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance and she told me to consult the Ministry of Education and Sports because she does not do the selection. In this case, 80 per cent of the students in Kagadi are not covered by the radio station that was picked. The radio station that was picked is from Kibaale and it is for hon. Kasaija. The assumption was that it is going to cover the entire greater Kibaale. 

There is a very big problem with coverage. The criteria that was used to select these radio stations left out most of these people; therefore, Kagadi District is not benefiting. It is only the owners of the radio stations that are giving out - (Member timed out.)

3.02
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, as a person from finance and statistics, when we get statistics, we should interpret them. It is not a matter of getting them from technical people and we present them.

Madam Speaker, we are here as Parliament because the ministry wants to do e-learning. However, when you look at the radio and television coverage - you cannot educate on phone but even if you include the phone, you get 55 per cent, plus 7.3 per cent, plus 7.2 per cent. When you get the average, honourable minister, you get 23.9 per cent. You get the average, please. 

This means that only 23.9 per cent of the people in this country will access the information. This is targeted only for Kampala. Honourable minister, add up the numbers on access to information – radio, 55.2 per cent – (Member timed out.)

3.03
MR CHARLES ILUKOR (NRM, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. To me, the minister has given us the statistics of people who own radios, telephones and televisions but he has not gone ahead to find out the regular usage of those items. In our villages, radios are either used to listen to announcements or a special programme and then they are switched off to preserve the batteries. Telephones have problems because they need to be charged. 

Therefore, capitalising on the coverage of 60 per cent or so, without considering how these gadgets are regularly used, will be misleading thereby denying our communities the learning facilities that they are trying to convey through those media. Thank you.

3.05
Mr George ouma (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, I would like to also thank the minister. My concern is about the e-learning that has been talked about. 

I come from Namayingo District and the bigger part of the district is in the waters and there are so many schools there. When you go to the islands, this coverage is non-existent. When you go to places like Hama, they only receive radio stations from Kenya.

When we say we are going to asses our learners using the knowledge they have got from either television or radio lessons, I think we are not being careful about this country. We should make sure that what we are doing here will benefit each and every person, even those who are on the islands. 

We are now talking about radio and so forth but you can see there are floods and rising water levels. People are nowhere. How will they learn when they are struggling? How are they going to look at the television when – (Member timed out)

3.06
Mr Geoffrey macho (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for his submission. 

We have got a challenge in Busia District and I think the country at large. Studying through the media has left out early childhood education (nursery), moreover this is the foundation for our children. If a tree is not taken care of well during the nursery time, it cannot grow straight. Therefore, I would like to get guidance from the Ministry of Education and Sports on how they have catered for that education. 

Secondly, we have another challenge because many people requested for licences to operate radio stations but Government refused to license them. I believe that this is the right time for Government to license these radio stations so that Ugandans have access – (Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Honourable members, when the minister brought the paper, we had a debate on that. What we asked for was a breakdown of the radio coverage in the country so that we could know if the children are accessing these lessons. That is why I will allow you only one minute to clarify.
 
3.07
Ms milly mugeni (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Uganda has a national broadcaster, which I believe would be the preferred media to reach the very poor persons in our villages. I would like to know from the minister what exactly happened to Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC). It is the national broadcaster and has been given money by Parliament but it does not reach so many places in this country. What is the problem?

Secondly, I would like to know which particular radio stations, per region, have been paid for airtime to broadcast these programmes. Thank you.

3.08
Mr gordon bafaki (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister. 

Honourable minister, how many families have receivers? There could be 68 per cent coverage that you talked about but how many individual families have a radio in their home? I will give you an example of my home; the only radio that is there belongs to my old mother and a primary seven pupil cannot access it. It is always in her bedroom. How many families have receivers and are able to access the radio to listen to the programmes?

The Speaker: Honourable members, recently, I received a letter from a young boy in Kampala who wrote to me saying that he is a Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE) candidate and he is trying to follow the programmes but he cannot get access to his grandmother’s radio. He asked, “Can you buy for me a radio worth Shs 30,000 so that I can study?” You can see how serious the situation is.

Maybe the minister can give us a final response. Let us have the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and then The Minister of Education and Sports.

3.10
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and colleagues, the purpose of this information was to show Parliament and the country the strategy the Ministry of Education and Sports used, in the circumstances, to try as much as possible to reach our children. 

We can now confirm that actually, 55 per cent of our households have access to information through radio. Therefore, it is an obligation for all of us to encourage people to help one another in these difficult times. 

As Members of Parliament, we can play a role. Personally, I have gone to radio programmes to say, “If you have a radio in your home, do not hide it from a child who is supposed to study” - (Interjections) - If they do not have one, that will be a problem, but that is the message we can give as leaders.

Finally, hon. Waluswaka said that the average percentage of access to information is 23. That is not true. The statistics are here. I would like to also let you know that ownership of radios per household is very important. We have broken down all these regions. They are not many; I can go through them. In Kampala, 60 per cent of the households own a radio; in Buganda, 68 per cent; Busoga, 59.7 per cent; Bukedi, 49.5 per cent; Elgon, 57.1 per cent; Teso, 53.1 per cent; Karamoja, 47.7 per cent; Lango, 44 per cent; Acholi, 56.8 per cent; West Nile, 14.5 per cent; Bunyoro, 64.1 per cent; Toro, 69.7 per cent; Ankole, 62.5 per cent; and Kigezi, 70.6 per cent.

Colleagues, this is information from your institution, Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS). It is done scientifically. You can either accept a scientific method of doing work or not but this is information we have and this is the only thing we can have. Therefore, based on this information, I think it was proper and right that in the circumstances, the Ministry of Education and Sports thought of this. They asked how they could reach the people in the circumstances. I now yield the Floor to my colleague, the honourable minister, to tell as about the strategy.

3.13
The Minister of State for Education and Sports (Higher Education) (Dr John Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank hon. Bahati for these statistics. Actually, when we were designing this programme, we got those statistics and they guided us in developing the programme where our children would be helped to revise during the holidays. 

We realised that not every Ugandan has access to a radio. Some have access but not many others. That is why we agreed that we would be able to help our learners revise through radio or television, but for those that would not be able to access that, we came up with private self-study written materials. 

Of course, like I said the other day, we did not have enough money to print materials for each and every learner but now the ministry has realised that even those that have access to radios or televisions need those printed study materials. We are now getting more money and more materials will be printed and sent to each and every learner, wherever they are. 

Madam Speaker, that is our plan. We have already started sending these materials to the villages. We sent them to the districts, which have been kind enough, using the COVID-19 money they got, to send them over to the Local Council I (LCI) chairpersons, who have the responsibility to pass them on to the children. 

Madam Speaker, somebody wanted to know what plan we have for early childhood – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think there hasn’t been access to that money. No local government has access to that money because of the confusion in the guidelines. That money has not been accessed by the local governments because of the conflicting guidelines between the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Local Government. 

DR MUYINGO: Yes, Madam, I am aware of that, as the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development clarified. However, the districts have got a way of passing on information and these materials within their districts. 

Of course, Madam Speaker, quite a number of districts have already sent these materials to the subcounties, up to the chairpersons – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I was in Kamuli a fortnight ago; they do not have the capacity to make more copies of the papers and distribute them. There are 18,000 secondary school students in Kamuli but you sent only 2,700 packs. Hence, the local government must find money to photocopy for the other 16,000. 

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, they do not need to photocopy or reprint them. We are preparing enough materials for each and every learner; we have the statistics. Of course, it will take some time because we did not have the money at the beginning - (Interruption.) 

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for giving way. In Ngora, in a place called Agule, in Omiito Parish, and Kococwa in Kobwin Subcounty, as we speak now, the LCI chairpersons of those places have received only one set for just one subject. 

Yesterday, there was a clan meeting to discuss how best we can improve on education, forgetting about what we are talking about here, because they said this is a failed programme. They say they are not benefitting at all and it is only the urban centres benefitting from this programme. That is why I would like the minister to know that the information they are giving is only good for urban centres and not rural areas. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, when are you delivering the materials per child? That is what we would like to hear.  

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In my subcounty, every class got only 10 copies. The persons given responsibility to send them out to students asked how they should give out the 10. 

Today, there is information circulating on social media, warning anybody reprinting and selling these materials, which are on demand amongst our people. What these people have done is to reprint them and sell them to parents on the black market. 

Therefore, I think the minister should be candid to tell us their plan because once you keep saying it will take time - Honourable minister, it is very unfortunate that it might take more time and many people will have lost their money. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, just give us a deadline; when will you deliver materials to every child in Uganda? We want a date. 

MS BETTY AOL: Madam Speaker, I also just have a point of clarification for the honourable minister. 

Honourable minister, in all your communication about education, you have never touched on the real people in the education sector. You talked about LCs and we appreciated; you also talked about ICT and radios but you have never talked about the head teachers, inspectors of schools and education officers. 

We know that there are very many day schools, especially primary day schools, which can easily be reached by our children through the head teachers and teachers. What is the problem? Is that not a good enough strategy? Why can’t you explore more strategies on how to reach our people? Your radios are not working for over 50 per cent of the people and your TVs are also not working for our people at all; it is only for those in the towns. 

The phones and computers may be accessed by the university students and yet not all of them can do so. Sometimes, they do not have data. The other time when we insisted, on the issue of connectivity and IT, that you should not tax people who are just trying to learn and promote IT, you people refused. In other countries, people do not even buy airtime but here, we buy the data, pay tax and do a lot more. All those are road blocks for our very poor people to access information on the phones. Can you clarify on all those? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, give us the date. We are wasting time on this issue.

DR MUYINGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to clarify two things. These study materials do not cover anything new. They are only meant to enable our students revise what they covered from the beginning of their education up to the end of first term of 2020. Therefore, anybody thinking that it is new – this is to enable them revise. When schools open for the new term, that is when the schools will be able to continue with the syllabus. This is purely for revision of something they had already done. 

As for the materials, Madam Speaker – (Interruption) 

MS BETTY AOL: Madam Speaker, since this is an effort for revision only, is the minister in order to think that only 50 per cent of our children should access these materials and the rest should be left out? Why then have you introduced the programme? 

Is the minister in order? The way you say it, it is almost like you are telling us not to worry since this is only just for revision. Is the minister in order to forget those regions where the percentage is 0.09 in accessing phones, radios and televisions? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you know you are making our lives very difficult. On one the hand, you say it is not a serious issue but you are spending money on it in some parts of the country. What will happen to the other parts of the country? You should tell us when you are delivering to every child in Uganda. That is what we want to hear.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, we are not leaving anybody out. We are going to prepare materials for every learner in all the corners of Uganda. As to when the materials will reach the learners, Madam Speaker, I cannot at this moment confidently tell you that because there is a process. We have ordered for more materials to be printed - (Interruption)

MR ALIONI: Madam Speaker, I returned from West Nile three days back. From the statistics given here by the minister, only 14 per cent of the people in West Nile have access to radio. Now, if the minister is saying they have been supplying materials, where is the ministry supposed to start? There is no single material that has been delivered to West Nile. I have been there for the last one month. Even when I was leaving, I consulted teachers in Aringa South. They told me they are not aware of any ministry programme distributing materials to schools. Which LCs are you using in West Nile, especially Aringa South? 

Is the honourable minister in order to lie to this House by saying that materials have been delivered when actually there is nothing in place? Why did you start distributing materials in the central region where people have access? Honourable minister, you have schools, which you have taken as a priority over schools in other parts of this region. 

Madam Speaker, is the honourable minister in order to lie to this House that they have delivered materials countrywide when actually there are no materials in West Nile and northern Uganda?


THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you account for the percentage of materials that have been delivered to the country, please? Give us an account.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, we have printed more materials and we shall be printing more. We are going to cover 100 per cent of the learners. However, as to when they are going to be delivered, I need to consult with the officers who are handling the exercise.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this is a serious issue; we want answers tomorrow. You consult and give us an answer tomorrow as to when you will deliver to all the children. Let us go to item 3(2).

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE INFLUX OF NOMADIC HERDSMEN INTO GULU, AMURU AND NWOYA DISTRICTS IN BREACH OF PREVIOUS PRESIDENTIAL DIRECTIVES

THE SPEAKER: Is the Prime Minister here? He is not here. Okay, let us move to item 3(3).

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON DUBIOUS ACTIONS OF UNSCRUPULOUS SURVEYORS UNDER THE FACILITATION AND PROTECTION OF PERSONNEL FROM THE UGANDA PEOPLE’S DEFENCE FORCES WHO ARE PLANTING MARK STONES

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs here? He is not here. Let us go to item 3(4).

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON FAILURE BY VOTES TO ATTAIN THE MINIMUM 50 PER CENT PASSMARK ON THE CERTIFICATE OF GENDER AND EQUITY COMPLIANCE IN RESPECT OF THEIR POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FY2020/2021

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Health here? She is also not present. Let us go to the next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DIRECTIVE BY THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT HALTING LOCAL GOVERNMENT COUNCIL SITTINGS DUE TO THE THREAT OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Local Government is not present. Let us go to the next item.

3.29
THE MNISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, some of the ministers are not here because we are also having a special Cabinet meeting today. We had hoped that it would end before the sitting but it has not ended. That is why some of the ministers are not here, but they will be here tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the matters will be reflected again on tomorrow’s Order Paper. Item 3(6) is on microfinance, honourable minister.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I am ready for the next one, the one on Kampala City Council (KCC).

THE SPEAKER: So, you are not ready for the one of Platinum Microfinance.

MR BAHATI: No, because we got information from the region and we are still compiling it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, that is really an urgent issue because this is the third incident. First, there was Bayport on the teachers’ salaries and now we have Platinum, again on teachers’ salaries. So, it is really important that it is addressed. Okay, it will be reflected again on tomorrow’s Order Paper. Let us go on to the next item on KCC.
MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DELAYED PAYMENT OF TERMINAL BENEFITS OF FORMER EMPLOYEES OF KAMPALA CITY COUNCIL
3.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we received instructions from court to pay Shs 4.08 billion to the workers of the former Kampala City Council who were retrenched. We have put this money in the budget for next financial year. We are here to confirm that in July, when the financial year starts, those former staff will receive their benefits. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sebaggala, do you have a supplementary question?

3.32
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are over 1000 ex-workers of former KCC. I do not know where the minister is getting those figures because according to the ruling of Justice Lydia Mugambe, it is approximately Shs 91 billion that is supposed to be paid to all former KCC workers.

Madam Speaker, it has been almost four years since the ruling was made. From the time the ruling was made, some of those former KCC staff have died and others are living miserable lives. The minister is talking about Shs 4.1 billion, yet the number of people who are supposed to be compensated are many. 

Madam Speaker, the minister should get more information and also read the judgment that was made by the High Court for him to come up with a clear figure. The figure he is talking about has never appeared anywhere. Even in the presidential directive, which was confirming what was ruled by Justice Mugambe, there is no Shs 4.1 billion mentioned. It was Shs 91 billion that is supposed to be paid to former KCC workers, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, why is there a variance in the figures?

MR BAHATI: I will benefit from the information from hon. Sebaggala, now that he has probably more accurate figures. However, the court award, which was given to the 449 staff who were retrenched in 1992, if that is the case you are referring to, is Shs 4 billion. That is the figure we have at the ministry. If you have any other figure, after this House, we can compare notes and harmonise. However, Shs 4 billion has been budgeted for in the next financial year and will be paid in July when this money is available for them.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Item 3(8). Is there an update on COVID-19? No update. 

3.34
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On the update on COVID-19, I have been on the Floor before, requesting that the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Attorney-General should lay before this honourable Parliament copies of statutory instruments to guide and also to publicise them.

We have a problem that the President has been making directives and these directives are being enforced as law yet in the actual sense, they do not appear anywhere in the statutory instruments. I would like to request, Madam Speaker, that you direct the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to Table before this House copies of statutory instruments that reflect presidential directives.

Secondly, the most recent statutory instrument, particularly rule 8, is to the effect that every Ugandan, who is appearing in public must wear a face mask. It is an offence to appear in public without a face mask. Unfortunately, this information is not anywhere; it only appears in the Gazette. Even in the House here, there are people without face masks and yet it is an offense. 

However, part of the problem is because the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is sitting on this information. No effort is being made to make this information public and to even formally Table it before this House. My prayer is, as we receive a briefing on COVID-19, that issue should be addressed. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I have been asking almost every week that after the presidential pronouncements, who actually follows up to educate the public? Apparently, there is no one.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I do not know whether you are privy to – because we have heard through various media that during this COVID-19 season, we have received a lot of money from different international financial organisations. 

Recently, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) gave us US$ 492 million. I do not know whether it is a loan or a grant. I also do not know whether you are aware, Madam Speaker, about this money.

The European Union also gave us US$ 120 billion. I think the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should have the courtesy to come here and inform us about all this; whether they are donations or loans, how we are going to pay this money and whether they have passed through the normal loan procedures. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

3.38
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to seek your guidance on the matter that is before the House, on COVID-19.

As one of the representatives at the Pan African Parliament, I would like to seek your guidance whether at a later stage, I can be allowed to inform the august House about COVID-19 and its impact on the implementation of Agenda 2063 and how it is re-shaping Africa’s position.

THE SPEAKER: I think we shall put it on the Order Paper formally. You could submit the motion to my office and then we shall put it on the Order Paper.

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, where is the money; the euros and the dollars?

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I am a bit surprised at the question raised by the senior Member, hon. Sebaggala, when he has been in this House.

We presented a loan request of US$ 500 million from the IMF. The figure that you heard that the IMF approved in Washington was actually a loan to Uganda and we have already presented that request to the Committee on National Economy, headed by hon. Syda Bbumba, who you know very well. It is surprising that now, hon. Sebaggala is asking this. 

The other question of how much we have got from -

THE SPEAKER: From the European Union.

MR BAHATI: It should be very clear to Members that all the resources we get as a nation, whether it is a grant, there is a procedure to report it. If it is a loan, there is also a procedure on how we access a loan. There is no information that we are hiding from members of Parliament or members of the public.

Madam Speaker, all we are accessing passes through a proper procedure. The loans that we get from IMF and the World Bank will pass through Parliament. The grants, if any, will also have a procedure and will be reported to the House. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Let us go to item – but honourable members, there is no statement.

3.41
MR MAURICE KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, I would like to add to what hon. Basalirwa said. In my area of Bulopa, two days ago, police officers arrested whoever was moving on the street without wearing a face mask. The tricky part was that they had their people around who were selling face masks at Shs 20,000. You had to first buy the face mask before continuing with your journey. They arrested everyone there and whoever had the Shs 20,000 had to pay while those who did not have were put into the cells. Therefore, we are asking under which law are they doing this.

The second issue is that in our area, Kamuli Prison is full. When they arrest people at night, they take them to Busesa yet the magistrates are not there. As a result, people are suffering. I think we shall lose people because when one is arrested at night, his wife may not know and she will not hear from him. All the people arrested from Kamuli are taken to Busesa because there is space. Otherwise, there is no more imprisonment in Kamuli and Buyende. We, therefore, need direction regarding this; we need to know what is happening.

THE SPEAKER: I think the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs needs to come and explain to us the situation. Otherwise, if you are arrested in the jurisdiction of Kamuli and you are now being taken to Bugweri District, how will your people know where you are and how will you apply for bail when no one knows you in Bugweri? 

The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is not here today but he should come tomorrow and give us an address on the issue of the operations of the judicial system during the COVID-19 pandemic. That is an issue of human rights; we want an answer tomorrow. 

Item 3(9). The Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugee is not here. Let us go to item 3(10); the Minister of Works and Transport is also not here. Item four.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO SECTORAL AND STANDING COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULES 184 (2) AND 157 (2) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE RESPECTIVELY

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural question. We are sitting as Parliament but Madam Speaker, before you issue out the Order Paper, the Leader of Government Business, the Leader of the Opposition and members of Parliament are availed copies. 

However, on reaching here on a serious day like today and we have to skip all the pertinent items on the Order Paper; yet yesterday, the Leader of Government Business was in the House and the Government Chief Whip was in the House. How come all the items on the Order Paper are being skipped because the responsible ministers are not present? Is it a way to undermine the sittings of this House? Are we here sitting in vain?

Madam Speaker, I thought you would now direct that as long as there is a Parliament and there are issues of extreme public importance – it is only fair for the Executive and ministers to come and tell Ugandans. If you do not tell us the representatives of the people, where do you want these very critical items to be addressed? 

It is getting out of hand and you are putting the Speaker in a very difficult position of chairing the House. We are not here to talk to ourselves –(Interruption)

MR ILUKOR: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give the honourable member is that the President himself stated at one time that because of social distancing, he has decided to reduce the number of ministers that he meets.

I imagine that instead of maybe the 80 attending a Cabinet meeting – like we are also here – maybe they are 40. If there is a senior minister in the meeting, the junior minister must be available. So, the issue of saying that all the ministers who should have been here are attending a Cabinet meeting is not correct. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think I am aware that only one third of the Cabinet actually sits; only the senior ministers sit. All the junior ministers are elsewhere. So, you have no excuse for not being represented. Can you undertake to ensure that tomorrow – the main issues are all here.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Leader of Government Business in the House, I undertake that every minister who appears on the Order Paper, to begin with, will be here tomorrow, so that we handle the Order Paper. I would really like to apologise that we are not here as we should and there is no way that we are planning to frustrate the work of Parliament. So, give us tomorrow; we should be able to handle these matters on the Order Paper.

THE SPEAKER: Tomorrow and the subsequent sittings, please. 

MR BAHATI: Tomorrow and the subsequent sittings.

3.47
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, the honourable minister cannot say this. I think since these ministers report to us and since they are not in Cabinet, they should come with a written explanation on where they were. It is not a matter of saying – (Interjection) – Yes! 

Madam Speaker, people are taking you and us for granted. Therefore, I request that the ministers come and they will explain where they were today. Cabinet is only a third. The President was even clear; he said he stopped his people from sitting; so, it is not a matter of saying that they should come but they should also explain in writing where they were. We should take this House very serious.

THE SPEAKER: Tomorrow, the ministers who are absent must come and explain. 

3.48
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, we have to put hon. Bahati to task because he is here representing the Leader of Government Business. If tomorrow other ministers with items on the Order Paper are not here, then we will sacrifice you. We will make sure that we put you on the cross because you have said that they will come tomorrow. In case they do not come tomorrow, we will be ready to sacrifice you. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in relation to the masks, the Minister of Health donated some masks to Parliament; 500 pieces. I know that. Clerk, you will have to tell us where the 500 masks are. They donated about a month ago; 500 pieces. So, let us know where they are so that we can supply to the Members. (Member rose_)

Honourable members, everybody is just jumping on the podium. Let us have some order, please. Wherever I look, someone is jumping here; the other is jumping there.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO SECTORAL AND STANDING COMMITTEES

THE SPEAKER: Where is hon. Aja? He is not there. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE INTERIM REPORT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY SUB-COMMITTEE ON HEALTH ON COVID-19

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson of the Committee on Health? Dr Bukenya is not here. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

SEMI-ANNUAL REPORT OF THE PETROLEUM FUND FOR THE FINANCIAL           YEAR 2019/2020

3.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we request that this paper is laid tomorrow. We are coordinating with the Clerk to Parliament. I did not come with them.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT ON THE JOINT WORKSHOP IN PREPARATION OF THE LAUNCH OF THE THEME OF THE YEAR 2020 ON “SILENCE THE GUNS: CREATING CONDUCIVE CONDITIONS FOR AFRICA’S DEVELOPMENT” – ADDIS ABABA

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kawooya? I see hon. Baryomunsi. I see hon. Beatrice Anywar; the education minister is there. Honourable minister in charge of the youth is there. The honourable minister of lands; the Minister of State for Public Service. Now, there are a few ministers here.

3.51
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table a report titled, “The Joint Workshop in Preparation of the Launch of the Year 2020 on Silence the Gun: Creating Conducive Conditions for Africa’s Development.” This workshop took place on 28-29 November 2019. 

This was a high-level workshop organised by the African Union representatives and stakeholders and all the organs that form the AU Committee on Peace and Security on the continent.

Madam Speaker, the report is a bit extensive and since I am supposed to lay it on the Table, I would pray that an opportune time, I am allowed to present it fully and the Members participate in debating it.

However, briefly, the aim was that the AU’s campaign on silencing the gun in Africa by 2020 aims at achieving a conflict-free Africa, prevent genocide, make peace a reality on the continent, stop conflicts, war, human rights violations and abuse and human rights and gender equity.

As I end, there are many topics that were covered:
    i. Silencing the gun strategy and action plan.
    ii. The role of parliamentarians and lawmakers in silencing the guns at the national level.
    iii. Women, peace, security and development.
    iv. Youth, peace, security and development.
    v. Illicit financial flows.

As I lay this report, Madam Speaker, I would like to reiterate that the role of parliamentarians on the continent is to ensure that they play a pivot role in ensuring that in the year 2020, Africa achieves it as a year of silencing the gun, a conflict-free Africa, peace and stability on the continent. Madam Speaker, I once again reiterate my prayer that since it is a very crucial report, allow me to bring it back so that it is debated by the whole House. I so pray. I also would like to lay it on Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Anifa Kawooya. It is now a document of the House. I encourage the Members to read it. We shall find time on the Order Paper to enable us discuss it. 

3.51
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Once again, I beg that I lay on the Table a report entitled, “The 7th United Nation High Level Political Forum on Sustainable Development Goals”. It was held in New York from 9th – 19th July 2019. This high-level political forum of the United Nations is a central platform for follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and Sustainable Development Goals.

This high-level political forum urged member States to ensure that the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals are achieved on the African Continent. 

Briefly, the following goals were reviewed:
Goal 4; I would like to implore you to get acquainted with what is happening on the African continent. This goal ensures inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all. 

Goal 8 promotes sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all.

Goal 10 was also highlighted. The goal seeks to reduce inequality within and among countries.

Goal 13; take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts on the continent.

Goal 16; promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all, and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels. The importance of this is that no one should be left behind. 

Goal 17; strengthen the means of implementation and revitalise the global partnership for sustainable development. 

As I conclude, Madam Speaker, this UN High Level Forum looks at the goals from ambitions to results for SDGs 16 plus 1. Many issues were looked at, demonstrated and progress reports were made. 

Mobilised actions and accessibility for implementation from the UN up to the continent was looked at with each sector given a responsibility. 

The UN High Level Forum looked at the consolidation of links to all the 17 SDGs.

Meetings were emphasised and observations were made. 

Lastly, as I said, there were recommendations. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table. Again, I know that the Sustainable Development Goals accelerate the Agenda 2030 and Agenda 2063 of the AU Charter. This is the charter that accelerates the African economic growth, peace and stability in the continent.

Madam Speaker, I once more request that at an opportune time, the House debates this report in its entirety because it has many issues that touch us as Uganda, Africa as a continent, and the UN as our partners. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Kawooya. Again, the report is now our property. I encourage Members to read it. At an appropriate time, we shall find the opportunity to debate it. Thank you. 

I now go back to Item 04 for hon. Baryayanga to do some designation. Please, zoom in hon. Baryayanga.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS

3.58
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On your behalf, I beg to designate hon. Ida Nantaba to the standing Committee on Climate Change. I would like to designate her to the sectoral Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. I beg to designate. 

Madam Speaker, I also designate, on your behalf, hon. Stephen Biraahwa-Mukitale to the sectoral Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs as the sectoral committee. I also would like to designate, on your behalf, hon. Andrew Kiiza Kaluya to the standing Committee on Climate Change. He has been on the Committee on HIV/AIDS. Madam Speaker, I beg to designate. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Baryayanga. Honourable members, you have heard the proposals. I put the question that those Members be designated as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, some time back, I said that where someone is a Chairperson or Vice Chairperson, they may find difficulties in attending the other committee meetings. We have not, however, sorted that out in the rules. For now, let us agree on the designation. 

4.00
MS IDA NANTABA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kayunga): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to put my case forward. I had approached you yesterday and requested that I applied to be designated to the Committee on Natural Resources. That is where I prefer to be, reason being we are losing forest covers in this country and Kayunga is one of those areas that are losing forests to land grabbers and many other factors. 

So, I pray that you allow me to be designated to the Committee on Natural Resources so that I am able to fight and protect the environment. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I know you came to me and I did check. Unfortunately, the Committee on Natural Resources is really oversubscribed. It is one of those committees with so many Members that it is difficult to – unless you can negotiate with a colleague to go to another committee. This committee is oversubscribed. You can still, however, do the work through the Committee on Climate Change. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

SEMI-ANNUAL REPORT OF THE PETROLEUM FUND FOR THE FINANCIAL
YEAR 2019/2020

4.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I need one minute to make a correction. The Leader of the Opposition made a statement to this House that if the ministers do not report tomorrow, I will be sacrificed. That is a big statement and my heart is unsettled. I just want to say that I am going to deliver the message about the ministers to the Prime Minister and he will ensure that the ministers come. So, I beg that I am not sacrificed tomorrow. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Semi-Annual Report of the Petroleum Fund for the Financial Year 2019/2020, detailing the inflows, outflows and assets of the fund for the period ended 31 December 2019. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The report is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Honourable chairperson, I know you have a lot of Bills but I propose that maybe early in the Fifth Session, we can handle this report so that we get an insight into what is happening. Thank you.

Item 7; is the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives around?

STATEMENT ON THE ESCALATING PRICES OF FOOD AND OTHER ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES IN THE WAKE OF THE CORONAVIRUS SCOURGE WITH ITS ADVERSE IMPACTS ON THE SURVIVAL OF CITIZENS


THE SPEAKER: The minister is unavailable. Next item. 

BILLS
SECOND READING
THE NATIONAL LOCAL CONTENT BILL, 2019

4.03
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Madam Speaker, thank you. I beg to move in accordance with Rule 129 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament that the Bill entitled, “The National Local Content Bill, 2019” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by several members. 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: The justification.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, in 2017, my colleagues - hon. Muyanja Mbabaali and hon. Herbert Ariko - and I, came before you with a motion, seeking leave of Parliament to draft a Bill entitled, “The National Local Content Bill”. You graciously granted us the leave and we appreciate you very much.

We made consultations, within and outside Uganda, and in January 2019, we presented the Bill for the First Reading. The Bill was sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and eventually, Madam Speaker, you sent it the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development made consultations the whole of last year and have made recommendations that the Bill be passed into law. Honourable members, the National Local Content Bill is an affirmative law intended to promote the inclusiveness and participation of our people who have hitherto been edged to the periphery by stiff competition from the globalised world order.

The law is intended to promote the use of products, goods and services made in Uganda. The law is intended to promote the transfer of skills and technology to Ugandans and to limit the importation of materials, goods and services which are readily available in Uganda.

The Bill is intended to limit the hire of non-nationals or foreigners in jobs and contracts whose skills and expertise are readily available and exist in Uganda. The Bill is intended to provide for reservation and preference schemes for goods and services for the benefit of citizens and Ugandan companies.

Madam Speaker, the Bill is intended to provide for mandatory sub-contracting and joint ventures to increase opportunity for inclusion of Ugandan-based entities. The Bill also intends to ensure that all procurement entities in Uganda implement local content obligations and that local content is evaluated at the beginning of the procurement and not at the tail-end.

The Bill is also intended to ensure that the targeted beneficiaries of this law do not abuse it and are not used as fronts for the foreigners and non-nationals. The Bill is intended to ensure that entities that promote the law are also given incentives by Government.

It is important to note that the Bill intends to impose these local content obligations on entities using public funds, either directly or indirectly. In the Bill, the affirmative action provisions are intended to benefit:
    1. Ugandan citizens.
    2. Ugandan companies wholly owned and controlled by Ugandans.
    3.  It is also designed to benefit Ugandan entities, those partly owned by Ugandan companies, and; 
    4. Resident companies - the companies which are registered and operating in Uganda but owned by non-nationals.

Madam Speaker, there are people wondering why it could not be under the PPDA Act. Under the PPDA Act, the rules that govern the game under PPDA are about competition but this is an affirmative action law and it could not fit well within the PPDA. That is why they have been grappling with it since 2003, when Article 50 was provided to cater for the preference schemes and they had totally failed.

I would like to thank the chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the review of the draft report and the recommendations they have given and I also thank everyone who has contributed. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Nsamba. Can I invite the chairperson to give a report? 

4.10
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development considered the Bill entitled, “The National Local Content Bill, 2019” and made the following observations:
    1. The Bill seeks to establish a department within the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development which shall be responsible for the implementation of the provisions of the Bill.
    2. The Bill applies to several activities not limited to procurement.
    3. It applies to local content entities that are in possession of an investment licence or being an entity or individual being a beneficiary of a tax or remission or any such similar incentives.
    4. Applies to public-private partnership agreements.
    5. Applies to those activities which are financed through public borrowing or any such similar agreement.

Implementation of the Bill will, therefore, be best handled by:
    1. The ministry since it can easily coordinate with other implementing agencies.

    2. In several clauses of the Bill, the terms “Ugandan company”, “Ugandan entity” and “resident entity” are used interchangeably. These may confuse readers and implementers of the Bill, leading to inefficiencies in implementation if they are not well aligned. There is need to align these terminologies to avoid ambiguities in the law which may lead to misrepresentation of the Act.

    3. The Bill proposes that goods shall be taken to be manufactured in Uganda where the production, manufacture, processing, assembling or making of such a good is carried out wholly or partially in Uganda. The word “manufactured’ is consistently used in the Bill but seems to be limiting the non-manufactured goods like agricultural and tourism products. The word “manufactured” might exclude the critical non-manufactured goods.

    4. The Bill seeks to provide for the application of the rules of origin for the East African Community in determining where goods are manufactured. However, local content laws for other East African Community members do not consider or use the rules of origin for the East African Community but their own rules. In this case, if this clause is maintained, it will open the Ugandan market to other EAC companies without giving the local companies priority. 

The clause should be used on reciprocal basis and opportunity should be given to EAC countries where the goods or services are not available in Uganda.

5. The Bill provides for negotiation of prices where the manufacturer or the service provider is a Ugandan citizen. However, negotiations on prices are not allowed under the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act. This may also disadvantage other bidders and affect the principle of competitiveness and transparency during the procurement process. 

There is need to harmonise the content in the Bill with the provisions of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003 as then it was. Madam Speaker, I mention this because this Act has since been amended by this House.

6. Whereas the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003 as then it was, contains provisions relating to local content, the provisions are limited only to the creation of preference and reservation schemes. Furthermore, local content in the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act is not only applicable to public procurements.

It is only considered at the tail end of the procurement process after all other evaluation criteria have been considered. This means that most of the persons it is intended to target at the time local content is considered will have been eliminated or will no longer be competitive by the application of the other evaluation criteria.

7. The PPDA issued guidelines for reservation schemes to promote local content. However, guidelines do not have the force of law as Acts of Parliament do and are therefore, not as binding as Acts. The guidelines are limited in scope as preference is given to procurement of army uniforms, electrical cables and conductors, medicines and medical supplies and not all goods and services manufactured or available in Uganda.

8. The Buy Uganda Build Uganda (BUBU) Policy, which seeks to increase consumption and utilisation of local products, and increase participation of the locally established firms in domestic trade, has not been fully operationalised due to lack of an enabling law, the non-existence of implementation modalities and lack of sanctions for non-compliance.

With these observations, the committee recommends that the Notional Local Content Bill, 20l9 be passed into law, subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson and the members of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Honourable members, the report has been signed by the necessary minimum number of members; you are free to debate.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay, on the Table, a copy of the original report, minutes of the committee meetings for consideration of the report and other materials that we scrutinised in the process of considering the Bill. 

4.19
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to applaud colleagues who have come up with this Bill, which is timely. It could not have come at a better time than during the COVID-19 crisis, when we need the local content.

You may have realised that during this COVID-19 period, prices of most of the imported things have shot up. Whatever we used to buy at a low price has come up. Be it rice – look at the sanitizers. We never knew we would need them. 

When COVID-19 had just started, a litre of sanitizer was around Shs 30,000. By the time we realised, it had gone up to Shs 100,000 or thereabout. It is not until some factories here used our local content, which is Waragi and other things to manufacture sanitizers, that prices started coming down.

This Bill is going to help Ugandans. One of the areas is employing our own people. Most of the companies that come from outside bring with them chief executive officers and the senior staff. If we start our own here, our Ugandan graduates are likely to get jobs as senior personnel instead of being regarded as underdogs in some of these industries.

Madam Speaker, I welcome the idea and I thank the Members that have come up with this. Let us all look around for the materials that can be used in producing what we need in Uganda. Can we also sensitise our people? We have engineers and teachers who have no jobs. Can the teachers start their own enterprises using our local materials?

I remember when the President had just assumed power, he attended one of the graduation ceremonies at Makerere. The then Vice Chancellor, in his report requested him to give them money so that they could expand the university. However, the President asked what the engineers were doing there. Even making a shed for graduation, they had to go and hire people from outside. He said, “You have local content here; your engineers. Can’t they put up structures like these?”

Because of that comment, the university started using its graduates who did not know at the time that they could be useful even to the university. The university also wanted money for repairs but the President said, “You have engineers here; what do they do?” The following year - I was at Makerere then - we saw our engineering students wearing gumboots, raising the shed and trying to repair the windows that had been shuttered. 

Therefore, I feel that this Bill is timely and it could not have come at a better time than now, when we have experienced prices going up and our people being treated as underdogs. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.23
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the movers of the Private Member’s Bill, more so your own innovation, to have enabled this come through after three years. We expected this to be the premier business of this Parliament but it was not easy. 

I would also like to thank the committee for agreeing. However, can I make a request that this Bill be implemented in the spirit that we intend? We also want an inter-ministerial – not only the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because many times, the Finance ministry has been an ally to those multi-nationals, who have handed this economy to foreign hands.  

The spirit of this Bill is to bring the economy back into our hands because we are aware that you cannot do iron and steel - We have been importing steel yet we could have manufactured it at home. 

We have had NDP I and NDP II, spending a lot of money on roads and dams without a single local company participating. If we had this local content law - Our partners in Kenya have the Standard Gauge Railway and they have achieved 50 per cent of local content. At the time they moved the motion, I even posted to our parliamentary email, the Kenyan law. I think we need to look at it as well. 

Now that this Ninth Parliament passed 48 per cent as a target for oil and gas, and you know we are going there, can we really make sure that all these ministries: Trade and Industry, Agriculture for agro-processing, Minerals for beneficiation and value addition and the ministry in charge of oil and gas – they should all come in, working with Finance, to make sure that as we do the NDP III, we can get the intended target. 

Indeed, COVID-19 may help us review some policies we thought we would not review. Policies are not cast in concrete but are meant to take you up to some level. Indeed, it is time that the NRM dream of 1986; programme No. 5 of the 10-point programme on “building an independent, integrated, self-sustained economy” is reviewed. I think the local content law is speaking to that. 

It is very critical to define what a local company is; what is domiciled? We do not want people that come and register as Ugandan companies just to get business and they continue expropriating the profits. It is very important that when you have a company, whether it is a loan or a direct foreign investment here, there must be apprenticeship and our citizens should be able to acquire technology through that placement. That is very critical. 

This also comes with the right tax policy. For the last two years, Parliament has not been able to discuss the State of Nation Address by the President; I only heard one yesterday. I hope in the next two weeks, when we have the State of Nation Address, it will speak to these very important issues. The role of a State is to enable the economy to be in their hands. COVID-19 has found us and undressed us when we have foreign banks while our own are being killed. We also have foreign insurance companies and foreign construction companies. I think the best timing for this local content law is now. 

Build Uganda Buy Uganda (BUBU) has not been able to work because the tax and industrial policy has been lacking. We have basically been doing taxation for purposes of raising taxes from import duty. Now that we do not expect import duty under these COVID-19 circumstances, it is high time we formulate a tax policy, which enables our local industries and import substitution for real. 

We also need to ringfence some component of Government finance. We need to give orders to local companies, even if it means for seven years. If companies know that they have Government orders and ring-fenced money from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the next seven years, even the bankers will give them support. It is a very difficult time and we need inward looking policies and one of the requirements of inward-looking policies is a local content law, a tax policy and an industrial policy. 

I would be very happy if the inter-ministerial committee comes and informs Parliament, before we pass this law so that we do it with full support. I would like to thank you again, Madam Speaker, for having allowed us to navigate through this. My earlier request was, why didn’t Government take over this Bill so that we put in all the expertise we require to have it work? I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

4.29
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the mover of the motion for a good Bill that has been brought on this Floor of Parliament. 

I am glad that this Bill has seen the light of day. This is something we started working on in the Ninth Parliament during the period of the Parliamentary Forum on Oil and Gas. We passed other Bills but we had wanted to come up with a stand-alone Bill in respect to local content. Therefore, I thank the mover and the committee for their submission. However, I have two or three things I would like us to note. One, we are talking about local content but how local is this local content? 

Madam Speaker, when some multinational companies with big muscle in terms of finances see that there is an opportunity of business somewhere, they come in three forms. In the first form, as we come to describe what a Ugandan company is, they come, open a local company and wait for the opportunity. In form number two, they come, open as a local company, have a representative and wait for the opportunity. In the third one, they come, open a company, acquire assets and do business so that when an opportunity comes and you are looking for a Ugandan company, because of the financial muscle, it becomes very difficult for you to compete with such a company. 

Therefore, as we process this Bill, we need to be mindful of what a Ugandan company is, not falling into the trap of having a Ugandan company fully owned by foreigners. 

Madam Speaker, again on this local content, it will go a long way in empowering our youth in terms of skills transfer and creating employment. It is very unfortunate that as the chairman was reading his report, when the – (Member timed out.) 

4.32
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Allow me to thank hon. Oshabe and his team for coming up with this Bill and in the same vein, I thank the committee for a job well done. 

As we salute the team for coming up with this good and wonderful idea of helping our indigenous Ugandans, I would like to point out a few areas that I think may still be exploited to deny our people the very intended benefits of this Bill, Madam Speaker.

In the Bill, we still have provisions which allow these foreign companies to exploit the area of quality, for example, in a situation where we find ourselves being unable to meet certain quality specification of some of these companies that come from outside. That is an area that we need to address. 

We have seen situations here where companies come and start specifying certain standards, which are very difficult for our local firms to meet just because they want to make it difficult for our firms to qualify to supply-

Madam Speaker, there is no clear strategy on how our companies can break into industries that are highly dominate by the foreign firms. What comes to my mind is the banking sector. In Uganda today, we have seen the banking industry which is basically dominated by foreign-owned banks. For example, Stanbic Bank, Standard Charted Bank. Whenever Government wants to borrow money or do any transaction, it only does with these foreign owned banks.

Madam Speaker, we shall need a strategy that will enable our local companies to break into these industries that are highly dominated by the foreign firms.

4.38
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover hon. Nsamba Oshabe and the committee for processing this Bill.

Madam Speaker, I think this is the best service this Parliament is doing to the country. Short of this local content honourable members, we risk as a country to have a country whose economy is owned by foreigners.

Madam Speaker, when you move around the world, there are areas where a foreigner cannot be allowed to participate. However, in Uganda, we have laissez-faire. They all come and do whatever activity can be done here including hawkers. You have hawkers of foreign national around the city. Even in low areas like hawking mandazi, pancakes and chapatis, you can only do it in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, you cannot find this outside. Therefore, we have our doors open to all forms of investors some whom turn up to be bogus investors. This Bill is so timely particularly in the extractive industries, petroleum. We are grateful to hon. Nsamba Oshabe.

However, I would like to point out two areas. First, it should be owned and accepted by Government. Even if we have good legislation like this, once Government does not put it in mind to enforce this law, it will remain in the statue books, Madam Speaker. It should be a way of life because this is what is being done elsewhere in the world.

Secondly, we must do something about repatriation of profits. At the end of the day, we want these profits to be reinvested and reploughed back into the economy. Otherwise, there is haemorrhage of profits from the companies we have like MTN, Airtel which are taken back to their capitals.

Madam Speaker, I read and it was in the public domain that part of the reasons why it was necessary to have this Bill was to ensure that you tag it to the licensing regime- (Member timed out)

4.38
MR ANGEL MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am happy like other colleagues because of this Bill. I would like to thank the colleagues who have brought this Bill because it is timely.

Madam Speaker, if this Bill is passed into law, it will be a gift of the year for this country. Uganda is the only country that behaves like an automatic vehicle that does not require many technics to drive.

Madam Speaker, if you go to Juba, for you to be able to register a company you must have local content. However, for us here, it does not matter whether you know the foreigner in details or not. Before the sun sets, the company is already registered. You wonder what country it is. Young as South Sudan is, they are doing much better in that area than us yet we have been here before them.

Madam Speaker, if this is achieved, it will be able to build our local capacity in terms of technology and economy and we will no longer be beggars like we have been before. It will be security to our people, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker, foreigners just play with our economy. They transfer funds at will. Go to Ethiopia, you will be limited as a foreigner to transfer funds out of Ethiopia to a tune of not more than five million. Why can’t we behave in the same manner?

We are really working very hard day in day out but you do not see our economy going beyond our nose. Much as we talk about improvement of our economy, practically when you compare it with yesterday, you will find it either the same or worse. Why? It is because the money you see here is just transferred. The country is behaving as if it is a conduit. It does not accumulate. For us to be able to improve our economy, we must have something that is cumulative. Minus that, Madam Speaker, even if we work and pass the work to our children, we would remain the same.

We were in Ethiopia a year ago, you would know that all the products that are in Ethiopia- (Member timed out)

4.41
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me also join colleagues to salute the private member and the committee for this Bill. 

Madam Speaker, this Bill is long overdue and it goes a long way to promote our Ugandan goods and services. It also goes a long way to maximise value addition. It is only  in Uganda where you get so-called investors who come here, find our natural resources like sand - sand in Lwera, Madam Speaker, I used to be on the Committee of Natural Resources and we were reliably informed it is not mined and stop here in Uganda but it is ferried even to China! 

The so-called investor, instead of adding value to our sand here, gets the natural resource and takes it away. This Bill comes with serious restrictions that if an investor is interested in any natural resource, that natural resource must be added value to from here not outside Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I also salute the Bill but I am wondering why they have not come out clearly to list the number of goods and services that could be exclusively supplied by Ugandans - (Interjections) – I have not seen but it is supposed to be there.

This Bill is very good, especially when it comes to issuance of work permits for foreign nationals. The only snag is about the protocol that has been signed among Uganda and other member states of the East African Community. That protocol removes that restriction from member states of these five countries within the East African Community. I do not know how this particular law or Bill, once it is passed into law or Act, will handle or harmonise this provision within the protocol, which removes that restriction, that I see in the Bill, on issuance of work permits to foreign nationals. However, it comes out very clearly on foreigners - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Can we Zoom hon. Nokrach? I think he wanted to speak. Let us have hon. Lubogo and then hon. Nokrach. Honourable members, you should move and sit near the microphone.

4.45
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank hon. Nsamba for sponsoring this Bill.

I would like to first of all, thank the Speaker, for having used our Rules of Procedure to see that this Bill comes to the Floor of this Parliament. This leaves a question to Government whether they are actually serious to see that this Bill is implemented. Otherwise, part of the Bill is such that Government must establish a department; there is a role Government must play. Now that Government seems reluctant or completely unwilling to issue a certificate, we hope they will do their part.

That said, we have approved very many loans in this House. Many of these loans are intended for infrastructure like electricity line construction. The information available is that from the loans we approve, especially for power construction, about 10 per cent is left in Uganda here. We get money from outside, we come and set up the infrastructure but the money goes outside and nothing is left other than the line that is constructed. Actually, the communities that are intended to benefit from this are not empowered at all because they do not gain anything. 

Madam Speaker, from the power construction, they only drill the holes and do the shadow small works. Otherwise, everything is imported including poles, bolts, wire lines, transformers among others. I, therefore, believe this Bill will go along away into ensuring that Ugandans benefit from these monies that we borrow.

Secondly, colleagues have talked about other economies like Ethiopia, where particular sectors are exclusively for the nationals. Why should Ugandans take the second place in their country? In Ethiopia, retail is exclusive for Ethiopians. You cannot just come from somewhere; a Chinese cannot come and set up a retail shop in Ethiopia, which is common here. Even banking is exclusive for Ethiopians. Telecommunication is also exclusive for Ethiopians but here, we have everything for everybody, for whoever wants.

I would like to speak about the quality of Ugandan products. Now that this law is coming, it will challenge our communities; our manufacturers and business communities to ensure that we raise the quality of our products. Otherwise, it is not just a question of benefiting from a law, when at the same time, we are compromising the quality. So, Ugandans must address this issue.

A colleague talked about quality being exploited by other people - I think we must have - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nokrach and then hon. Alyek. Please Zoom hon. Nokrach. Hon. Nokrach, you can contribute. Is it working? Okay. Let us have hon. Alyek, as we wait for hon. Nokrach.

4.49
MS JUDITH ALEYK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to say something about this Bill. I would like to also thank hon. Oshabe for moving a motion on the Private Members’ Bill, which is very critical this time, when we have many companies and a lot of money is being spent without involving our local people.

What matters when it comes to adopting local content? Madam Speaker, the outcomes of what we are discussing here will go a long way to save Ugandans from unemployment since we shall have employment for most Ugandans. We shall no longer be importing many employees, coming into this country, when we have our people who have the skills to be used locally, as they implement this very important activity.

The other thing I would like to mention, Madam Speaker, is that even the local monitoring of the project that we have, shall be done by our people. We have local content policy on oil and gas and other policies that would help us. This was not something that had come as an Act of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, about two years ago, Cabinet approved the local content policy on oil and gas only. This is just a small sector that does not cover all other projects that are coming into this country. When this Bill comes into force, it will promote our local content in terms of creating much employment for Ugandans. It will also go ahead to enhance procurement of Ugandan companies. Otherwise, we have seen that most of the companies working in Uganda have been solicited from outside the country and they exploit us. They do not involve our poor people who have the skills for doing the work. So, this will go a long way to promote local companies that exist in Uganda.

The other point is that all local goods in all the undertakings, where public funds are used, will be taken into account. This Bill is timely. I support – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Try hon. Nokrach again. After that, we shall go to hon. Wanzala. Yes, hon. Nokrach, please speak. Is it not working today? There is hon. Okello Oryem, although he is still dressing up. Try hon. Oryem; let us see. (Laughter) Hon. Oryem, I am sorry your dress code does not allow you to speak today. (Laughter) Let us go to hon. Wanzala.

4.54
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to discuss about the National Local Content Bill. Allow me to also add my voice to thank hon. Nsamba and colleagues for coming up with this important Bill.

Madam Speaker, as we look at our country Uganda, our people are becoming landless in many places like Nakasongola and the central region of this country. Most of the people who are taking our land are the foreigners - at the cost of Ugandans.

When we look at Ugandans becoming landless, I look at this law being timely. I want to appreciate and say that let this law be blessed by this Parliament and of course it addresses such issues, so that Ugandans can also own land and settle in their country peacefully.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, it is about the payment of our children who are employed by foreign companies. When you go to those companies and see how our children are employed, they have no appointment letters. That is why they have no basis of negotiating how much money to be paid and how they leave the company. Today, they can employ you but at any opportune time, they can chase you because there is no appointment letter and you cannot go to court to sue them. I see this law will come and address such issues.

I am also looking at the contractors. Many contractors in this country who are working on our roads and doing some other work in this country are foreigners. When our local companies happen to apply, of course they do not meet the measures which the procurement laws have put there.

Madam Speaker, it is my humble prayer that this law comes on board and also addresses such issues, so that our local companies can also compete, have jobs, construct roads in their own country and enjoy their country. 
I thank you, Madam Speaker, for according me this opportunity. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nokrach, can you try again as we go to hon. Gutomoi, hon. Atkins Katusabe, the LOP and hon. Sebaggala.

4.57
MR CHARLES GUTOMOI (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice in thanking the movers of this important Bill and the committee for their critical analysis of the Bill.

My concern is about how prepared Government is to benefit from this Bill when it becomes law. The most important thing about this local content is those who benefit from the final products - which are goods and services which will be produced. 

I was surprised to learn that in Ethiopia, the Government entered into an agreement with the German Government to train technical experts every year. They are trained in groups in different sectors, so that when foreign enterprises are going there, they have no challenge except to agree with them in the areas where these people should be employed so that the emphasis is to address the human resource, which is original.

We have been thinking about this but now it is time that we opened our doors - even up to window level – to allow these people in. However, they will still manage to manipulate when production begins because here, it seems we are not serious. 

Go to South Sudan; you cannot start any business there unless - The first local content there is their land. You pay seven million dollars first and then you are allowed to operate. However, here, we give them the money and you wonder what kind of local content or how rich we are to allow – I consider them even poor, although they come from their own countries and then we again support them instead of them supporting us.

They are coming to buy, unless we accept our new mantra that “Buy Uganda, Build Uganda”. So, when they buy from us, we must, therefore, work together in partnership to develop Uganda. Unless we know what we are doing, these people are still coming to exploit Uganda. With a free market economy today, they are planning and therefore, I do not know how much planning we have put in place to – (Member timed out.)

5.00
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I really want to thank my colleagues, hon. Nsamba and those who were working with him, and then the committee for processing this very important Bill.

For any war to be won, you have to focus specifically on four fundamental items: offensive, defensive, sustainability and sustainment. 

Uganda takes the place as the only country in the whole world that relegates its citizens to second or even third place. The wealth of any nation, in terms of qualitative measurement, is determined by the number of PhDs in that country. 

Madam Speaker, you have a place in this country - I mean the first female lawyer. However, if I relate that to academics, we are a country that retires its professors at the age of 70. If a PhD holder is not an associate professor or professor, he is retired at 55 years - the only country in the whole world!

We know what it means being a PhD holder. Our professors in this country are retiring but as a Government, we are not focusing on who will take over from the retiring professors. My worry is, who will be the next professor in criminal law or commercial law?

We have young people getting first class degrees, but they have no jobs. If we cannot give them jobs, as Government, we should be able to give them money to upgrade their education so that they become the next metabolic engineers, or the best surveyors to enable sustainability in our system. 

I encourage my colleagues, the movers of this motion, to have that sustainability in terms of – (Member timed out.)

5.03
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSTIION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the movers of this Bill. It should have come even a little earlier. When we want sustainability, we cannot forget the local content. 

In the 8th Parliament, we complained about treating foreigners with priority over the citizens. I remember during the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) foreigners were supported very heavily at the expense of the citizens. I know this law is coming to address such problems.

If we take it further, you always hear about foreign investors. How about the local investors? Can’t we promote our people too? These foreign investors have their timeline here. Some time to come, they will choose to go away, and if we do not build our own investment base, shall we force them to stay? 

Look at the exploitation by the Indians who employ our Ugandans. They expect them to start working at 8.00a.m. and sometimes, they leave work at 6.00p.m. yet they get paid peanuts. This is because we do not have a law on minimum wage. This law will cure such problems. 

I remember when, we one time, went to Karamoja for our oversight role, I kept on asking the contractors how many local people from there they had employed to work on the road project. The contractors said, “You know, these experts are not here. If they were here, we would have employed them.” 

Right now, we cannot say there are no good engineers in Uganda; they are there. Actually, there are very highly qualified Ugandans. The only thing left is to promote and support them. The law is here now. With this law, we will stand with Ugandans, and we will make sure they are supported. Sometimes, we prefer - you see when it comes to furniture, we say the imported one is better. I think we should – (Member timed out.)

5.06
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a very important Bill given the fact that for the many years, Ugandans have been left behind in as far as various projects are concerned.

What we need is the Government to embrace this Bill in totality. We know that in Uganda, we are very good at making laws and many countries come and compare notes with us, and they go back to their own countries to implement what they have learnt to the best of their abilities. So, our challenge is implementation. 

This is a very good Bill, and if we pass it, it will become a very good law. The question is: how can it be implemented for the benefits of all Ugandans? I call upon Government to wholeheartedly support this Bill. 

Madam Speaker, we have many foreign-owned companies in Uganda. That is why we have capital flights because whatever the foreign investors get, they run away with it. 

I do not know how we are handling the issue of registration of companies with Uganda Registration Service Bureau. In many countries, one cannot register a company minus an indigenous person being one of the shareholders. To register any company in such a country, one of the prerequisites is to have a national as a partner. It is to let the indigenous people have a feel in owning those companies.

Madam Speaker, we should ensure that all companies that are registered in our country have local shareholding.

Finally, when the Government talks about Buy Uganda Build Uganda - (Member timed out.)

5.08
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to begin from where hon. Sebaggala has stopped on Buy Uganda Build Uganda. This is a timely Bill and it has come at a time when this House and the country need to reflect on our foreign investment policy. We need to look at the policy very closely so we can incorporate the spirit of this Bill into it. 

The Local Content Bill, 2019 is for the protection of Ugandans and our manufacturers. We are looking forward to post COVID-19, and this Bill will help the country consider its local manufacturers and the products that are manufactured here. 

Uganda has been one of the dumping sites for all products that are not good for consumption in other countries. It is my humble request that Government should consider this Bill and implement it by helping our good professionals outside this country, as demonstrated by our scientists during the COVID-19 pandemic, to come back to this country and be given professional jobs.

When you look at the projects in most of the sectors, they are contracted out to foreigners. At the end of the day, these foreigners sub-contract them to the Ugandans. This is very demoralising and unacceptable because these are jobs that can be done by Ugandans.

We have good brains here in every sector. In sectors like energy, for example, you find that the rural electrification programme has not succeeded because of bringing in sub-contractors from abroad and most of them are Chinese. 

Therefore, you find that Government programmes have not been achieved. This Bill should be supported by every good intentioned Ugandan and by our Government to ensure that we build Uganda for Ugandans and – (Member timed out.)

5.13
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to thank the movers of this Bill and to also thank the committee for processing the Bill. I pray that Government does not find any reason not to implement this Bill.

In fact, Government should start the process of promoting the Bill by giving incentives to our local companies so that they are competitive enough to secure those services that they do not have at the initial time of registration of companies.

Government is also a big spender and it should be in position to promote by purchasing products and services from these local companies so that it is a way of financially empowering them. 

Government has also been spearheading innovation. Some of these companies may not have the required skills and finances. As such, Government should put in place provisions to ensure that they build capacity through providing them with high quality machines that will produce desired products that fit the requirement for these big companies, in case they are securing sub contracts. 

I pray that everyone here supports this Bill so that we are able to help our own people to secure good jobs instead of money being always repatriated. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.15
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover and the committee for this Bill. It is a very good idea and we support it. I pray that the threshold can be applied and enforced.

Madam Speaker, we had issues regarding the definition of a local company whereby it was like it should be registered here for one year and should be with a majority shareholder; that is above 50 per cent. 

Ugandans are very brilliant and can do most of this work but it is about attitude. When you compete with an international company, they only look at the colour. They look at a white man or woman and even if you have better qualifications, their attitude will consider the white person.

I pray that this should be attained if we develop and instil confidence in all our stakeholders, particularly the policy makers and implementers, that Ugandans can do better. I know that Ugandans can be trained and we have been trained by these so-called foreigners but they come here with their own agenda; to promote their nationals.

Madam Speaker, this Bill is very important and we support it but let us follow and instil confidence in the stakeholders and Government to know that Ugandans can do better than the foreigners. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the Local Content Bill be read for a second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we should be going to Committee Stage but it is a quarter past five and we need to close so that the members and staff can go home. We shall start tomorrow with the Committee Stage. I invite you to go and study the report and look at the amendments. If there are members with amendments, please send notice. We shall not have spontaneous amendments on the Floor.

Honourable minister, do you have something to say? However, before the minister comes, I am sorry I forgot to announce the death of Mrs Jovlet Kempara, sister to hon. Jovah Kamateeka. She will be buried on Friday, 15 May 2020, in Mitooma. We shall stand up for a moment of silence when we leave. However, let us listen to the minister.

5.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I tried to stand before you concluded the Bill -

THE SPEAKER: Did you want to contribute?

MS ANYWAR: Yes, because as Government, I have been listening to colleagues raising a number of issues and I thought that I would respond to some of them and comfort them. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the mover of the Bill and comfort them that Government will take the law seriously. However, it should be noted that a number of interventions have already been put in place. As a Government, we have been promoting Buy Uganda Build Uganda (BUBU). That is political will, which we should be building all these colleagues’ concerns on.

You are aware that as a Government, we have been promoting human resource build up, especially the scientists. With the lockdown, His Excellency the President says maybe it is also good in disguise that Ugandans can now showcase. You are aware that a number of factories and industries have been activated to innovatively respond to the needs of our day.

This is a challenge to us, as a country, and we want to encourage innovation and scientists to come and occupy that space. We are in lockdown and so much can be done by Ugandans. Therefore, we should not think that we shall lose it all to foreigners. We need to occupy the space, especially now that we have a bigger opportunity and then the Government – (Interruption)

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the honourable minister for picking my point. When I raised that point, I was expecting Government to come up with fact and not fiction. I was expecting Government to come up with a task list and not a wish list.

Madam Speaker, my point of procedure is basically the status. While I applaud the minister in regard to scientists, I would like to bring to her attention that Government – if I can focus on Makerere – contributes only Shs 200 million as research funding. Shs 200 million is not even worthy half a programme of a PhD student.

Therefore, in terms of support, we still expect Government to do more.

Specifically, on the point of procedure, I was saying that if we are talking about building capacity in terms of the scientists, the first call would be the first-class students who are now vending newspapers and making rolex yet we want this.

My procedural issue is; is the minister proceeding well to communicate a Government position yet in terms of innovations, science and technology and engineering, Government is doing the opposite? Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable minister, we appreciate the policy proposals but what Ugandans would like to hear is; how are you going to support the local entrepreneurs? 

In this country, you are on your own. You negotiate to borrow money by yourself. There is no start up from Government like they do in other countries. People of Uganda would like to hear; what does the Government contribute towards our innovation - We are taking a lot of time. We need to close.

Ms anywar: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was responding to the debate as it is on the Floor. I was saying that there is already a good will that we need to build on. 

Indeed, if we recognise that we have not done so well but we have started, we can still improve on that. I still want to comfort my colleagues that as a country, we can still add on what we have started and make it better. 

I was giving an example that with the present situation, the dilemma we have is that we have found ourselves in a position that we need to build more on our capacity as Ugandans so that we help ourselves. 

Madam Speaker, as you had already directed or noted, we need to put more funds in this. To even the colleague who rose on a point of procedure, this is a moment of truth. We need such human resource more than ever before. We have already opened up many companies and industries to fill in that gap, which will help our Ugandans.

As a Government, we shall come back of course, to have a systematic implementation of all this. It cannot be overnight but there is a will. I pray that we move together and make it a reality. Let us Buy Uganda, Build Uganda. Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable members, let us rise up in honour of Jovlet Kempara, the sister to our colleague, hon. Jovah Kamateeka, Member of Parliament for Mitooma. Burial will be in Mitooma on Friday, 15 May. Let us stand up for a minute of silence.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence)

The Speaker: Honourable members, House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00p.m.

(The House rose at 5.26 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 16 May 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)

