Monday, 18 May 2009

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you and thank you for having sacrificed your Monday. We do not normally sit on Mondays but because of the business we have, I requested you and you agreed that we sit today. I therefore thank you, especially those who have been able to come. 

Hon. Members, you must have seen yesterday’s Bukedde, where there was a very nasty picture on the front page. It was a picture of a child who was sacrificed, with his body mutilated and his private parts missing. This practice has continued but we do not know what steps are being taken to curb it. It is really a disaster. I hope something is being done to stop this practice especially regarding children. 

The problem is that I have forgotten my copy of Bukedde at home but you should look at the Sunday Bukedde and you will see what I saw, and I think you will not like it. So I am appealing to those concerned to take steps to curb this practice where children are sacrificed and their body parts taken. 

2.48
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek your indulgence because a few minutes back I was in your chambers, unfortunately you were out and I left a message with the secretaries that if you came, I had wanted to raise a matter of national importance.

Yesterday at about 2.00 p.m., I was coming from Namilyango and when I reached Ridar Hotel I found a big crowd of people enraged and there was a 999 highway police pick-up truck under the command of an inspector of police. I requested my driver to stop so that I could find out what was happening. When I stopped, I was told that there were suspects in Ridar Hotel who had been caught with ballot papers, which are supposed to be used on the 21st of this month for conducting by-elections. The mob was very annoyed, and they really wanted their lives. At the end of the day, however, these suspects were handed over to police. Even as I talk, Ridar Hotel is under the security of police. 

I raised this matter up with the Electoral Commission. It was on Thursday that we, Members of the Opposition, were in the Parliamentary Gardens, and I am happy we even extended an invitation to the Secretary-General of NRM-O. Unfortunately, he was not present but of course it was for obvious reasons because the NRM-O had its caucus. We raised issues of national importance and of concern about coming up with electoral laws, which will guarantee free and fair elections. 

If ballot boxes and ballot papers are printed and are under the management of the Electoral Commission, how come they find their way out before the electioneering process? I drew the attention of the Electoral Commission to this effect and I am happy the Attorney-General, under whose docket the Electoral Commission falls, is here. I think it is high time government came out to cleanse its image and disassociate itself from these malpractices. 

How will government do that? Government will do that if it can interest itself in this case and successfully prosecute the suspects. That is the only way government can come out clean. Even on Thursday, voter’s cards were brought in large numbers having been picked from the stores of the Electoral Commission. 

I am raising this so that the right institution in government interests itself and sees how far it can follow up this matter so that we know where to apportion blame. If government does not come out and disassociate itself by taking action, then we will say there is complacency on their part. 

This is a matter which is of grave importance. People out there are concerned whether it is worthwhile spending taxpayers’ money in conducting elections, which are already predetermined by the powers that be. I think let us as a country try our best to make sure that elections really mean something to us. As of now, with what is happening I am afraid people are losing interest in the electioneering process. 

My appeal is to the minister responsible to interest himself in this matter and get in touch with the police in Seeta and carry out investigations. If government is not involved, then let the law take its course and those people are prosecuted. I thank you.

2.53
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to concur with you on the issue of child sacrifice which remains a big problem. We also saw the picture in Bukedde but I recall that a few weeks back, we had a debate in this House and the Minister of State for Internal Affairs promised to bring a position paper to this House explaining the steps government is taking to address this matter. 

I know that we will soon prorogue the House, so I just wanted to know what time government will be ready to bring the paper here to tell us what is being done to ensure that we eliminate this practice of child sacrifice in this country. 

2.54
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Mukono): Thank you very much. The issue you have communicated, Mr Speaker, is very important and we are also very afraid about the continuous sacrifice, not even sacrifice but murder. It is murder because those involved take deliberate steps to kidnap and kill with their own intentions. I think it is shameful that no action seems to be done to curb this systematic murder of our children. 

About a month ago, the chairman of Mukono District issued a statement. He said that anybody who is suspected of going to sacrifice a child should be dealt with, that is, should be killed. This was carried on various media, including television. 

About a few weeks later, a certain man called Bwete was murdered, and I think this was a direct response of the citizenry to the advice of the chairman of Mukono District. Bwete was a chief of Kawolo sub-county. He was caught with a child who was going to direct him to where a headmaster of a certain ramshackle school is. Citizens and boda boda men rounded him up, questioned him, and as he was responding they started beating him up. He was flogged to death. 

Those are unlawful responses to these actions where we have not had any particular action by government. That is the extent to which this issue is going. A mere suspicion of a man or a lady who could be with a child who is not his or hers may invoke an adverse response of mob justice and innocent people may be killed like Mr Bwete was. Cries of people to let the man go and cries to let them know that this is a sub-county chief were not heeded to. So, this is a very serious issue and it needs to be taken very seriously. 

I want also to add a word to hon. Kassiano Wadri’s concern. We have also been hearing about pre-ticked ballot papers over and over again, even in Rubaga. There are people who have been caught red-handed ticking and making them ready for placement into the ballot boxes when the day of an election comes. 

The incident that happened at Ridar Hotel in Seeta is no rumour because this is what exactly happened. There are other cases, which are in court, and I would not want to mention them because this would be sub judice. However, this is something we have been crying about on and on. 

It does not only affect the opposition against the ruling party, it also affects members of the ruling party who are independent. In an election in Sembabule, for example, where I participated, I saw what was happening. These incidences are serious. Election processes are very serious issues and they involve peoples’ emotions. If there seems to be no response from government to ensure that the Electoral Commission takes charge of the elections, then the people will take charge and you will see for yourself what can happen.

This is a precursor. When you look at people ticking ballot papers, it is a precursor to stuffing them into ballot boxes. Those who are not involved in the process but are jealously guarding their elections are not going allow this to happen. So, you are likely to see bloodshed on the day of elections. 

I do not think that this Parliament would be responsible if this situation degenerates into violence while we are just looking on. I think we can make the necessary response to make the electoral process better, and to ensure that everybody gets justice. 

It is in that vein, Mr Speaker, that I request that this Parliament passes the necessary resolution to ensure that this process is investigated and action duly taken before elections take place. We also need a statement from Government to ensure that peoples’ emotions are calmed, lest they will wait for the suspects and deal with them as a mob, the way they dealt with Bwete following the advice of the chairman of Mukono District. Thank you.

3.00
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Because Government seems not to be taking any action at all on human sacrifice, the practice is spreading to cover almost the whole country. In November, a child of one year and two months disappeared from my constituency. At that time the grass had not yet been burned down. The community made some efforts and combed the grass for about one square mile but the child was not found. Later on, the body was found very far away besides a stream where people collect water, with some of its body parts missing. 

It seems that these bad people, who want to become rich by killing others, are now spreading their nets to cover the entire country particularly where they think people are not yet aware of their activities. In Pader, more than six children have gone missing within the last one year and they have not been found up to now. 

I have not heard our President coming out clear on this issue. I find this disturbing because for a head of state to keep quiet on a matter like this when citizens are being murdered day and night is unacceptable. 

In the earlier 1960s, soon after Kenya’s independence, witchcraft was widely practiced. The late President Kenyatta issued a decree that “deal with any witchdoctor you find and there will be no case to answer”, and witchcraft stopped. In fact, in Kenya witchcraft is not widespread now because the head of state came out to stop it.

On rigging elections, I wonder whether the government in power cannot win without rigging. I just wonder. Why don’t you try it one day; maybe you can win. Why don’t you try? (Laughter) 

In the by-elections in Kitgum District, they denied all other parties information about the vacant posts until after nominations. They only gave this information to the NRM. I even went on radio and talked about it but the representative of the Electoral Commission refused. Why do we stay in power when we know that we have actually stolen? Is there no integrity, no honesty, no shame! If you fear elections, do not call for them. You have the gun, you can stay there and nobody will disturb you. I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Ms Kabakumba rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: Let me allow two more members. Honourable minister, you will come in after these two contributions. 

3.04
MR ROBERT SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): I thank you. I would like to react to the issue of child sacrifice. Maybe as a way of advice, we cannot say Government is not doing anything because for every child murdered, Police gets involved. However, as Members of Parliament, we need to pronounce ourselves on this. Just as we managed to host the inter-party coalition in the backyard of Parliament and they aired out their issues, maybe Parliament can also call stakeholders - NGOs, religious leaders - and we get involved to try to seek a way forward in as far as publicity is concerned. 

We are currently bombarded with Bukedde pictures of child murders. I cannot call this child sacrifice because I do not think they are sacrificing them for anything. It is child murder. We must pronounce ourselves and say that this is a lie; they are not sacrificing anybody for any riches. You will never get riches this way. We can seek a way forward as Parliament and send a signal to our population that much as it spreads, it will do nothing. 

In a neighbouring country, they are busy killing albinos in the name of getting rich. So, it is high time - and I pray this practice does not come into Uganda - that as Parliament we do something in as far as pronouncing ourselves and sensitising people that they will never get rich from carrying out child sacrifices. I thank you. 

3.07
MR JULIUS BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you. I want to also make a comment on the issue of child murder. I will not call it a sacrifice because it is real murder. 

Like my other colleague has said, the minister promised to give us a comprehensive report on what they have done and up to now we have not seen it. What do I want to suggest? Before we wait for one of our very own children to be murdered, let us maybe put up a committee of Parliament to look into this vice because when something happens to a Member of Parliament, that is when we will rise up in arms as Parliament and say, “Oh, this is bad.” We have had incidences like road accidents where people have died and we do not complain, but when it happens to a Member of Parliament, we weep as if we are different human beings from others. 

In that regard, I want to suggest that whereas government is doing all it can, and they promised to bring us a report which is not yet here, as Parliament we should form a committee to look into this monster called child murder. Otherwise, why should we continue looking on when our very own children, who are the future leaders of tomorrow, continue being murdered? As Parliament, we should not wait for the minister but if we formed a committee, we would give it a timeframe within which we should have a report ready for discussion. Otherwise in waiting, we shall wait and wait until maybe the nth Parliament. 

On elections, I think something ought to be done because it affects all parties, not only the Opposition but the entire country. I thank you. 

3.09
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I have heard observations from hon. Members that government is doing its best. Actually, hon. Sebunya was saying that in each and every case you hear police intervening. I would wish to make my observation that I am disappointed with the way government is handling this issue of human sacrifice. It is not even child sacrifice; it is human sacrifice, murder! 

These are cases of murder, felonies and capital offences. I do not know how many people have been arrested and arraigned before courts of law and charged with murder, which is barbaric in nature. I do not know. Yes, every now and then we wake up to gruesome pictures in the press but you hardly hear of arrests and prosecution. 

Besides that, there are two specific incidents I want to talk about. Dr Bayigga has talked about a case of a suspected witchdoctor who was killed in Mukono. A similar incident happened in Mityana where a lady was flogged to death because it was claimed that she was a witchdoctor or something like that, and there was no action taken by government. 

Another incident, which was very shocking to me, was brought to my attention this week. Some very concerned citizens approached me with documentary evidence to the effect that even some UPDF generals could be involved in human sacrifice. Mr Speaker, I wish I knew that this matter would come up today I would have laid these documents, which are in my possession, on the Table. I am saying this because there is a person who was found in possession of a human skull by some residents in Busiro and this person is in possession of documents called ekibali, a pass permit -(Ms Kabakumba rose_)- You know, I was laying background to my – (Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member is giving very useful information on this Floor but according to what he is saying, he received that information and he still has it. He has not passed it to any authority yet he knows he does not have the capacity to investigate these cases. Is the honourable member in order not to pass on valuable information to government to follow up these issues and bring the culprits to book? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: What I have heard from him is that he regrets because he did not know that we were going to deal with this matter. Otherwise, he would have brought the document. Please bring those documents tomorrow.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am making an express undertaking: tomorrow, I will bring those documents here showing that a high ranking UPDF officer is linked to a case of child human sacrifice. This gentleman, who was found in possession of human skulls, is passing off as a driver and at the same time a traditional healer. He claims he is a traditional healer but he is in possession of documents signed by a high ranking UPDF officer. He also claims he is a driver. I will bring those documents tomorrow. Thank you.

3.14
THE MINISTER FOR RELIEF & DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. With this issue of human sacrifice and murder, the first problem is detection - detecting murder before it takes place. In other words, stopping murder before it occurs. The usual problem with murder is that it is proved after it has occurred. Before it has occurred, it is not murder.

Here, whether in the case mentioned by hon. Okello-Okello or in the case of Mukono, or anywhere it has occurred, the problem is that you get to discover when the person has already been killed. In cases where the community has been able to detect a missing child and have pursued the kidnappers, the child has been saved in many cases. So, I think the first area of concern is for all of us to engage in detection. Before the Police can come in or before information can flow to government machinery, there have to be detectors of the occurrence of the crime.

Why does this crime seem to be prevalent now? Why is it seemingly also found elsewhere in the region? The answer is very difficult, but it seems to me that as changes are occurring in our society, the norms are loosening up to a point where human life is less valued than it used to be. This is probably a cumulative effect in this region and particularly here in Uganda. There was a time when even a head of state was associated with talking to beheaded heads, or keeping some of the heads in a fridge. It takes time for that kind of abomination to be eliminated in a given society.

I am also referring to the dehumanised behaviour, which arises out of practices, like the case in Mozambique. Human sacrifice was known. The kidnapped children would be forced to drink human blood. They would be forced to behead others. I do not know if this is far away from our own experience here with Kony or even some of the officials in the Kony camp who have been killed and their private parts removed.

There are cases of secret societies in West Africa - it is very well known -(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for giving way. We are talking about things happening where there is government. We are not talking about things that are happening in a situation like in LRA or in Mozambique that the minister is talking about. We are talking about things happening where there is supposed to be law and order. We are asking: do we still have government in this country? Do we?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you very much. We have not established the type of people who are doing this, whether they are coming from the bush, or whether somebody is claiming that some UPDF soldier has been involved. Who knows that probably this disease, this epidemic, has not come from Garamba or from elsewhere?

This to me is an area to study. In fact, I would wish to bring it to the attention of the academic community in the field of religious studies, social work and social administration and sociology. Studies should be undertaken in this. It is not simply a matter of social control.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I am wondering whether the minister is in order to request for church leaders, academics and NGOs to commission a study when the minister who is serving a constitutionally established government knows for sure that it is the duty of the Police and security agencies to detect and prevent crime. 

Would the minister be in order if he said now that it is a matter which has defeated government’s understanding, that they do not have capacity to understand the cause of this therefore they should be assisted by the church? Should he say they should be assisted by academics and others when they are manning government machinery with a duty to investigate, detect and prosecute criminals? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I believe the minister thinks that is the best solution. That is his view as an individual. You are right, and this is why I raised it. I am concerned but it appears he thinks the best way is to have a study.

Anyway, hon. Members, this is a very serious matter. It is not an isolated incident. It is not an incident that has happened in six months, but everyday we are getting reports of children being murdered. What do we do? I think the Attorney-General will bear us out. Why don’t they have an inquiry in each case? The situation is desperate, honestly.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You can approach it from a legal point of view and impose laws, but what if they do not understand the basis of behaviour. What is happening in this country needs more than just law; it needs studies also and studies of a serious nature. If there was to be a select committee of Parliament and I attended that committee, one of the things I would propose is that we commission serious studies of how change affects behaviour in a society. 

The honourable member is seemingly saying that government understands everything and if you are in government you know what is happening, but everyday there is research. Even when you are looking at inflation, somebody is in the field studying the conditions which are producing inflation. Similarly for crime, you have to carry out studies of why crimes are rising and falling. It is not out of the ordinary that we should be concerned –(Interjections)- there can be procedure, but certainly moral decline needs to be studied and not simply be a matter of law.

THE SPEAKER: Well, they can go concurrently but it seems there are no investigations going on. You can carry out a study and at the same time investigate. I think let us end there, but you also have to say something about the cards hon. Wadri complained about. 

3.23
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Mr Speaker, I want to thank hon. Wadri for his information. I want to say that government is always quick to act, that is why he found that Ridar Hotel had already been surrounded by Police, and according to his information Police is still there guarding this hotel. What I am not sure of is whether Ridar Hotel is a polling station or it was being used as a venue to do bad acts. 

The challenges of carrying out elections are known to most of us. I would say that as Government, Police has taken it up but also the Executive, the line minister, is here and has heard your voices. We shall investigate the case and bring it to its logical conclusion -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the minister for allowing me raise this point of clarification. I am happy she has undertaken some commitment that government will conduct investigations. Today is the 18th of the month and the by-elections are going to be conducted on Thursday, 21st this week. That means we are only left with 19th and 20th. If the same ballot papers, which are supposed to be used in these elections are the ones the people were caught ticking, is it possible for the minister to assure us that action will have been taken before Thursday, 21st so that we are able to secure the elections?

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Government is in charge and we are going to do whatever is humanly possible to handle this case. I will not say that government will investigate, prosecute and conclude this case before the 21st - I do not think it will be possible - but this is a case that has already been recorded and government will follow it up. 

I want to assure hon. Lulume that there will be no blood shed. It is good we have been alerted in time. We are going to have fair, free, peaceful and transparent elections.

The issue of child sacrifice is not a new one in this country, and the debates about child sacrifice are not new either on the Floor of this House. The Minister of Internal Affairs did undertake to bring a statement for debate before this House and all I know is that at some point that statement was ready, but I undertake to follow it up. 

That notwithstanding, I think it is not fair for members to debate as if government is seated somewhere and doing nothing. Actually, even members of the opposition have testified on this Floor of the House that police and the government have helped many people, including those who testified, to avert a catastrophe in a certain constituency - I think it was Rubaga. I will tell you, police has set up a division to specifically handle cases concerning child sacrifice, which some people are calling child murder. Recently, I was also following up a case of defilement and clearly it was rape but because this girl was below 13, they told me it cannot be rape so the term is defilement. That is what I was told. So, child sacrifice is a challenge. As hon. Kabwegyere said, you can only detect it when it has already happened. 

I want to allay the fears of hon. Okello-Okello. Where there are bad hearted people - you can call them witches and those who are hunting for riches - these things are bound to happen whether in northern, eastern or central Uganda. It is up to us as Ugandans to be vigilant and of course not to take the law into our hands lest we end up killing innocent civilians. 

I want to call upon all Ugandans to report these cases promptly but also to remain calm. If you arrest a culprit, please hand him or her over to Police. 

Hon. Okello-Okello did say that Nyerere one time gave a decree; I think we are not living under a dictatorship. That is why the President cannot come to give a decree but rather Parliament can make laws to make sure that the evils that are happening in our country are handled. (Mr Banyenzaki rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: According to our rules, since she declined his clarification, I do not see why he insists. 

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: In summary, Government is committed to fighting child sacrifice, and we are going to do it together with the people and citizens of Uganda. We are very serious and we are sure we will handle the matter. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think two points have been made. One was what hon. Wadri reported on. The best we can do in the circumstances is to alert the Electoral Commission about these happenings and ask them to make sure voting is done in the open. The agents of candidates should be at the polling stations early enough so that the ballot boxes are opened while they are there to see that nothing has been stuffed. These will be some of the preventive measures. 

You know, stuffing ballot boxes can only be done either before or in situations where voting is being done in polling booths. It is easier to go with those things and stuff them. However, with the system of voting in the open, it may not be easy to stuff. That is the best we can do for now given the limited time. 

On the other issue, I think the cards were distributed and the good thing is that the Electoral Commission has provided for anybody who may not be having a voters’ card but are registered voters. So, you do not have to borrow somebody’s voting card to use it. You only have to go to the polling station where you are registered and you will be allowed to vote. So, why should one commit a criminal act when that person can vote without having to commit such an act? Anyway, I think we should end debate on this issue.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last Thursday you were with us in the Parliamentary Gardens when we were displaying the voters’ cards that had been issued out of the stores of the Electoral Commission. Yesterday, you heard how people were caught ticking electoral materials. In this august House, do we still have confidence in this Electoral Commission? Can we keep quiet? 

I know that government has said they are doing all that they can but they are the ones to benefit from the rigging of these elections. After these two incidents, can we still keep quiet? Can we say that we still have confidence in elections in this country? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nsubuga, nobody is keeping quiet. That is why the matter came up. It was reported here and it has been debated in an effort to devise preventive measures so that such illegalities are not employed in the Thursday voting. I have said that people should vote in the open because if this is done, then how will people stuff ballot papers into ballot boxes?

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to say that much as we can keep our hopes high on the promise that something will change tomorrow and we see free and fair elections, we are at pains, considering the precedents. It is true the Minister is assuring us that some action is going to be taken against whoever is found at fault, but that might not happen. We are very skeptical. 

I am one of those people who were involved in the last Kyadondo North elections, but I can report to this House that some people were caught in the open at one of the polling stations with a ballot box full of pre-ticked ballot papers. Although those people were arrested and taken to police in broad daylight, up to today they have never been prosecuted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I have just been suggesting remedies, one of which is to be vigilant; candidates’ agents should be at the polling stations before voting starts so that they can witness ballot boxes being opened. Vigilance is a process in open voting; it allows you to see what somebody has or is doing. That is the best we can do. 

Meanwhile, we can continue examining this matter on how the culprits caught in these acts can be dealt with. It is basically for future reference. Otherwise, elections cannot be stopped because of this. They are going to be conducted. We have said the fairest way of conducting them is to be vigilant - vote in the open and agents of the candidates should be at polling stations in time. I think that will be a measure to correct this situation. I think we have sufficiently debated this matter. We should now deal with the other item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW ADDITIONAL FINANCE OF SDR 9,255,000, FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING THE SECOND ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT CAPACITY BUILDING PROJECT

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to move that Parliament passes a resolution to authorise Government to borrow Special Drawing Rights (SDR) 9,255,000 from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group for financing the additional costs under the second Environmental Management Capacity Building Project.

Whereas, the financing agreement for Special Drawing Rights of 9,255,000 is to be concluded between –

THE SPEAKER: Professor, I think this was done before. Hasn’t it been handled by the committee?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes, the committee has done so. Okay, therefore, I can now report that as you may recall, Parliament did approve the borrowing of US$ 26.6 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank to support the second Management Capacity Building Project. This was to be implemented by the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) and the National Forestry Authority (NFA), all under the Ministry of Water and Environment.

I would like to report that progress has been made in the implementation of the project. The current project is the second phase of the long term project to build environmental capacity in the country.

In the interest of time, I would like to very quickly highlight –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thought that the professor had understood you well. I am saying this because what he is presenting is what was presented to us in this House before we forwarded this loan request to the committee. Is it procedurally right for him to continue giving us the same information? I thought now it would be the committee to read its report and we see whether it requires any further adjustments by the ministry. That is the time he would come in.

THE SPEAKER: What I expected today is the report from the committee because this matter has been to this House before.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

3.39
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. On behalf of the Committee on National Economy, I would like to present the report on the proposal by Government to borrow an additional financing of Special Drawing Rights of 9, 255,000, which is equivalent to US$ 15 million, from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank, for financing the Second Environmental Management Capacity Building Project.

I hope that honourable colleagues have got copies of the report. They were circulated early last week and I think more can be availed. 

The committee report on this loan was presented to this House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and referred to our committee in accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Article 159 and rule 152 of our Rules of Procedure.

The committee has considered and scrutinised the request and now begs to report.

Methodology

The committee held meetings with:

•	The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
•	The Ministry of Water and Environment
•	The technical teams from the two ministries including the lead implementing organisation, NEMA. 

The committee also interfaced with the sessional Committee of Natural Resources as the line sessional committee. 

The committee made reference to the following documents:

•	The minister’s brief which, was put to the Floor and I am sure members have copies of the same
•	Loan Financing Agreement
•	Project Appraisal Document; and
•	Project Implementation Plan. 

I now beg to lay on the Table the three documents aforementioned. There is a copy for you, Mr Speaker.

The committee made on-spot checks on the activities including visiting the NEMA House, which was implementing the just ended project. The committee intends to continue monitoring the progress of this loan should Parliament approve it.

Background

The second Environment Management Capacity Building Project (EMCBP II) was approved by Parliament and became effective on 25 June 2001, for a total of SDR 17.1 million. 

The project’s closing date has been extended three times. The first extension was from December 31st 2006 to December 31st 2007, arising from disbursement lags during the original project period. 

These lags were due to broader consultations in implementing institutional strengthening efforts at the district level; a modified grants delivery model that better reflected the needs of the districts as the number of districts in Uganda expanded during the project period because of the decentralisation policy; and the need to accommodate delivery of some composting equipment that was delayed because of port disruptions during our neighbour’s post-election events.

Implementation Progress

The major project achievements can be broadly categorised into three areas: 

1. District Institutional Development and Strengthening
	This has provided support to district environmental officers through training and facilitation for integration of District Environmental Action Plans into District Development Plans. Twenty-seven districts have been supported and the minister’s brief clearly covers those districts.

	The component has successfully established one tree plantation in Rwoho in Mbarara, Ntungamo and Isingiro districts. There are nine composting projects in the towns of Lira, Soroti, Mbale, Jinja, Mukono, Fort Portal, Kasese, Mbarara and Kabale.

2. 	Institutional Strengthening of Lead Agencies

	This has provided support to lead agencies including other ministries, departments and independent authorities throughout the country in strengthening environmental management capacity. 

	During this second project, 21 targeted agencies were provided with facilitation, training and other forms of strengthening such as integration of environmental policy into their operating procedures.

3. Central Institutional Strengthening

	This has provided operational and policy support for the central institution, in addition to catering for vehicles, a new building and elaboration of key environmental regulations and polices. Up to December 2007, the project also provided salaries to support NEMA staff.

	The additional financing of SDR 9,255,000, which we now seek to be approved from the IDA of the World Bank, is for financing the second Environmental Management Capacity Building Project.

Proposed Project Activities

The objective of the new request is to:

•	Strengthen the capacity of the Authority and lead agencies to carry out their environmental functions and responsibilities effectively.
•	Strengthen the capacity of the local government institutions at district and community levels. 
•	Assist communities to address the environmental degradation problems and use natural resources in an environmentally sustainable and prudent manner as detailed below:

Capacity Building at Local and Community Levels

1. 	Capacity building will be undertaken through development of environmental management capacity in 31 districts by carrying out training for local government staff, educational institutions and NGOs. 

	Further logistical support and acquisition of office equipment will be provided to district environment officers, district technical planning committees and district environment committees in 15 districts.

2. 	Local governments and communities in the 15 districts will be assisted to incorporate environmental concerns as a part of the development plans. In this line, the local governments will provide specially designed environmental planning training modules, through workshops to district personnel, councillors, educational institutions and NGOs.

3. 	Local governments, NGOs and communities will be engaged and helped to undertake activities that will lead to a reversal in environmental degradation through training, provision of technical services and equipment.

4. 	Rural towns will be supported to improve the collection and processing of solid waste and management of their landfill sites.

Tree Planting

The expanded activities will include the planting of 4,000 hectares of forests on denuded lands in two government forest reserves managed by NFA namely, North Rwenzori and Kasagala Forest Reserves. The reforestation activity will focus on sustainable planting and management of the forest resources, while at the same time enhancing the incomes of the people.

Solid Waste Management/Composting

This activity will implement the second phase of the community composting project. Rural towns generating up to 70 tonnes per day (TPD) of organic waste will receive support to improve collection efficiency and process the waste at existing landfill sites. 

Finances available under the EMCBP II were capable of funding only nine towns in the first phase. The additional financing will permit roll-out and implementation in seven additional towns, and this is expected to double NEMA’s long term revenue generation potential from ERs. Arua town will be used as a pilot to design and implement investments that support community based waste management and composting. 

Capacity Building for the Lead Agencies

1. 	The project will support the oil and gas sector, which is a new sector, and will be built on the model of regulatory and capacity building frameworks for lead agencies in the gas sector. It will also include capacity building programmes for local governments in the oil and gas sub-region. The project will further support purchase of priority equipment for monitoring, and the design and promulgation of key regulations.

2. 	Policy measures will be undertaken to build the capacity of lead agencies to enable them carry out their responsibilities of addressing environmental issues. The environmental management skills to be transferred to the lead agencies will be in the area of environmental information collection and analysis; environmental reporting; sectoral environmental impact assessments; strategic environmental assessment; environmental audits and regulations; environmental inspections; environmental policy and law; environmental planning; training and awareness; and environmental standards.

Support to NEMA

1. 	The institutional capacity of NEMA as a principle agency for environmental management will be strengthened and consolidated through training of staff and the providing equipment.

2. 	The capacity of NEMA will be built to promote compliance with environmental laws and regulations.

3. 	The enforcement capacity in the lead agencies will be built to assist communities comply with the environmental laws and regulations. Under this sub-component, the capacity of district staff will be built to enable them formulate and enforce bylaws and regulations in their areas of jurisdiction. NEMA will also be helped to complete the regulatory framework established under the National Environmental Act.

4. 	The environmental monitoring and reporting of NEMA will be strengthened through preparation of environmental monitoring indicators, lead agencies having the capacity to monitor and report on sector environment performances, and development of strategic and sectoral environment impact assessment guidelines.

5. 	Environmental education and public awareness will be strengthened through: review of the curricula and educational programmes of secondary and tertiary institutions; carrying out national environmental public awareness and mobilisation; and training of national trainers to expedite dissemination of environmental information, knowledge, skills and practices in the communities.

The following is worth noting:

1. 	Environment and natural resource management is a decentralised function but has a direct link with the District Environment Officers. NEMA builds the capacity of local governments to carry out this function to ensure sound environmental management. The National Environment Act provides for the reporting structures between NEMA, local authorities and the communities through the local environmental committees.

2. 	A regional office will be established in Masindi as an exception, as a response to the specific and unique challenges that will arise out of the petroleum and gas exploitation in that area. In addition, NEMA will establish a specialised unit under the Department of Environmental Monitoring and Compliance to deal with the oil and gas sector issues.

Terms and Conditions of the Additional Funding

The terms and conditions of the credit include:

•	A maturity period of 40 years with 10 year’s grace period.
•	A service of 0.75 percent per annum on the disbursed and outstanding balances.

Observations

1. 	The committee observes that the current global environment problems require a concerted effort in protection of the environment. A project of this nature is a good contribution from us as a country in that direction.

2. 	The discovery of oil and gas in the country is likely to pose new environmental challenges and requires timely interventions in the area of environmental protection before it is too late.

3. 	NEMA gets negligible budgetary allocations from the normal budget, making it difficult for it to implement the environmental related activities under their mandate. The situation is worse at the local governments, which hardly make allocations for environment related activities in the districts.

	Honourable colleagues, you are aware that NEMA depends on the capacity of our decentralised districts for it to be able to enforce and implement. That is why we need to support them.

4. 	The achievements under the first phase of the project are impressive. It is therefore necessary that they get additional financing to expand their activities.

We have also observed as a committee that the structure of the loan largely includes civil works equipment, operations and some specialised consultants, which we think is a largely good structure.

Recommendations

1. 	The scope of the environmental interventions should be expanded to include water sources that are drying up or being polluted because of deforestation and loss of catchment areas as well as clearance of vegetation cover around them, like Lake Kyoga and many streams spread all over the country. 

2. 	The project should have a component for supplying tree seedlings to institutions like schools, churches, health centres and other community institutions so as to widen the scope of tree planting. This is in line with the Tree Planting Act 2003, which has largely been redundant. Any effort towards financing multiplication centres and tree nurseries at local levels should be supported.

3. 	As planting of trees is a targeted activity in the project, there should be a deliberate effort to preserve old trees. 

4. 	In mobilising the communities to understand environmental issues, there is need to emphasise household greening at a family level. 

5. 	Established traditional, cultural and religious institutions should be brought on board, and where possible, funds allocated to such institutions, and take advantage of such structures to mobilise the population to participate in environment management activities. The committee thinks that cultural institutions and faith based organisations can still do more in terms of re-greening our country and synergising on the efforts of environmental conservation.

As I conclude, the committee recognises the environmental challenges we are faced with as a country and appreciates interventions aimed at protecting the environment. It is for this reason that the committee supports the request by Government to borrow an additional financing of SDR 9,255,000 from the IDA of the World Bank Group for financing the Second Environmental Management Capacity Building Project. 

Mr Speaker, as we mentioned last time, we are requesting that the committee works more with every sessional committee for every loan got. Parliament should interest itself in monitoring the performance of loans in addition to approving them. Also, we appeal to the Office of the Prime Minister, which is supposed to monitor, to step up their efforts in this endeavour.

I beg to report and urge this august House to support this loan request given its intentions, the dire need to protect Mother Earth and to protect the environment. Given the challenges of oil discovery in this country, we need to help lead organisations and our districts to have the capacity to cope. I, therefore, request members to support this motion. I also request that copies of the detailed project costs, which we photocopied, be availed to members to analyse this correctly. I thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairman and the committee.

4.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENVIRONMENT (Ms Jessica Eriyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to give additional information to what the Minister of Finance gave earlier but also to respond to some of the issues raised by the committee, which will hopefully guide the debate.

I would like to first thank the chairman and members of the committee for a very good report. They interfaced with us and the lead agencies, and we want to thank them for supporting this additional financing request.

In addition to what has been outlined in the intentions for this additional financing, my ministry is working in the area to expand conservation particularly of water catchment areas. This was raised in recommendation number one. Under the Farm Income Enhancement and Forestry Conservation Project, we have a number of water sheds or degraded water catchment areas, which are being restored under the Lake Victoria Environment Management Project. We are also working on restoring some of the catchment areas in the Small Towns Water Project, and tree planting in the water catchment areas is now integrated. 

Originally, water projects did not have the aspect of conservation of water catchment areas. This is ongoing, and we also have conditional grants that are sent to specific districts for management of wetlands and some catchment areas. So I would like to thank the committee for this recommendation, which my ministry will continue to work on given the opportunity of additional funding.

Specifically on this project, it will not be possible to widen beyond the areas which have been specified. We do hope that the rest of the projects that are ongoing, other than this one, will be able to tackle this aspect. We are also going to look for more money within the ministry’s budget to handle this specific area.

On number two, I would like to appreciate the fact that the committee and Members of Parliament would like us to supply seedlings to institutions, schools and so forth. I would like to request members here to support us when we come to the next financial year’s budgetary allocations. Government is operationalising the tree fund and I would like to mention here that –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: I am standing on a point of procedure. We are burning to discuss the report of the committee; wouldn’t it be procedurally right if the minister came later because she is pre-empting what we would have asked? Is it another method of ensuring that we do not waste time?

MS ERIYO: I am giving additional information, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think she hopes that this information will help you debate the report.

MS ERIYO: Mr Speaker, I have a report, which could be given out to members. I am not going to read the whole of it but I am just highlighting a few specific areas, which will really help members when they are debating. I beg that members give me a few minutes. The reports are being distributed.

I would like to thank the committee for recommendation number three -

THE SPEAKER: Are you going through all this?

MS ERIYO: No, Sir. In the report that I am circulating, there is an attachment on the districts, which were supported -

THE SPEAKER: I will just give you five minutes to plug in what is missing.

MS ERIYO: Yes, Sir. We have a list of the districts. In the committee’s report this is not there, but in the report that I am giving out, we have a list of the districts that benefited from the initial capacity building project; also attached on that report is a list of the lead agencies that have been supported. 

In order to enhance environmental management in this country, a number of ministries and other institutions have been listed down there. And then the districts that are supposed to benefit from that additional financing. The municipalities were already provided for in the committee report but I would like to mention that this is also given in this report that I am giving out. 

As Members may know, Uganda is urbanizing very fast; at the rate of 5.9 percent. A number of people are coming to the urban centres and in this project we are emphasizing the issue of waste management particularly in urban centres because of the volume of waste that is generated in these centres. And without building the capacity of those local governments, it will be very difficult for the people in these urban centres to have a clean and healthy environment. 

While I was interacting with Members before coming in here, they were saying, “What is capacity building? We are not going to support any loan dealing with capacity building.” I want to emphasise here that the capacity building in this particular project is really not the capacity building of training and workshops that Members are not happy about. This is really building the capacity of local governments to manage the waste; building their capacity to link this to the carbon trade through the clean development mechanism; building the capacity of National Forestry Authority to link up tree planting and also building the capacity of the country in carbon trade as far as tree planting is concerned. 

So, the forest reserves that are going to be planted using this financing will be participating in the clean development mechanism and receiving additional financing through carbon trading. Mr Speaker, I think the rest of the issues will be got by the Members from the copies which have been distributed. I think I have made a few clarifications. Thank you so much. 

4.10
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman and his committee for the report that they have produced and tendered to this Parliament this afternoon.  

I rise to support this motion for a resolution of Parliament to borrow the money that we badly need. (Applause) My only caution here will be that the money really goes for what it is meant to achieve because here is a situation where we are borrowing in the name of the future generations. It may not be us as Members of Parliament who are borrowing this money that are going to face the burden of paying back. This is an expensive loan; a loan which I, therefore, call upon the Government of the Republic of Uganda to use very profitably and with a lot of thrift.

The issue of the problem statement that can be deduced from the report of this committee cannot be overemphasized. Uganda right now is undergoing an immense climatic change. At the time when I first came to Kampala in the early 70s, when I was a student and a young person, Kampala used to be a region which we used to fear to come to because it was extremely cold and rainy everyday. Equally so, in Northern Uganda, we used to pride in having a lot of trees. There are certain streams which when I was looking after cows in Terego which if it rained we would not be able to cross. But today, it will be an uphill task for you to convince a child of the day that a few years back there was a river there because all has dried up. 

And there are a lot of reasons for which this country is suffering desertification; the Sahara Desert is steadily and yearly expanding. Geographers know this and unless we commit ourselves to positively doing something to restore that natural habitat, which we had and under which we enjoyed good climatic situation, I am afraid even some of the young generation now might even begin to experience harsher climatic conditions that we are experiencing now.

In this project proposal that has been shared with us, I would have expected that purposeful targeting should be made of areas that have undergone immense environmental degradation. In particular, I will talk about the dangers of tobacco growing in West Nile. Some time back, on the Floor of this House, I came here and said that I am what I am because of the tobacco industry but that has been at a cost. Because as I talk now, the environmental degradation tobacco has caused to Terego and its surrounding counties cannot be talked [MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: “Bujenje.”] Bujenje is okay because the type of tobacco that is grown in Bunyoro does not rely on firewood for curing unlike that type grown in Koboko, Maracha, Terego, Vera and Aringa counties. It has caused immense environmental degradation.  

At the same time, we also need to appreciate that Uganda is one of the countries in the world with the highest rate of population growth. Men and women of this country are working very hard day and night. And as I talk now, our population is around 31 million. Let us give ourselves ten more years; we will have a population explosion that will not be able to settle on the static land size that we have. This, therefore, calls for a purposeful intervention in which to conserve the environment. 

But while we are doing all this, Mr Speaker, I have a few reservations about the recommendations that have been given by the committee. As I said, in principle I support the request to have this money. But there are certain recommendations that have been made, which I do not agree with. Hardly a month back, were we in this House talking about support to cultural institutions. Cultural institutions in this country seem to be only limited to regions that have got cultural institutions that are recognized in our Constitution. The other time, three point something billion was given to three cultural leaders: Bunyoro – Madam Minister, your region benefited. Four billion – something like that –(Interruption)

MR OPIO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform my honourable friend that as we speak now, two more institutions have been provided with funds for improving on their palaces; one is the Tieng-Adhola, 250 million and the second is the Emorimor, 250 million and we shall continue as we manage better. 

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: I would like to give information to hon. Wadri that government is currently constructing palaces for all the chiefs in the Acholi sub-region. So it is not limited to only the three you are talking about. We are spreading throughout the country.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Wadri. I just want to correct the impression created by the minister that you have already given the king of Teso money. Just last week I was in the ministry trying to chase this money; we have not yet received this money.

MR OPIO: Mr Speaker, there are conditions which must be fulfilled in order to improve on the palaces. There has to be a title deed or a lease. Secondly, there must be architectural plans, which have to be certified by the rightful body and it must be showing that there is no dispute where you are putting up the structure. Otherwise, the money is there.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, that is okay. But why do you apply double standards? Some kings were given money without submission of those details.

MR OPIO: Mr Speaker, the bank is not releasing the money until they have fulfilled those conditions. There was a mistake and mistakes are human.

MS KAMYA: Mr speaker, I would like to inform my Chief Whip and this House that while the Government of Uganda promised Shs 2.0 billion to the Kingdom of Buganda, government has been renting 18 headquarters of Sazas, 168 Gombolola headquarters and halls, 9,000 square miles of land which they have been leasing and giving out. And if you want to know how much government owes the Government of Buganda, you should multiply the 168 Gombolola headquarters and the 18 Saza headquarters by 20 years. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: But I think we are confusing the issue because if you are talking about the Shs 2.0 billion, that was for development of people. People are entitled to development money. You do not tie it with other claims. This is money which my people are getting is for development in Uganda. So you do not have to wait for other issues to be able to develop the people.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I appreciate all the information that has been given to me, but the only thing which I hasten to add is that the confusion which has arisen out of the information that has been given talks for itself. 

The point I am making is that if support is going to be given to cultural institutions, we must be mindful of the fact that these are public funds, which are going to be a responsibility of all taxpayers, whether from Karamoja, Koboko, Samia-Bugwe land or Kayunga where they are struggling to have a Banyala king.

All are going to suffer to pay it back and therefore there must be a rational method in which these moneys are really given up to every part of this country to generate development. If you are talking about money going for architectural plans and houses - what is a house for a king vis-à-vis development and wellbeing of our people? What I am trying to say is that we must be pragmatic. We should not channel such heavily and very painfully earned money to few individuals in the names of institutional heads.

We are republicans, if I may answer your question. We do not have to have kings. I believe in Uganda we do not want this business of breaking the country down.

The issue of supporting educational institutions at a pilot level as demonstration farms is welcome. When I was in primary school, we used to have young farmers associations which used to be in every school; it was part of the extra curricula activities, which would interest a child in agricultural undertaking. If therefore this project targets schools so as to inculcate the culture of tree planting and forestation that is an idea which I highly support and I welcome.

But most importantly, we should not limit ourselves to demonstration plots in these schools because at the end of the day, this child when he goes back home, he will also want to plant trees around the homestead. However, tree seedlings are very expensive and highly unaffordable for the ordinary person. I have been to Namanve Seed Centre on a number of occasions. There, a seedling of a pine tree goes for Shs 2,500. The same seedling, if you go to Arua, goes for Shs 500 –

THE SPEAKER: You said 2,500 or 250? 

MR WADRI: Shs 250, a seedling of pine in Namanve Seed Centre. So the point I am making is that this is unaffordable for an ordinary person. As I was saying, Shs 500 given to a peasant in Arua, the person will kneel down and pray. He will look at you as his saviour, because it is not easy as of now where people are starving to lay hands on Shs 1,000, 200 or 500 at a go. Therefore, such a person will not be interested in planting trees. The hierarchy of his needs will demand that tree planting cannot be of priority to him. 

Therefore, let this project assist us and make seedlings affordable for the ordinary person so that he or she can be able to actively engage in afforestation programmes.

Then there are certain issues which have been raised which I am afraid I am to make it very clear I do not support - the idea of capacity building. There are many colleagues here who have been in the civil service and they know very well what connotes capacity building in terms of the civil servants’ language. When a civil servant is talking about capacity building, he is talking about seminars and workshops and I say this without fear or favour because I have been part of that system and I know what it is.

So at the end of the day, lots of money which we are borrowing on behalf of the future generation is going to varnish in thin air and we shall not have anything to show on the ground, to justify why we painfully went for this loan. I am one of those who are strongly against the idea of this capacity building if it is talking about workshops, visits of observation, training seminars. I will not support that.

MR MUKITALE: This is very useful information. I have circulated a copy of the detailed project costs. The word “capacity building” to the donor community could be the catch word and if you are accessing that line of credit, it will still be called capacity building. What should you call the preparation of our districts and lead agencies in dealing with the new oil sector? Can we find a better word than capacity building? 

I would like to give information that the list I have given you here shows clear targets and clear outputs and I think the fatigue of the phrase “capacity building” itself should not be brought in this very loan. We as a committee started from that level until we were educated and that is the reason I gave you a detailed list of the total project cost and you will find there is very little of any of the capacity building items you seem to be talking about. I thought I should give that information.

MS NAJJEMBA: My clarification still goes to the chairperson of the committee. You are telling us that capacity building does not involve seminars and workshops, but when I look at the table here I see, “Sensitisation, training, workshops, inspector training, and printing NRM regulations” – I also want to know what NRM regulations are? Whereas I am NRM, I do not know how it comes here.

I am still not convinced that we need a loan for capacity building; yes, we need trees everywhere; we need to conserve the environment and protect it but for capacity building, I am not convinced. I know very well that for any civil servant to build a good house and have a good life you just have workshops and seminars and you will have good life. I know that very well and we have evidence. So capacity building is not clear still.

MR WADRI: I am highly impressed by the very touching information given by my colleague from Gomba, hon. Najjemba. That was very good information. Chairman of the committee, in Latin they say “vox populi vox dei” meaning that when you hear the voice of the people then you have heard the voice of God. Therefore, when we are talking about these issues, we are talking on behalf of Ugandans who do not have easy access to this chamber to be able to register these issues of concern to you. The issue of capacity building as understood by the civil servant and as it is clearly reflected in the activity profile that you have given us is what we do not want to see.

Coupled with that, we are borrowing this money and sooner than later you will find expatriates brought into this country to be paid hefty sums of money in form of salaries and technical expertise fees. These are people who will come even driving the most expensive vehicles under this project at the expense of the ordinary Ugandan. 

Even the issue of vehicles whether for the ordinary people or not, these are the issues we do not want to see because Uganda is the only country in the whole of East Africa which is very luxurious in terms of running government offices. There are ministries in this country which even have more vehicles than the number of staff including office messengers. Office messengers can drive and other vehicles are still left in the parking yard not driven. For example, Ministry of Health has more vehicles than the number of staff it employs. You can go there and see for how many years some of the vehicles are parked not driven. We would not like to see this money we are soliciting to be used for such situations.

At the same time, when we are talking about building the capacity of local governments to manage, we should be more pragmatic. I would want a situation where the biggest chunk of this money goes into tangible use on the ground. Let the environmental officers, the committee development officers be accessible to the ordinary person. I wish that after three years Parliament interests itself to find out from the project officers how many acres of land have been covered with afforestation undertakings. That will be a sign that we borrowed this money and it is doing a good job. If we cannot do that and we continue having Uganda Forest Authority in Nakawa, with environment officers aggrandizing themselves with four-wheel drives and nothing is on the ground, I am afraid history will judge us very harshly! I support this request but please as a Parliament, we should ensure that this money benefits our country and it goes for the purpose for which it is being borrowed. I thank you.

4.32
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chair of the committee but we need to call a spade a spade. If this is capacity building, it is capacity building indeed. And the minister talked about building the capacity of local government to promote environment. How will local governments promote the environment when they have not trained the trainers who will train others to implement the project? This is capacity building but I would like to request the government to ensure that this money for capacity building is put to proper use. 

We do not mind whether government is training local government or what but the most important thing is how government is to retain the human resource that have been trained so that they do not go to look for greener pastures. I think we need retention measures to ensure that all the people who have been trained do not go abroad to seek for better salaries.

On page 5 of the report, the committee mentioned something about capacity building programme again in the oil and gas sub-region. I think in this case we need to target people like engineers, wild life officers, water officers, agronomists - soil and crop scientists who will promote, manage and protect the environment in oil and gas project. 

I would like to know the criteria that would be used to select the districts that will benefit from this capacity building programme. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but hon. Nampijja, there was a document that was given to you by the minister and when you look at its back, you see that this is the second programme. It also shows those districts that benefited from the first programme – 50 of them. It is a useful document for you. Okay, yes, hon. Ebong.

4.35
MR DAVID EBONG (Independent, Maruzi County, Apac): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the well done job. Uganda, just like other countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, has failed to attract the carbon credits because of failure to implement projects under clean development mechanisms, yet a lot of resources are really available to give additional revenue and resource inflow to countries that take proactive moves in supporting projects that focus on emission reduction and deal directly with issues of climate change. For this reason, I unanimously support this loan. 

However, I would like to say that we have to strengthen our effort by maximizing and scaling up private sector initiatives in projects that qualify for carbon reduction. Statistics from the African Development Bank, as of December 2008, show that US $90 million should have been disbursed to projects that would qualify in terms of carbon reduction. But records show that only US $21 million was disbursed; the international commitment is to raise over US $1 billion within the next three years. That means we are not doing enough. I am saying this because Sub-Saharan Africa is only accessing two percent of the CDM resources for Africa with South Africa taking 56 percent of the entire African share. That also means that countries that would strategically place themselves in promoting projects under clean development mechanism would really maximise a lot in terms of tackling climate change and dealing with poverty issues.

I would like to add that internationally, while people are now talking about concepts of waste to energy, we are only talking about waste compositing. It also means we are still a step behind technically to meeting what we could have maximized in terms of returns. I am saying this because under this project we should have proffered waste to energy – when you say waste compositing, at the end of it you still get fertilizers. And when you talk of waste to energy, at the end of it you also still get organic fertilisers. So why would a country like Uganda agree to lose on energy yet our poverty has essentially been attributed to energy inaccessibility, with only four percent rural access to electricity and nine percent urban access to electricity. 

All the sites that have been counted would have been waste to energy giving municipalities and NEMA a stronger financial resource inflow to enable them, especially NEMA, have a strong financial basis to deal with the overwhelming demand in terms of environmental compliance and mitigation. So, I would like to appeal to my honourable colleagues that we need to mainstream the component of energy, if Uganda is to show that we are thinking seriously and in a technical and economic way.

Lastly, I would like to say that I appreciate the aspect of mainstreaming tree planting in respect of this project. In Germany, it is said that people may not remember Bismarck for other things, but they remember him for one very important reason of promoting tree planting. When you have land, it appreciates at 2.5 percent annually, but if you plant trees in it, it appreciates at 4.5 percent annually. Anyway, there are broader issues in terms of environmental services that tree planting would bring to the wider community of Uganda.

I would like to say that people are looking for methodologies, internationally, on how tree planters should be rewarded. Sooner than later it will be a greater source of revenue to our farmers, the environmental benefits tree planting would bring notwithstanding. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us have first, hon. Hood Katuramu before getting to hon. Winfred Masiko. I am only trying to balance up. 

4.41
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Western): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for a job well done. In the same vein, I would like to thank the National Environment Management Authority for the illustrious work they are doing to preserve our environment.

I wish to point out that commercial tree planting in this country, if taken seriously, could become one of the leading sources of revenue for Uganda. For example, Swaziland, which is the size of the district of Masaka in Uganda, is one of the leading exporters of timber products to Europe, Middle East and Asia. The effort that government is putting in, if packaged well, can see Uganda become the leading exporter of the pulp to the outside world.

This loan is very vital to this country, if you consider the environmental degradation that we are seeing in this country where hillsides have been excavated, and vast lands of swamps have been encroached on. I believe that the objectives for borrowing this loan are indeed genuine and I urge my colleagues to support this loan.

The question of waste management in this country has also not been addressed comprehensively. I remember sometime back the Government of Uganda acquired some trucks from the Government of China - I think they are called Jiefang. These trucks were distributed to many town councils and municipal councils for waste collection but if you go to these town councils and municipal councils, these trucks are no longer working.

As such, I urge the minister that once they get to this item of trucks for collection of waste we should have durable trucks that will serve in our terrain. Otherwise, the Jiefang trucks as of now are no longer functional.

I agree with the committee that about 4,000 hectares of land, particularly our forest land, in the country are going to be replanted. However, I would suggest that we have a pilot project scheme for afforestation for areas in Uganda which are semi-arid or arid like Karamoja, so that through that project we could change the climate of this area which is very dry and which has made our people in that sub-region live a very difficult life. 

I would imagine that a portion of Karamoja would have benefited from this loan. It is common knowledge today that the leader of Libya, Col Muamar Gadaffi, has changed part of his country which is now a 100 percent forest and has turned it green. In this country where we have dry and semi arid areas, we could emulate such an example and make at least a pilot project, particularly if we have borrowed some of this money. 

I am supporting this loan, particularly because of the enforcement issues. NEMA cannot fully implement its activities unless it is self reliant in enforcing its own regulations. If we look around, for instance, in Kampala after Nsambya in that valley, we can see ramshackle houses being built in the swamp. I would imagine that if NEMA had its own enforcement agencies fully equipped and fully backed by law we would not see such poor houses coming up and people encroaching on those swamps.

I wish to end here and thank the committee and our National Environment Management Authority for the work they are doing throughout the country. I urge all Members of Parliament to support them in their efforts in this direction. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.49
MRS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the well written report, especially for the breakdown that they gave us in order to easily understand the kind of areas that have been worked on. I thank the ministry for the way they have structured their loan request. 

Indeed, as members have said, the level of capacity building in the human resource to a great extent especially in workshops and other meetings has been greatly minimised and I think this is a great step forward as we try to borrow money which we know we shall have to pay back in future.

One of the issues that have made me support this loan is the issue on the air quality management. We are all aware that we are presently facing global warming mainly because the air quality management component had been ignored by the industrialised countries. This has led to global warming and now we are facing a lot of problems with our climate because of lack of air quality management which would have been done strictly right from the beginning when the industrialisation was taking place. So for the ministry to see it fit to make sure that air quality management equipment and trainings are put in place; is very important.

Air quality management is an environmental issue, a public health issue and a human rights issue because human beings are supposed to be in safe environments according to our laws. So, it is important that this loan is in place more especially before the refining of oil and gas is in place because I am sure it will help to establish the status quo before these industries are established so that when the monitoring is taking place the change is measured against the environment that had been there before the industries were established. 

So I think this loan is timely and we should support it so that it helps us to make sure that whatever we do, we comply, right from the beginning, with the world standards. 

The issue of establishment of the Masindi station is a brilliant idea. It is important that this Albertine region is served with people, equipment and expertise to make sure that we start from the right footing as we start on the industrialisation and refinery systems.

The issue of carbon trade is very important at this point in time. As one of my colleagues has already pointed out, the clean development mechanism has not been greatly used especially in this country because of the requirements, the technicalities, the bureaucracy and the lots of money you need to have in order to establish a forest that can be easily graded to attract the clean development mechanism. So having money to put in place a forest reserve would certainly kick start the clean development mechanism and I am sure that since one of the components that clearly comes out is sustainable development, if properly managed, this can help us to develop sustainably.

It is important that the capacity of NEMA to monitor activities is strengthened. We need an institution that is able to go out and police especially in areas of land degradation. The deforestation level in this country is alarming especially in the areas of Nakasongola. This area has been a hub for the production of charcoal for the city of Kampala and other surrounding towns. It is high time we reversed this otherwise the rate at which trees are cut will certainly bring devastating effects especially concerning climate change.

The wetland issue is a very important component and NEMA has got to work hard to ensure that wetlands are protected. We have been featuring high especially regarding the number of sites we have in this country but the problem is that we have not benefited much economically. I expect that this time and with this kind of money, which NEMA will have, this will go a long way in establishing eco-tourism so that we can also get money from tourists and at the same time conserve our environment so that we are compliant with the requirements of a healthy and clean environment.

I would like to support this loan and urge my colleagues to do the same. I also request the implementing body to ensure that when this money comes, it is used for its proper purpose and is put to good use so that we can at least come out of these dangers that are likely to face us as a result of the climate change issues that have engulfed the globe. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.57
MS JANET OKORI-MOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the committee for this good report. Sometimes I feel so envious when we are passing some of these loans especially loans regarding projects under agriculture and environment simply because I know some areas of this country like the Karamoja sub-region are more demanding. If I were to be in charge, I think some of these projects would be piloted in Karamoja; projects to do with environment, food production, irrigation - (Interruption)

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The cries of hon. Janet Okori-Moe could be the cries of many of us although we are keeping quiet. I am a national youth MP but I come from Mpigi. Since Mpigi was divided, Wakiso has always outshined us in that every project that comes goes to Wakiso and Mpigi is neglected. If I could give you the statistics of afforestation and deforestation in Mpigi, you can cry. For Mpigi to be one of the districts out of the focus of this project is a shame especially when most of you who pass on Masaka road know the impact of deforestation.

Passing this loan based on the justification that it is going to encourage tree planting, we must also look at the pull and push factors! Why is there deforestation? What are the factors? If we cannot speed up the implementation of some government projects like rural electrification and Prosperity for All, even these trees that we are planting will be cut. That is the information I wanted to give you my colleague but we are also crying.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nalubega, you are the mother of Wakiso and a mother would like the baby to eat more so that it gets fat.

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you very much, colleague for giving way. I would like to give you some information. When hon. Katuramu was telling us about Libya, which is a desert, I imagine Libya is almost like Karamoja. Because Libya has been well managed, it is now the donor to Karamoja. I saw the First Lady receiving food from Libya, which is a desert! So can’t we really try such things in this country so that we stop crying for food when we have all the resources? Thank you.

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you very much, honourable colleagues for the information. The information they have given strengthens my point that some of these projects should be piloted in Karamoja because of the problems, which are there. Who doesn’t know that Karamoja is nearly a semi-desert? A project of environment like this should go there. For how long are we going to catch fish for Karamoja instead of teaching them to catch fish?

I think we have talked in this House, I don’t know maybe one day we may need prayers. Before I saw the list of districts that are going to benefit from this project, I was nearly opposing this loan but I felt slightly comfortable when I saw one of the Karamoja districts; Kotido although this is just a drop in the ocean. This is because nearly all the six districts of Karamoja are semi-desert but when you read in the 29 non-focused districts - they are non-focused so “to whom it may concern” - most of the Karamoja districts are there.

I also want to understand because on page 2 of the report, we read that in these non-focused districts, there have always been small interventions. What are these small interventions and how small are they? Are we convinced that these small interventions will lead us to success? We really need to get serious in this country because year in year out, we are crying about Karamoja. It has almost become a song but you never find that we fall in any first phase of any project in this country. We always wait for others to enjoy before we can also enjoy. We are either in the last phase of projects or in no phase at all; so you can see the state in which we are.

I would also like to comment on capacity building. I feel that we have built enough capacity. I feel disturbed when I read on page 3 that some of this money is going to be spent on capacity building of lead agencies. I thought when they are lead agencies they already have the capacity. Why are we still building capacity of agencies whose capacity is already built? This is wasting money. This is the money we should be giving to Karamoja for tree planting. So I think that this is really misplaced, unless we are saying we are building capacity to steal money but we also have that capacity. Last week we passed a law on anti-corruption –(Interruption)

MS LAGADA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I just wanted to inform the honourable member on the Floor and the House that indeed if we must build capacity, it must be capacity in Karamoja for environment keeping. Just a month ago, my Committee of Gender, Labour and Social Development was in Karamoja. We spent a night at the Catholic diocese. It was so cool, beautiful and full of trees and vegetables that you could not imagine that you were in Moroto. 

Therefore, when the honourable member cries for us to be serious about Karamoja, I want to confirm that it is possible to change Karamoja; it is possible to have Karamoja covered with trees. If a priest and sisters can do it, what stops Uganda from doing it? The honourable member needs a lot of capacity building in different forms in Karamoja as that is where I also saw women digging with one hand and the other hand on the knee. You need to teach these people how to dig and how to keep their environment. I thank you.

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for that good support. I think those who have visited Karamoja know what we are talking about. We are not telling stories but real problems and facts where people are starving year in year out and the wind has been blowing houses from 1950 and we are here in Uganda. I want to thank the committee for this report and I would like to appeal to this Parliament that Karamoja should become our priority if we are to move together. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, don’t you really think that we have sufficiently agreed? What remains are the details, which would require the supervision of the relevant committee and the ministry so I think we should put the question. 

I put the question to the motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise government to borrow additional finance of SDR 9,255,000 from International Development Association of the World Bank Group of Financing for the Second Environmental Management Capacity Building Project. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much! What we need now is for the relevant committee to follow up what is going on and report to us or to the Executive.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I am sorry I was late for the motion but listening to hon. Janet Okori-Moe and knowing the plight of Karamoja, wouldn’t this House consider amending this and putting in the four districts of Karamoja? Given the floods, the drought and famine in Karamoja, wouldn’t Parliament do something to add the remaining districts of Nakapiripirit, Moroto, Abim, Kotido?

THE SPEAKER: I think the ministry can make the adjustment as they have heard the case made by the Member for Abim.

MS ALASO: Thank you, it would help if we got that commitment on the Floor.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MS ERIYO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like members to know that the list of districts, which we gave here are the ones that benefited from the original loan. The new districts that are going to benefit are the ones that are within the Albert and Gribben for the Oil and Gas Capacity building. This was information for the ongoing project that has already been there.

However, I would like to assure members that we are taking the issues that they are raising here very seriously and that the issue of Karamoja is being discussed. We are developing projects specifically for Karamoja and the whole country. In the wake of climate change and degradation in this country and what is affecting agricultural production in this country –(Interruption)

MR ISHAA OTTO: Thank you, honourable minister. I am still referring to the 56 districts that were supported in the first phase of the project. I see here the 27 focused districts and the 29 non-focused districts. What do you mean by this?

MS ERIYO: Mr Speaker, originally 56 districts received support from this project but there were some districts that did not have any facilities at all. These were empowered with resource centres, computers - the rest of the districts had some kind of capacity so all the 56 districts received some support but it varied according to the kind of capacity that those districts required. Now we have additional districts that were created in addition to the 56 and from some of the 56 districts. They will also have some capacity building but the main focus is on the Albert and Gribben due to the oil and gas sector. I thank you.

MR TANNA: First of all let me star by thanking you for allowing me to raise this issue. Mr Speaker, this is a burning issue that I have; if we go to the end the Schedule that has been provided on the implementation plan and we go to the end of year I, as price contingencies, we have US $1.4 million; at the end of year II, you have price contingency as US $1.4 million; at the end of year III, you have price contingency of US $1.4 million. This is the first project that I have seen in my life time where 22 percent of a project is put as price contingency. US $4.2 million; over US $19.5 million totals to 22 percent of the total loan that we are planning to borrow. 

I strongly support the borrowing but I think there is something that fundamentally needs to be clarified by the Minister on the issue of price contingencies. And in year III we have markings.

THE SPEAKER: But are we still debating this matter? We have agreed that the relevant committee will follow up the implementation of this programme. However, I think your point has been noted. 

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to press on concerning Karamoja; I feel Karamoja is 40 years late. Teso and the surrounding districts are suffering the effects of the floods because of the waters that run from the run offs from Karamoja. So honestly if we are to take Karamoja as part of this country, it needs a lot of interventions. A bird in the hand is worth 200 in the bush. Let us get the opportunity of this loan at the moment and not wait for the interventions the minister is talking about. If those are coming, these too should galvanize Karamoja. I thank you.

MR BIRAHWA: Mr Speaker, I would like to agree that the Karamoja problem requires a comprehensive and a more strategic intervention. Having listened to the Member’s contribution, wouldn’t it be wise for Parliament to request from government how they intend to solve the very many Karamoja problems of water for production? I am saying this because NEMA and this loan cannot address the gigantic Karamoja problem. So the guidance I am seeking is: can’t we –(Ms Alaso rose_)– order on guidance? I am seeking guidance.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Chairperson of the National Economy Committee is in charge of the entire economy and he did scrutinize this Bill. From the way he talks, he appreciates the dire need that the Karamoja region has for interventions. Is it, therefore, in order for him to try to divert us from the little loan that we have now and make us imagine that there will be a bigger amount of money elsewhere instead of him bringing an amendment to his report to include Karamoja? Is the chairman in order?

THE SPEAKER: No, honestly I think the point has been made. Everybody is sympathetic about the plight of Karamoja. I think the minister has heard; even the Cabinet has heard. They should go and find a way of addressing matters that have been highlighted here. I think you have made a case, Mama and you have many supporters. 

MS AKELLO: In her response the minister was trying to insinuate that they are working on a separate programme for Karamoja. But as you have been following, Members honestly, I would propose that since even in her own brief statement to Parliament on page 1, she clearly says; “Capacity building, though continuous, has already been done at national, district and community levels.” Activities that are going to be carried out with this money are just going to sustain the capacity that has already been built. So I would really request that she kindly considers Karamoja and possibly districts that border Karamoja like Pader. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I think let us end this matter, hon. Minister, but I appeal to the government to go and think about Karamoja.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. If we take this question holistically, this is just one loan out of the entire total programme for the whole country, including Karamoja. If we single out Karamoja particularly in relation to this programme, we would have missed out a point. You have a whole ministry in charge of Karamoja; with holistic programmes covering Karamoja and consequently – while everybody knows the situation in Karamoja, it cannot be addressed by a single loan as is being debated. That is point No. 1.

Point No.2 is a technical clarification. You have a whole Minister in charge of Karamoja; of no less standing than the First Lady of this country. There are so many things she is currently doing, which you cannot judge on the basis of this single loan. 

Permit me-

THE SPEAKER: No, honestly let us not explain. As I have said, the case has been made and I have appealed to the Minster in charge of the Environment and the entire Executive to consider. I think that is where we can end. If you agree we would rather stop there.

PROF. KAMUNTU: But the second point, Sir. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I think the appeal has been made and special consideration will be given. Hon. Members, on the Order Paper we had another item, the  Contracts Bill but we had given them space sometime back but they did not appear and we have earmarked  tomorrow to discuss the Human Rights Commission reports. There are 80 or so which have not been discussed. I think we should discuss them or debate them during this session. Therefore, I am appealing to Members to go and read the reports so that you are ready to debate the Human Rights reports. It is not one report; they are many reports. If we start on contracts tomorrow, we shall not be able to finish and, therefore, we will not be able to hear something about the human rights.

And before we end the Session, the Chairperson of the Budget Committee has to let us know what we have sent to the President in respect of the coming budget. She will also be given space. Therefore, we will not be able within the remaining two days to complete the human rights and report of Budget Committee. We are not handling the Contract Bill today. We shall handle it some other time because the session will open maybe on 5th or 6th June; we shall deal with that Bill. With this we have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(House rose at 5.20 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 19 May 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)

