Friday, 13 May 2011

Parliament met at 10.45 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you and I congratulate Ugandans, including yourselves, for having successfully witnessed the swearing-in of the new President of the Republic of Uganda, His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. He was sworn in yesterday as a new President of a new Government, which started yesterday. (Applause)

There was another issue which was before us the other day concerning Dr Besigye. I understand Dr Besigye is back home in the country. We welcome him. (Applause) We now hope Ugandans will be ready to work for the peace and development of our country so that we maintain and enjoy the peace without destroying it and having to rebuild anew.

Hon. Members, as I told you, our term as the Eighth Parliament will end on 18 May 2011. I have signed the proclamation which will be gazetted to that effect. So, between now and the 18th May, we can transact business. 

We were meant to transact business today, which we could not complete last Wednesday, but I realise that there is a technical problem, which I cannot solve now - a problem that was raised last Wednesday. I have not received any communication to that effect. Because of that complication, I may not be able to proceed today with the business that we intended to proceed with until I get further information. Because of that, I intend to adjourn sine die. Sine die means that any time in the future, should it be found necessary, Parliament can always convene. 

Should we not be able to convene by the 18th May, I want to take this opportunity to thank you for the support you have given me. I thank you for the good working relationship that we had, for the good working relationship members of this side and the other side have forged. It has been a learning period for us as to how a multi-party system operates because it was not there for over 20 years. I believe we have learnt a lot and, therefore, next time we shall do better. 

I am happy that we shall be able to hand over this multi-party parliament to another parliament and also that parliament hands over to the next, so that we avoid what happened to the multi-party system in the past - it did not last three years and it broke down. With this one, we have succeeded and I congratulate you for enabling that to happen. We wish those who will be in the next parliament a successful tenure. As far as I am concerned, I am available to you for your service. Thank you very much. (Laughter and Applause) So, should you assign me any work, I will do it.

10.51
MS JESSICA ERIYO (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you very much for your communication. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you for steering this House from the beginning of the Eighth Parliament to date. It has been a long journey but you have done very well, according to my own assessment. We have not even had any need as a Parliament to change a Speaker since you have been Speaker of this House. We have not had any complaints from any colleagues that, “Hon. Ssekandi has not done well and so he should leave or quit the chair of Speaker”. In my opinion you have done very well and you really deserve thanks and a very big handclap from my colleagues. (Applause)

I say this because we have had a number of controversial issues but you have managed to bridge the gap between this side and the other side. We have sometimes come to the House with tempers that are raging very high and sometimes people would imagine that we would not even talk or speak with one another, but the way you conducted business made it possible for us to discuss issues openly and debate them and to get out of this House as friends. I do believe that we shall continue to work as friends and as colleagues even after the Eighth Parliament.

I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate you, Mr Speaker, for winning your seat to come back as an MP in the Ninth Parliament. Personally, I lost because of various reasons, so I may or may not have the opportunity to be in the Ninth Parliament. I want to take this opportunity to sincerely congratulate you and wish you very well in the Ninth Parliament. I do hope that those who will be in the Ninth Parliament will make very serious consideration as far as your steering of this House is concerned. I would like to appeal to those colleagues who will have the opportunity to be in the next Parliament to elect the next Speaker to give consideration to you.

I would like to request my colleagues who will be in the next Parliament, particularly those who will be in the Opposition, to work hand in hand with Government to ensure that issues that affect our country and the Uganda population are handled in a civilised manner. 

I would like to congratulate His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for having been sworn in as President of the Republic of Uganda, and I would like to express the feelings of my people in Adjumani. Yesterday, the whole of Adjumani was celebrating. The whole of Adjumani was coloured and they were very happy that we have Yoweri Kaguta Museveni sworn in as President of the Republic of Uganda. So, I would like the whole country to know that Adjumani District and all the people of Adjumani are very happy.

It is unfortunate that there are people who have chosen not to take advantage of their representation in this House. We have Members of Parliament who represent every constituency and a number of political parties in this country but instead of using that opportunity of their membership in this House to discuss issues and have problems resolved, they take to the street and cause the destruction of lives and property. This is very unfortunate and I hope that the next Parliament will not have these. 

10.56
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Mr Speaker, following your communication, I want to take this opportunity also to make a comment on one of the issues you raised in your communication. 

Yesterday I was at Entebbe Airport receiving my party president as he came back from Nairobi after treatment. Being a Member of Parliament representing his party, I felt it was very necessary for me to be there to welcome him back home. As we drove back from Entebbe, very many zealous Ugandans happily lined up along Entebbe Road to welcome their president. We started off very well but all of a sudden when we reached Kisubi, soldiers were ferried in on Lorries and they begun to beat up the unarmed civilians. They were shooting civilians and tear gas was being poured - at least we received blue tear gas. I had never seen blue tear gas and I even saw some pink tear gas as we drove along.

THE SPEAKER: You did not witness our planes in the air? The colour of the smoke was red.

MS AKELLO: I did not see that, Mr Speaker, but I had the opportunity to watch it on TV. When I came in this morning, hon. Okello-Okello was very happy as I heard him trying to thank the Deputy Attorney-General for beautifying Kololo with their colours in the air. Red was flying in the air and the First Lady was also dressed in red and black. Hon. Okello-Okello was very happy about that. I have just said that sometimes it is important.

What I saw on Entebbe Road yesterday was really very bad because a procession of peaceful Ugandans was very happy on the road waiting and waving to their party president, and then suddenly soldiers come from nowhere to disrupt. Police were guiding us very well until the military police came and started disorganising people. 

I was so upset when I saw Mr Opolot on TV saying that soldiers came and began to beat up people because civilians were shooting at soldiers. I was there and nobody was shooting at soldiers; people began to throw stones after military police came -(Interjection)- I am well informed because the whole of yesterday I was in Entebbe, so you can find another venue to provide that information.

My biggest disappointment is that at the end of the day, amidst tear gas and bullets, we could hear in different media centres different reports of how many people were killed. Some media houses were reporting nine dead, others five and others one. Can somebody provide us with the correct information? I heard a policeman on Radio One today saying that nobody died. At least I saw one person shot dead in my presence. Can somebody inform us on the exact number of people who died yesterday? I want the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and tell us today the reason why the military police yesterday removed about 500 motorcycles from their owners. Why remove these motorcycles? Where are you taking them? They are supposed to earn a living. We want these men to get their motorcycles back. 

Everybody who was mistreated on Entebbe Road must receive justice. Nobody intended to hurt anybody on the road but this situation came after soldiers interrupted us, which was very bad.

11.03
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to use this opportunity to extend my innermost appreciation to you and to all Members of Parliament who spared some time to come and be with us at the time when I lost my dear father. Last Wednesday when you learnt about the demise of my father, you came very early in the morning to give us a word of comfort and we appreciated that gesture very much. I want to appreciate your contribution of Shs 1 million towards the burial expenses of our father.

To other colleagues in the House, you were with us; I could not greet all those who attended but at least you came in big numbers. We are very grateful for that. Those who did not attend, at least you extended your condolences to us, for example, hon. Nankabirwa and Prof. Nsibambi. All your condolences reached us and we are very grateful. 

My second point is that I know that it has not been a bed of roses for all the years you have steered this Parliament. I know that at times we have really failed to agree on various issues under your leadership. Allow me, Mr Speaker, to extend credit where it is due. Allow me to extend my appreciation on behalf of the Muslim community, of which I am the Imam, to you for having steered the organisation of the Parliamentary Union of Islamic Conference. It was under your leadership that we introduced that idea to you and indeed we worked together to have that kind of conference organised in Uganda, which was attended by many from OIP countries. We are very grateful for that and I know that kind of arrangement exposed many of us to many Arab and Islamic countries. Under your leadership, we managed to traverse various countries requesting members to attend that conference, which was indeed attended in big numbers.

It was during your leadership that still we, the Muslim community, approached you for a parliamentary mosque and you allowed all arrangements to take place. That is why as we talk now, we have the Muslim Parliamentary Mosque here in this House under you leadership. On those areas, I am very grateful on behalf of the Muslim community.

To all hon. Members, who are going to join the Ninth Parliament, those who are going to be sworn in from Monday to Wednesday, my word of advice is that if we are to steer this Parliament to higher horizons, there is a need to work together as Ugandans; there is a need to co-operate as Ugandans. Our motto is, “For God and My Country”; we should know why Uganda has such a motto. I was very disappointed when I heard His Excellency, the President blasting religious leaders. Religious leaders are here to guide and advise us whenever we are going astray. At yesterday’s function, I even thought that the religious leaders were not going to carry out their duty by swearing in the President because he said, “No, you should do your work.” 

It is my humble appeal to His Excellency and all leaders that the moment we do not listen to the advice from the religious leaders, then the country is going to go astray. I request that as leaders, if our religious leaders tell us, “Please, what you are doing is wrong”, let us humble ourselves and listen because our motto is very clear, “For God and My Country.” If  the motto is changed to “For myself and my country”, that is when the religious leaders cannot come in but for as long as we are going to swear with a Bible or Koran, there is no way you can say that religious leaders cannot enter into politics or advise us because we know what we are doing –(Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: I thank you very much, hon. Sebaggala, for giving way. Actually, the role that the religious leaders performed yesterday was to lead us in prayers and there was no other role played. So when you say that you wondered whether they were going to perform any other role at Kololo, then you miss the point. They called upon the religious leaders, not anybody else, to lead us and to pray for the function which is exactly what they did and we thank them for that.

MR SEBAGGALA: What I am trying to put across is that we value religious leaders; they are the ones that pray for our country and indeed, the Koran and the Bible we use to swear in are a clear testimony that we cannot move away from their words of wisdom as we are running this country. If they pray for us and then when they come in to advise that, “The route you are taking is going to lead this country into trouble ...” - I request His Excellency, the President and every leader that we do listen to our religious leaders and not blast them. 

The President was calling for an apology, which was wrong. The moment religious leaders see anything that is going to take our country into trouble, then they are duty bound to come and put us straight.

Finally, allow me to extend my appreciation to all Members of Parliament for their co-operation, for having worked together. Those who were with us or with me in the Seventh and again in the Eighth Parliament, it is not really very easy to be part of the team from Seventh to Eighth and then to the Ninth Parliament. I congratulate all those who have really persevered all those years. I thank you very much.

11.12
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): I thank you, Mr Speaker. We are coming to the end of the Eighth Parliament and I do understand that you hosted the Eighth Parliament on Tuesday. However, you also sent quite a number of us to Arusha. I hope you know that ceremonies are always supposed to mark the end or beginning of anything. I hope that you will take the opportunity and use the Speaker’s budget to host us who have not been there –(Laughter)– there are quite a number of us - before this term ends.

I want to take this opportunity to thank you for offering leadership for the last five years. I also want to thank the Clerk and the entire staff of Parliament for the support they gave us because it is extremely difficult for Parliament to perform without the support staff. 

I want to take this opportunity to thank all the hon. Members of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises for the co-operation they exhibited without really having any party leaning. We executed our duties as a committee of Parliament and I want to thank them for standing up to that because it enabled us to move forward.

I want to thank the Leader of Government Business in absentia, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister of this country, because for the last five years he has actually been consulting on both sides. Whenever there were issues, he would call people from the other side; for example, when there were issues affecting Northern Uganda, he would consult us, Members of Parliament from that region, before making any statement on the Floor of Parliament. We found that working relationship very good. I hope this will continue.

I also want to take this opportunity to thank the hon. Minister of State for Northern Uganda for having worked tirelessly during the peace process. You will recall that the peace process started when this Parliament was just starting its life. This minister has been able to significantly contribute to this peace process, which saw our people return to their villages from the protected camps. Hon. Wakikona, we thank you for this humble contribution. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, allow me to also thank the Deputy Attorney-General for his outstanding performance while putting issues across on the Floor of this Parliament. I also would like to thank him for his ease - we could approach him from anywhere, even on phone, and he would offer positive guidance. Thank you, hon. Freddie Ruhindi, the MP for Nakawa, for that positive contribution. 

I am saying all this because to be an Attorney-General is not an easy thing. Sometimes you give legal guidance that other people may not be able to appreciate. I would like to state that your role in this House is appreciated because of your being objective in focusing on issues. Many of us admire you and wish you all the best in this country. There are many ministers who positively contributed; I just decided to mention the three outstanding ones according to my assessment.

Let me take this opportunity to talk about those ministers who did not perform so well. Some of them were very arrogant whenever we met them. Outstanding of these is the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness. (Laughter) I am saying this because as Members of Parliament when there are issues affecting our people, we reach out to the ministers but some of them have been extremely arrogant such as the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness. We got very difficult times in overcoming disasters whenever disasters hit. 

I really want to urge that humanity should prevail in the hearts of our ministers so that they are able to appreciate the background of a Member of Parliament who may be coming to them. When there is pressure, a Member of Parliament will come to the Floor of Parliament with all the emotions, but it is the responsibility of you, the ministers, to sober up and listen as long as the issues being raised are of great concern.

I would like to appreciate those ministers who worked with the parliamentary committees very well. Whenever we needed anything to be clarified on, they were always available. From my committee, the most outstanding one was hon. Aston Kajara, the Minister of State for Investment. He was always available whenever my committee sought his support or information. I wish that spirit continues with those who will occupy the Front Bench in the next Government. They should know that they are not supreme by virtue of being ministers. They become supreme when they co-operate and work with Parliament because at the end of the day that is the only way they can deliver services to the people.

I want to thank this Parliament entirely for its contribution to the realisation of peace in Northern Uganda. I am saying this because it was during this Parliament that peace returned to that part of Uganda with our people getting back to their homes. 

Mr Speaker, thank you so much for paying attention to our concerns. I know that from time to time, you would call us Members of Parliament to consult about the situation in Northern Uganda. Together, we were able to deliver peace to Northern Uganda. I would not like to speak like other people who keep boasting that they delivered peace to Northern Uganda individually; no, it was a collective effort by Parliament, the Executive, the civil society and the entire population in this country. It is because of these efforts that our people in Northern Uganda have been able to live like other people in the rest of the country.

Let me conclude by talking about the events that have been going on in the last few weeks, including what took place yesterday. There are so many issues that were raised. The Government has been claiming that the Opposition has a different agenda. Granted, but if you are in the Opposition, your agenda is to definitely take power through the proper channel so, you must conduct yourself - the Executive must be on the side of the people. That is when it will make it impossible for the Opposition to take power. 

You should not expect campaigns to take power to just be limited to the campaign period. No, if you make mistakes and blunder, we will go and expose you to the public and capitalise on it by telling the people that, “This Government has failed to manage”. That said and done, your response should not be in the form of unleashing the police and military on people who are peaceful. That is very unfortunate! 

What has happened is really very sad. Many people have been killed. You have made a statement as the Executive - the Minister of Internal Affairs who was extremely arrogant and the Minister for Information and National Guidance, went on to address the nation by saying that the demonstrations would not bring rain. I thought we are civilised enough to know that even in countries like Egypt where there is no rain, Government contributes to build canals to draw water from the River Nile. Assuming it fails to rain, are we going to leave our people to die because Government cannot cause rain to fall? This is a very arrogant attitude.

I want to tell everybody that this country belongs to all of us. Those who are mature – some of us have just read some of these things from history - know that today you can be there but tomorrow you can be at some other place. Sometime back, hon. Awori was here and now he is on the Front Bench of Government and next week, you never know -(Laughter)- so, people move from position to position, but once your actions hurt some individuals in the country, you are causing yourself a very big problem.

I would like to appeal to Government on the way they handle the Opposition. The Opposition are not enemies; and we are not armed people who go out to the streets to do wrong things. I want to thank the other side because when some of these issues were brought here, you were able to harmoniously respond to them. 

You cannot expect I, Reagan Okumu, MP for Aswa County and a Member of the Forum for Democratic Change, just to sit and smile when you bundle up my party president onto a pick-up! I will never forgive you because you did not only humiliate my party president but you also embarrassed and humiliated me and our supporters. By the way, you should know we have a significant number of supporters in this country. Even Laurent Gbagbo, the former President of Ivory Coast was handled in a different way: he was captured, arrested and taken to a hotel, even dressed in a shirt in a decent place despite what he had done. That is a big contrast to how you have been handling our party president. 

Honourable colleagues, this thing is not exclusive to Europe because even other African countries have a way of respecting others. Otherwise, Gbagbo would have been paraded with his hands tied behind, bare chest, bare footed and made to walk around. So, you should know that when you handle people with dignity, you earn it back. When you handle people badly, the way you have handled Dr Kiiza Besigye, you create and you extend the hatred beyond Dr Kiiza Besigye. I personally will never forgive those who presided over the arrest of Dr Besigye, those who gave the orders for Dr Besigye to be arrested and those who did nothing to reprimand those who mishandled Dr Besigye. 

It will be extremely difficult for me to forgive because they never humiliated Dr Besigye alone; they humiliated our party, they humiliated me and they humiliated the people who have elected me and they have embarrassed this country. At least if they had taken action in arresting some of those guys, the way many people were arrested allegedly because they were demonstrating, we would reconsider.

Uganda has entered a very difficult stage. You should know that in 1980, UPM got only one seat in this House and they claimed elections were rigged; 27 people went to the bush to fight and they caused this country a lot of bloodshed. Today as we speak, however few we are - you see us on this side - do not take us for granted, my dear colleagues. I always see the arrogance in the faces [MR AWORI: “No threats.”] Even hon. Awori is really responding to me on this matter! (Laughter) I really do appreciate some of the colleagues -

THE SPEAKER: But honourable, you should limit.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to seek clarification. You told us that you have not got any writing from His Excellency about appointing ministers. Is hon. Awori rightfully here, because he is a complete stranger? The clarification I want to seek is: is he in the right place?

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I was actually concluding by saying that I do appreciate the individuals on the Front Bench on the side of Government that when these things happened, some of us were able to reach them individually and their response was positive. However, I also want to condemn those ones who acted in a strange manner - maybe they were searching for jobs - like the Minister for Internal Affairs. 

Really, the manner in which you act and respond as a minister should be accommodative. You should open your ears and listen to other people. I want to thank some of you; we have reached out, we have talked and you were able to engage us through good understanding while I condemn some of you who would not even afford to listen or entertain anything and you closed your ears and eyes just to assume that whatever was done against Dr Besigye was the right thing. 

I think for those of you who were in the bush, you fought together with Dr Besigye and you know his contribution. He made a significant contribution but it is embarrassing today that the man who helped you - you fought together for five years in the bush - today you are turning around to bundle him up in a manner that is unbefitting. He treated some of your leaders; some of them are in Parliament and they would not be in the Parliament here. Some of them are in the military and they would be amputated but really -

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Reagan Okumu!

MR OKUMU: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I wish those who were re-elected a good time in the Ninth Parliament and co-operation for the sake of our country. For those who lost, losing is not the end of it; you will still continue to do positive things for this country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now I am not going to allow anyone to speak for more than seven minutes. 

11.32
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (NRM, Ibanda County South, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First and foremost, I want to thank God who has brought us this far from the Seventh Parliament with you to the Eighth Parliament. The Eighth Parliament has not been easy and I want to thank you immensely for the good job you have done in steering the House, especially the first multi-party House.

I want to also extend my sincere thanks to His Excellency, the President, for the good leadership he has given this country. Yes, we are all human beings and we cannot be 100 percent perfect. I do not think that even Jesus himself was 100 percent perfect because he had an element of a human being. 

I want to thank the Cabinet where I served and I am still serving. This may be my last speech in this Parliament as a Cabinet member - you never know, maybe I will be brought back but that I do not know because that is the prerogative of only one person. I want to thank my colleagues with whom I served in the Cabinet. Really, we have done a good job for this country. I thank you very much.

I am at a loss. You know, I was expecting my honourable colleague, hon. Okumu, to be seated with me in Heaven because the Bible says that only those who forgive will go to Heaven but by standing here and declaring that he will never forgive anybody, I am afraid that I will be seated alone as he will not be in Heaven. I call upon him to repent and have the heart of forgiveness even in extreme times. Please, have that heart of forgiveness! Even you have got your negative side and that negative side notwithstanding, you have got the positive side, therefore, saying that, “I will never forgive” - I appeal to you that you should have that heart of forgiveness. Those who hate do not live long; they usually die quickly or they perish.

I want to thank the hon. Members of the Eighth Parliament for the way we conducted ourselves. Yes, we were learning on the job because this was the first multi-party parliament. Some of us had never witnessed a debate of multi-party parliaments in our lives - this was the first one. If there are shortcomings, let us try next time to improve on that but I want to thank the honourable members for how we conducted ourselves. Of course, tempers were high but under your guidance, Mr Speaker, we were cooled down.

I want to thank the entire staff of this Parliament. Sometimes we deceive ourselves that we are great here but without the support staff of this Parliament, I think this Parliament cannot move an inch. (Applause) I thank them immensely for supporting this Parliament especially the Eighth Parliament.

Finally, I want to comment on some issues which have been alluded to by my colleagues. Yesterday, I took time off to watch TV and follow these events. We have our right to demonstrate and actually I think our Constitution is fantastic. I also watched the procession of Dr Kiiza Besigye on WBS TV from Entebbe and it was peaceful. However, the problem came in when they failed to constrain their supporters and sometimes bringing in those who had different intentions, who came not to demonstrate but to cause havoc. 

The people who brought problems there were the motorcycle riders. They were crisscrossing the road in front of the convoys. I looked at it not believing that these were Ugandans. For the rest, the whole procession was peaceful. I watched the video clips on Al Jazeera. The fracas started when they started stoning the motorcade –(Interjections)– yes, I watched it and it is still running even today. I was in Kololo up to 2.00 O’clock so I watched everything –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, when hon. Okumu was speaking I was listening and when hon. Alaso was speaking I was listening, so let them also listen to me. You can correct me later if you think I am not right. The videos are still running on our TV stations and on Al Jazeera. 

Finally, I want to tell Ugandans, my brothers and sisters, that this country called Uganda is a basket for all of us. We should not treat ourselves like grasshoppers. Grasshoppers have a common enemy who is supposed to fry them in the evening and eat them, but while in the basket they eat each other without realising that they have a common destiny. We have one destiny as a country and, therefore, whatever we do and say, let us first look ahead and say, “This is our country: how do we want it to be, how do we want to leave Uganda for our children and our grand-children?” That should be paramount. Therefore, whether we are in the Opposition or the Government side, we must conduct ourselves as people belonging to the same country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.39
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me also add my voice to my colleagues’ as we end the Eighth Parliament; I wish to also register my sincere appreciation to you, Rt Hon. Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, for steering this House to high levels. The words “thank you” are not enough for you; you deserve more. Thank you for the job well done and may God continue to bless you! 

For the ministers, thank you so much because you have been able to generate a lot of business for this House. In spite of other shortcomings, you have done a very commendable job and the Parliament of Uganda has gained a name. Hon. Ministers, continue in that spirit of working together and supporting each other for the good of our nation. 

I recall when I came here in 1996 and I was seated where hon. Christine Abia is seated right now, the House was being presided over by the Chief Justice and he told us, “Members of Parliament, take a leaf from America; an attack on one American means an attack on all Americans”. Let us be together, Members.

For colleagues, let us open a fresh page for each other. Some of us will not be here with you, but wherever we shall be we shall be lifting you in prayer so that you do good business for the nation. In this, I want to appeal to my colleagues who are bitter: the Bible says that you should not allow the Sun to go down when you are still bitter with another person. Please, forgive. In all, let us treat other people the way we want to be treated because we have a few days to live on this Earth. So, for the few days we have, let us share whatever we have because sharing is caring.

I want to give some advice to the Opposition. I must thank you for restraining yourselves from doing what you would have done, because a number of times we have passed some legislation when you are unhappy but in all, we need each other. I think everyday we learn something new. So, do not harbour any ill-feelings but let us keep together. As hon. Reagan Okumu said, this country is for us all. I reiterate, even to the Speaker that what we have done is a good achievement for this country and we shall continue to be there to do this work for the nation. 

I must generally thank all of you and the support staff. I have been here for 15 years and I think I should also take this chance to thank the people of Bukanga for having elected me for 15 years –(Member timed out_)

11.43
PROF. TARSIS KABWEGYERE (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish I knew in advance that I would say something about you; I would have been better prepared. There is enough illustration to show what kind of leader you are. You did not get to the position you are as Speaker by accident. In the background, there is a history and you have demonstrated that you are really a leader. 

What do leaders do? Among many other things, leaders are problem solvers and I think in this House, you have shown that when faced with a situation requiring your acumen, you have been there to guide both sides to a solution. 

If there is anything that I want to associate with you, and for you to bequeath to all of us Ugandans, it is that you do your best. However, your best can also improve because the best is not the end; excellent can be more excellent. I have seen you improve and I have seen you look behind, look on the sides and do better. That is something commendable. I hope that the next House sees it fit that you still chair and if that does not happen, I hope you get a higher post than the one you have. I believe you deserve to be recognised. 

I would like scholars, students of Ugandan politics and of Uganda Parliament, probably to consider studying the contribution of Edward Ssekandi in the development of our democracy.

Have we learnt enough? Do we know? I listened to hon. Reagan Okumu. He is effectively speaking as a statesman, advising. I believe that is good because if you know better, you should make other people learn better; you should be a teacher. But have we, in the period of being a multi-party Parliament –(Member timed out_) 

THE SPEAKER: Well, I give him two more minutes. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you. The model of Parliament where you have Opposition has been adopted more or less from the British Parliament. The Opposition is called the Royal Opposition. I do not think in the history of Britain you would have the Leader of the Opposition behaving the way our Leader of the Opposition is behaving. I think the five years we have had as a multi-party Parliament is a start. However, I would like to end since the time is so short -(Ms Alaso rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Alaso, I will give you time to say what you want to say.   

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for your understanding. He said if it were in the British Parliament or in the UK, we wouldn’t have the Leader of the Opposition behaving the way our Leader of the Opposition has done here in Uganda. All I want from him is not to leave it vague because then, I would know how badly or how well the Leader of the Opposition in Uganda has behaved. We need an explanation.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you still have the Floor.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: That is why I said I wish we had enough time to make our minds clear. I actually meant the leader of FDC not the Leader of the Opposition. Hon. Latigo has been excellent and I will miss the sarcasm and the acidity of hon. Nandala-Mafabi, hon. Alaso –(Laughter)- and I want to conclude with hon. Reagan Okumu. Reagan, in my language, we say it is better to feed somebody with a running stomach than to feed the ungrateful. If I tell hon. Reagan the truth and he interprets it to be arrogance, I have no apologies. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nambooze I know was here on time, so it is fair to start with her.

11.49
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank your Office for a job well done. I was the last person to join this Eighth Parliament. I came here in June 2010 not because the people of Mukono had not voted for me but because our victory had been snatched from us. It took us four years to go through the courts of law and through the by-election to have a representative. I came here when the excitement of the pending elections had taken over. It was by the grace of the Lord that I was able to find some Members still attending this House. 

All in all, we can even say that Mukono North was almost unrepresented in the Eighth Parliament because when you go to court, both the petitioner and the respondent are engaged in the court process. There is no time for a constituency to be represented. It is my appeal that we urge courts to handle election petitions in a special way. Justice delayed is justice denied. The people of Mukono North were denied justice. 

I understand we have about 104 election petitions pending before the courts. I believe that in a civilised society when you are not satisfied with the results of an election, the best place to go to is the courts of law not the bush. But people have been denied justice in the courts of law.  At one time, I even became something to joke about. The –(Member timed out_) 

THE SPEAKER: She is the youngest Member of Parliament; she has just been here for less than 12 months. I give her two more minutes.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to request the Attorney-General to urge the courts of law to handle election petitions in a special way. The 104 pending election petitions should be given a hearing as soon as possible.

Finally, I want to talk about one young man in my constituency who died last Wednesday. He was only 16 years old. Andrew Mayanja, a student of Seeta High School died of heart-related problems. He was due to be flown to India for the operation but the airline declined to take him because they thought he could not stand the flight. 

Towards the end of last year, one kind person donated Shs 20 million to me. I found Shs 14 million on my account. I, together with a number of colleagues, 11 in total, returned that money with a request that it be given to Mulago Heart Institute so that they can use it to buy the heart machine they always talk about. It is painful to see our people dying because they cannot be taken outside Uganda. 

And at the end of the day, in Uganda when you go out to protest, you are killed. But even when you stay at home and obey all the Government regulations and rules, you end up dying like this young man Andrew Mayanja. So, when you care, you die; when you do not care, you die. Ugandans have found themselves in a tricky situation -(Member timed out_)

11.56
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank you for having led the House from the beginning to now and my colleagues with whom we have been together, some in the Seventh Parliament, and some in the Eighth Parliament and now we are going to the Ninth Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, as you are aware, change is very good. It is like taking a holiday. Having gone through all this process, I am now calling on my colleagues that Uganda belongs to all of us and we need to build it together; that the leadership of Parliament that we have now in the Eighth Parliament was there in the Seventh Parliament. It is time that there is some little change so that we can see new blood in this House. If you are saying that Uganda belongs to all of us, then we should try others to see how we can move the country. 

In the near future, we are going to elect one Member to become a Speaker. We are not going to vote a party. That is why I am telling all of you that Nandala is the best candidate for the Speaker of the next Parliament. (Laughter) You will see a change. You will see independence of Parliament. I am going to be your employee and I will deliver to the end. I can assure you, bank on me, trust me and you will get what you like. 

As I am saying, this House belongs to all of us. Some Members can say, “You never,” because we could have stepped on one another’s toes. Where I have stepped on your toes, I request you to forgive me and to vote for me. 

As you are aware, Parliament is where people should run - 

THE SPEAKER: You see; they are going to tell you that you do not use Government facilities to come here. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We have parliamentary facilities which will be availed to all Members and not Government facilities. You cannot blame somebody for being lazy when you have not given him a hoe to dig and nobody should say - you said a few minutes ago, hon. Byabagambi, that Uganda is for all of us and we are in a basket. If we are all in the basket, we need to choose one person from the basket and not step on him. And that is why I am saying you cannot say I am lazy if you have not given me a hoe to dig.  

I am calling on you, ladies -(Laughter)- gentlemen and ladies who were planning for the other lady, speakership belongs to the Speaker and the Deputy. They worked together and the benefits and losses were by both -(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: I think to be fair, it will be hon. Okupa first then hon. Okello-Okello. They were the first people in the House. And then I will go to the other side.

11.59
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank you, the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, for having chaired the Eighth Parliament. I thank you so much. 

I want to start by making corrections to what hon. Byabagambi has stated regarding yesterday’s events. Yesterday, I drove from Entebbe with Col (Rtd) Kiiza Besigye. I was with hon. Mao following his car and then the chief of the VIP protection, Mr Laban Muhabwe, was the third car in our line. But from nowhere within Kisubi, military people stormed us. They even beat some people up who were on Mr Muhabwe’s car, the Commissioner of Police. So, it is not as hon. Byabagambi was saying that it was the people who started throwing stones. You can cross check. This is the head of VIP and he was behind my car. It was from nowhere that military police came and messed up the procession. For yesterday, Police were exemplary. Mr Muhabwe and Mr Rwego handled things respectfully. It is the military police that messed up the whole thing and provoked the throwing of stones. 

If it was premeditated, as Mr Opolot was stating on radio - he is not the spokesperson of Government I know - why didn’t they stone President Museveni’s car and yet he was the first to cross? Why would we go to stone His Excellency, Goodluck Jonathan? 

Some of you may have not even had a word with him but he hosted me last year. I know him personally. I would be the last person to organise people to stone his car. So, it was the military police and Police got annoyed. Mr Rwego even left the command to Mr Muhabwe alone but Mr Muhabwe fought it and brought calm to the situation. By the time we reached Bwebajja, that is when the convoy of His Excellency, the President of Nigeria, arrived and these people again had started beating up people. It was a provocation but we do not support that act of stoning guests in this country. I condemn it but not the way some people are putting it.

Thirdly, I want this Parliament to recognise hon. Alintuma. Hon. Alintuma, through the ICT project, was the first person to bring laptops to each and every Member. I think he made an opening for us. It was a good initiative and you have seen how the thing has spread. Hon. Alintuma, we do not know whether you will be there or not but we pray that the Almighty keeps you and brings you in front of the House -(Member timed out_)

12.03
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since this is my last opportunity on the Floor of the Eighth Parliament, I beg you give me a few more minutes.

THE SPEAKER: For hon. Okello-Okello, since this is his last time here, I give you seven minutes. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am leaving not because I lost an election but because for the second time in ten years, I was militarily prevented from joining the next parliament. I want this on record. That is the reason for my leaving.

I have very many people to thank. I want to start with you, Mr Speaker and your Deputy. The ease with which we could enter your Office and that of your Deputy was exemplary. (Applause) No Member of Parliament needed an appointment. At least, for me I could walk in any time and see any of you. We are most grateful! 

I would like to thank the staff of Parliament. They really help us. They served well and they were dedicated. They served us smiling, and I think this is very good.

I addressed the press many times in this Parliament. The members of the press accredited to Parliament behave very well. And really we should pay tribute to them. They were exemplary. You would call them and they come on time, ready to ask very intelligent questions. I am very grateful to them. 

Mr Speaker, I will not be here on May 19 and maybe this is my last day here because one thing I would not have liked to see is a contest between you and your Deputy. I think it would be a nasty and unfair thing to happen in the world because the two of you served together very well. Now, for you to turn against each other would be a nasty thing. I pray that if there is anything to be done to avoid that situation, it should be done before it is too late.

I would like to thank my colleagues, the Members of Parliament, in general terms, we behaved very well but there is what we call national interest which at times we failed to differentiate from partisan interest. There were times we should have gone for national interest but instead we went for our party interest or individual interest. 

I can give two examples: the way Parliament handled the CHOGM report was not in the interest of Uganda. The way we handled the Temangalo issue was not in the interest of the nation. So, I pray that the next Parliament will be in position to identify the national interest and separate it from partisan or individual interest.

Uganda is safer when we are all together. I am saying this because after the last elections, the people in the North – at least where I come from – were crying saying, “Is there was a way we could secede from Uganda?” This matter is gaining popularity particularly among the youth because of the way we are being treated. If you impose a leader on the people - someone who was not elected is declared a winner whereas the one who won is said to have lost - this does not augur well for togetherness in this country. I would like to repeat what the Leader of Opposition said here one day to the effect that we are not dying to be Ugandans. We think that some of us would be better off being separate from Uganda because there are leaders in this country who would like to control our resources and deny our people leadership that could scare them off from controlling our resources. I think that time should not come.

I would like to end with the manner of handling demonstrations. I was in Arusha when I checked on the Internet and saw my party president and others looking red. When I called here, I was told what took place and I was very disappointed. There are now various substances being used on the Opposition, particularly party leaders. We demand that scientific investigations be carried out to find out what chemicals are in those sprays. If some of these people later on fall sick and die, who will be to blame? 

It is very unfortunate that our country has reached this stage. As for what happened yesterday, I think it is regrettable that a foreign head of state’s car was stoned -(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: A bonus of only one minute for you to wind up.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Even if the car was stoned, the person who did it, I am sure, did not know that Goodluck Jonathan was in that car. While that incident is regrettable, I think it was very good that those other heads of state came here yesterday to be witnesses to the situation in Uganda. They will now go back and tell the true story about Uganda. We gave money here for 33 heads of state but only nine came; where were the rest? I believe they saw the risk and decided not to make the trip. Those who took the risk volunteered to face anything that could happen. I think it was good that they were treated that way. (Laughter)

12.12
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This was my first time in Parliament and I must thank you and your Deputy for the work well done. I think I should mention this because I have been impressed by the way you have been handling this House. There were times I thought you were boxed into a corner but somehow through your experience and age, I suppose, you managed to cool down this House. There were times I saw things getting out of control but by the time we came to the fifth year, I had confidence in you that you could handle the situation. At one time, I nearly came to your Office to find out why you do not choose me to speak but somebody told me, “When this man sits on that chair, he reads the minds of everybody and when he thinks what you are going to say is going to be controversial, he avoids you.” (Laughter)

Let me also take this opportunity to thank the Leader of Opposition. Hon. Ogenga-Latigo has done a great job! I hope the next Leader of Opposition will be as mature and good as hon. Ogenga-Latigo. I thank all of you, hon. Members of Parliament, for the time I have been here you have assisted me a lot and shown me what to do. I have enjoyed my stay with all of you. 

I appeal to you that we should stop going to our friends’ constituencies and telling lies there. I have had an experience of my colleagues coming to tell lies about me to my constituents. Fortunately, the voters saw it and had a very negative attitude towards those MPs. You are free to come to say the truth but to tell lies is wrong.

Let me also thank you for supporting me when I was a committee chairperson. I handled controversial Bills like the Land (Amendment) Bill, which was a dog-eat-dog situation but you stood by me and it went through. I also thank you for all the other Bills I handled. 

I thank the parliamentary staff because without them the work we do in committees would have been very difficult. Some of us are arrogant but these staff members can still handle us. To those of you who have come back to the Ninth Parliament, I congratulate you but those who did not go through; this is not the end of the world. We are less than 400 people here and we are not the richest people in Uganda. There are better people out there. So, whether you have lost or not, take it easy. This is not the end of the world.

To my Chief Whip, I thank you for the work you have done. It is a very difficult job. 

Prime Minister, Apolo Nsibambi, I have been with hon. Nsibambi for a long time. Some of you always refer to him as, “My professor” but during my days in the university, he was my warden in the hall -(Member timed out_)

12.16
MS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you. Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I am saying farewell to this Parliament and I want to thank you so much for the time I have been with you. 

Mr Speaker, I want to tell you that I really enjoyed being a member of the CPA under your leadership. It exposed me to the world and to so many other things that I could not have known had I not been a member of the CPA. 

I want to thank my Chief Whip and the NRM caucus that enabled me become the chair of the committee on Gender. The work of women, youth and children involves issues that are very dear to my heart and as chair of that committee I had opportunity to really do something for them.

The Bills that we passed, together with the women Members of Parliament and the other Members under the leadership of UWOPA - the FGM Bill, Domestic Violence Bill and the Trafficking in Persons Bill, I believe is a trademark of the Eighth Parliament. 

However, I want to say I also leave very disappointed; disappointed that on Wednesday, we failed to debate the Marriage and Divorce Bill in this House and yet a lot of work had gone into it: 10 regional consultations, so many consultations by the Law Reform Commission, consultations of religious leaders, political leaders, women leaders, youth leaders, opinion leaders – all that work and a lot of resources were put into it. I really got the shock of my life when I heard the owner of the Bill, the Attorney-General, stand up in this House and say the people pro and the people against have not agreed. But this was his Bill; it is a Government Bill. Why wait when the committee report is ready and when we say let it be debated, you say people are not ready? What a contradiction!

Mr Speaker, are you feeling that Government was paying lip service to those of us who want that law in place? How can something be consulted on from 1965 to 2011? (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Since she is speaking for the last time, and I know that fact, I give her two more minutes. 

MS LAGADA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like us this morning - in fact I want you to help us. I do not know whether there is any law or rule of this Parliament, which says that when a Parliament lapses, everything it was doing lapses. If there isn’t such a rule, is there a way we can preserve all that work, which has been done so that the next Parliament can take off from where we stopped? They can use that to make that law. And I am appealing to the next Parliament to prioritise that law and let it come into being. Nobody will believe Government if that law does not come into place because it has been promised again and again. 

Lastly, my community in Northern Uganda has undergone war. I want to say on this Floor that Government is trying its best – there are a lot of resources being put there. But if we, Members of Parliament, do not play our oversight role properly and ensure that the resources which are going there are used properly, we shall continue being backward.

I am not coming in the Ninth Parliament because I played my oversight role properly. I was following up on the resources going to my constituency and as a result, the people who were mismanaging those resources did everything possible to make sure I do not come back. They were saying, “If that woman goes back, we shall not be able to eat”. I therefore pray that the people who have come in my place will stand strong and proud, like I did, and do the work of a Member of Parliament properly. 

Incidentally, my district, Oyam, was number one in the recently released report of the Auditor-General - number one out of 100 districts that failed to account for nearly Shs 800 million. Now you can see where my problem was. (Member timed out_)

12.22
LT COL (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (NRM, Isingiro County North, Isingiro): Thank you. Mr Speaker, I beg for more time because hon. Rukutana gave me his time. (Laughter) Thank you. I join the rest of my colleagues to thank you for a job well done and to appreciate your leadership in the Eighth Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, you have been patient. When things become very difficult, you stand over them until we find a solution. You have been considerate. You belong to the ruling NRM but you give more time to the Opposition sometimes to our disadvantage. 

You have been very generous. The Parliamentary Commission has worked perfectly during your tenure of office. You have been professional. Many times you have guided us on issues of constitutionalism and other technical issues to do with parliamentary work. You have been an arbitrator; a case in point was the other day when we had a stand off. Both the Opposition and Government came to you and you found a solution. 

I thank parliamentary staff for their support during our term. I want to thank the Sergeant-at-Arms and his security team for successfully making sure there was no incidence of terrorism here at Parliament, and yet it has been a target for a long time.

Lastly, let me talk about democracy. When we started multi-party politics, we did not know we would go this far. In democracy, we must accept defeat when we lose. On both the Opposition and Government side, we have very many petitions. The challenge we have is people do not want to concede defeat. 

Let me comment on yesterday’s incident. First of all, I want to thank God that all the presidents and visiting heads of state who came for swearing in finally went home safely but it did not go very well. I have heard voices saying that demonstrations were peaceful. I have experience that when you engage an international airport for eight hours with such numbers of people moving in a disorganised manner, what happened was bound to happen.

To choose a day when the President who won elections is being sworn in for you to engage an international airport route conscious that it was going to be used by many heads of state was very unfortunate and I regret it. That is the truth.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Alaso, you will correct the record because I do not intend to extend the time. You will utilise your time.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA): Mr Speaker, as I make my concluding remarks, I want to thank Members of Parliament both on the Opposition and Government side for their support during my tenure of office. It has been a long way, we have a common destiny; we need to listen to each other and to love each other. We have lost our dear ones and we believe that in the next Parliament, those of us who are staying should learn from mistakes of the past to forge a way forward.

12.29
MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU (NRM, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank you for the many years we have worked together. I want to thank my fellow Members of Parliament both in the Seventh and Eighth Parliament. 

I also want to thank my colleagues with whom I have been serving in the Cabinet for the tremendous support you have given us especially in an area which only five years ago was virgin in our country. I also would like for the first time to mention the challenges that we have been facing in our ministry of ICT. 

Our ministry started with only two members of staff and I remember at the time we were appointed as ministers in that sector; I was the secretary, the typist and the software developer. So I was basically everything. There was a cost to that; it gave us very little time especially for me to come here as often as possible to debate with other Members of Parliament. At one point, I felt like that person in the restaurant who cooks everyday but usually when they give tips, they go to the waiter and forget the chef. For example, I feel proud that every Member of Parliament has a computer to use. It is really very painful to see that even up to this day there are Members of Parliament who have a lot of papers on their desks. 

My request to you, Mr Speaker, is that in the next Parliament, whether I am there or not, try to remind Members that every month we use papers that can cover the entire area of Kampala capital city, which is very wasteful especially in this time of ICT. 

I want to conclude by thanking my fellow members in the Parliamentary Soccer Team. For the first time when I came, you allowed me to be the captain of that soccer team and then afterwards we chose hon. Otto who has been driving it. I request Members of Parliament to be healthy, the saying that, “Work without play makes Tom a dull boy” is true. It is very important to be healthy especially in these times of high blood pressure and low blood pressure. The amount of pressure that Members of Parliament and ministers meet is just too much to go away by just sitting down or holding speeches without playing. The chance that you are given in the Parliamentary Soccer Team to go and exercise even when you cannot play for the Parliament team is very important to consider. I request Members of Parliament to explore it because it will keep them healthy and the country can benefit more the longer they live.

I want to also conclude by saying that the challenge you are facing as you join the Ninth Parliament is that of financing. You need to bring to the public knowledge that Members of Parliament –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: What I have realised is that we do not appreciate the difference between the Movement System and the Multi-party System.

This country held a referendum that decided that we go multi-party. There has to be a difference in running a Multi-party Parliament and a Parliament under the Movement System. There must be a difference but if you do not appreciate it, then you fail to understand.

If you think that the Movement System was better, you can move that the country should go to a referendum to decide on that. I hear comparison between the Sixth Parliament and the Eighth Parliament but those cannot be compared. You cannot compare the dressing in summer and the dressing in winter or spring. You cannot say that, “We were very smart during winter”. You should know the difference; in the Movement System you did not have caucuses. In the Multi-party System, you have caucuses because you came under one manifesto whereas under the Movement you came here on individual merit. Then you decided on a matter as you saw it but in a multi-party system, you must be under the control of the party that brought you because it monitors how you perform. It seems many people do not know this and that is why they are comparing situations that are not comparable. 

12.35
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Youth Representative): I thank you, Mr Speaker. As you realise, I am the outgoing National Youth Member of Parliament, a position that I have really enjoyed serving in. I have been an Independent Member of Parliament and I am lucky that I am again coming in as an Independent Member of Parliament. 

I must congratulate you for you are the first Speaker who has presided over a Parliament under a multi-party democracy. I must say that as an Independent and maybe other Independents, we have enjoyed the nature and the way you have transacted business in this House. As you know, as Independents, we have been looked at as less privileged members of this House yet we serve and we have the same mandate like that of any other member of this House. I pray that in the next Parliament, this is well addressed for we have the same right and we are elected in the same process just like any other member of this House.

On behalf of the young people, I would like to say that we have been few Members of Parliament representing the young people. But I must thank all the youthful Members of Parliament including you, Mr Speaker, for the support you have given us when we have been presenting our issues to this House and to the committees. 

We also managed to increase the budget of the National Youth Council when we came to this august House which was through lobbying and convincing members of this House to support the young people. As you know, 76 percent of Uganda’s population are young people. Every member of this House; those going out and those coming in and the Government should address the issues that affect the young people like education, health, employment, poverty and social justice.   

I regret what has transpired in the last few months after the elections because we have lost very many young people and so many others are in prison and hospitals. We appeal for calmness, tolerance and good handling of our Ugandan citizens.

As I conclude, I would like to say that in this House, there are three shades of opinion: the Opposition, Independent and NRM. Let us co-exist and listen to one another. There is a tendency in this House to not listen to one another. We come with our own opinion and so we must accept that we have different opinions -(Member timed out_)

12.38
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Mr Speaker, I thank you so much for this opportunity and thank the responsibility, stewardship – you steered this House through the five years that the Eighth Parliament has been in existence. I think we are so grateful to you and the Deputy Speaker because you tried your best much as you could not definitely do everything because you do not have the mandate to do everything for Uganda.

I also thank the honourable colleagues who are in the Eighth Parliament. You have been so good. Some have really been mentors to many especially the elderly. 

I want to use this opportunity to recognise in a special way, hon. John Arumadri, who has managed to always be the first person in this House –(Applause)- -(Mr Arumadri rose for recognition)- I thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: I do confirm. (Laughter)

MS EKWAU: We thank the people of Madi-Okolo for giving you the mandate. I thank you very much.

I speak with a heavy heart relating to one issue that I find so dear and close to my heart; that is the question of the pastoralists. Hon. Mukitale in 2007 brought an issue to this House which ended up being code named “Balaalo”. The pastoralist question - throughout the four years over which hon. Mukitale has brought it to this House – has remained a white elephant. I am very sad that the Eighth Parliament is going away before solving the question of the pastoralists. They have remained in the wild and scattered. Only two days ago, on the sixth and eighth pages of Daily Monitor respectively, one was again portraying hon. Mukitale who brought the question as the one grabbing land. 

On page 8, there was a question that the Government has lost the first phase of the court case and the Balaalo have won in Masindi. Now, where have they gone? There were Balaalo in Teso. In Lango, they were beaten in Maruzi. They were in Acholi and they are in West Nile. Up to now, hon. Christine Bako has them occupying her grandfather’s piece of land. What has the Eighth Parliament done to solve the question of the Balaalo? 

This brings me to another thing; well, most Members of Parliament have been so cordial and understanding but the Executive – most Cabinet Ministers let us down. They were braggarts, they felt so proud and so full of themselves that even when we went to them to consult on important issues - we pray that most of them do not come back -(Member timed out_)

12.42
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): I thank you. Mr Speaker, when I came to this Parliament from a very strong academic background, my expectation was overrated. When I saw for the first three months the quality of debate in this House, I reflected as to what was wrong and I realised that to be a Member of Parliament, you can have anything equivalent and you will be in this House.

As the next Parliament, we should do something about the qualifications of the people who come to Parliament to represent Ugandans. You will go into a committee meeting and you ask if somebody has really looked at the policy statement; Nothing! You come on the Floor of Parliament – first of all, just to express an issue becomes difficult. I therefore think we need to take Parliament to another level as far as qualifications of Members of Parliament are concerned. 

In a very special way, I thank the Shadow Cabinet for tirelessly providing alternative policy positions to the Government. It is unfortunate that many times we are never listened to but it is my prayer that one day, all the alternative policy positions that we have given the Government will be implemented. It is one thing to say, “This is from the Opposition,” and it is another thing to say, “Country first”.

My heart bleeds over the way the Government has managed the issue of fraud and corruption. In a very special way, I want to thank the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament for doing an excellent job but it is unfortunate that the Government came in a very solemn way to insulate corrupt government officials. Why? On the presumption that once we are corrupt, we shall retain and sustain power and be in the positions we are in forever. It is my appeal to the Government to know that there is time for everything. There is time to lie and there is also time to visit the confession box. 

This country has been polarised along economic, social and political lines. For you to be employed today – if you spoke a certain specific language, you would be able to get a job with ease. I will give an example of the last recruitment to the Uganda Police Force: from Arua, they were only five; from Ntungamo, they were 27; and from Ruhama alone, they were 23. That gives you the impression of how polarized our country is. And we are not taking this simply because the people who come from those places are not in any specific way trained to suit those positions. 

So, unless we address this, we will really get into a situation where calling yourself a Ugandan will need patriotic lessons in which we have to invest some resources; very unfortunate. After 25 years we cannot be teaching patriotism; we should be feeling it. 

Mr Speaker, finally –(Member timed out­_)

12.47
MR MOSES KABUUSU (Independent, Kyamuswa, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I cannot add anything to the thanks extended to you because it is a fact you have done a good job during your term of office for the last five years we have served here.

When I took Oath in this Parliament, I vowed to support Obwa Kabaka Bw’a Buganda and being the fishermen’s voice. I have attempted to represent the fishermen by airing what any of them should have said if they were here. However, it is regrettable that the question on the Buganda issue has remained something to talk about. I have heard people promise to talk about the issues of Buganda – the five years have ended without me seeing those people talk about how to solve the Buganda question.

I think the Ninth Parliament must struggle to see that people who have unresolved issues get solutions to them so that we can enjoy the governance of Uganda because we all contributed to it being.

Mr Speaker, I have not enjoyed life as a Member of Parliament because of the challenges that we have in our constituencies. I would like to say that the Ninth Parliament with the Public Relations Department of Parliament should put a clear picture of this institution to the public who we represent here. They must tell the public what we are meant to do and what we are not meant to.

Mr Speaker, a Member of Parliament representing a rural constituency, including you, is like a moving ATM. I am saying this because on several occasions I have seen people stop you and wished to insert their ATM cards into you. (Laughter) This is unbecoming. For the time we have been here, all of us have been struggling to satisfy the needs of our people vis-à-vis what Government sends to them. Most of us who lost in the last elections – today when I looked at my payslip, it was in negatives. This prompted me to ask myself whether I had really used all that money, but later I remembered I had sent it to my voters through that ATM method I have just talked about. So, you must realise that this life is not very easy. I would like to urge the Ninth Parliament to fight hard to see legislators earn something from which they are able to save. They must also see to it that Government works hard to develop their constituencies -(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Since this is your last time, I give you two more minutes.

MR KABUUSU: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that I will leave this House a very happy man. I joined Parliament when I was only 26 years of age. Yes, I had gone to school, but I could not get a good job in order for me to obtain a degree because I hail from a poor family of peasant fishermen. However, during the time I was in this Parliament, I was able to go back to school and have attained a degree in law. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations!

MR KABUUSU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think I will be able to face the challenges of the world that we are going to but above all, I will be able to champion some of the causes for my people that I wasn’t able to while in this House. I have enjoyed working with everybody here. Thank you very much.

12.51
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu):  Thank you, Mr Speaker for the opportunity. Let me start by thanking everybody in this Parliament – you first, and all the other Members of Parliament regardless of their political party affiliations. One Member said that they would get shocked when some Members of Parliament went to other constituencies and made contrary statements. I must, however, say that those Members of Parliament who went to Gulu were very supportive of me regardless of their political party affiliations. (Applause) They were very supportive –(Interjections)– maybe because I am very good. (Laughter) Maybe that is true because I am the only Member of Parliament who was re-elected to the Uganda Women Parliamentary Association Executive.

Mr Speaker, I am grateful for those Members of Parliament who showed a lot of support whenever they visited Gulu; thank you very much. As a shadow minister, it is has not been easy for me. I hope we will be able to do better in the Ninth Parliament. We are now doing a SWOT analysis - looking at our strengths and weaknesses and the opportunities that we can explore to do better.

Let me talk a little about the Marriage and Divorce Bill, which hon. Beatrice Lagada already alluded to. Is there any way of preserving this Bill for the next Parliament not to start from scratch? My suggestion is: they should build on what we have already done. We have indeed done a lot on this Bill as a foundation. I am saying this because there is nothing in the Rules of Procedure that mandates the next Parliament to take over such a Bill in its current form. 

From an ignorant point of view, what can we do to preserve this Bill for the next Parliament? That is an issue of great importance not only to women but for everybody: men, women and children. For example, we have sons and no woman would want her son to be in big problems in the future.

Let me also comment a bit on what happened yesterday. Yesterday, I saw very many vehicles of Government from ministries like Agriculture, Works and Education – why do we try to smear mud on number plates of vehicles? Why did you have to hide identifications of these vehicles? As politicians, we need to read this book by George Orwell, Animal Farm. People went to the bush because of bad things; these bad things are creeping in again completely -(Interruption)

LT COL RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, I would like to clarify on the number plates. When we have visiting delegations especially of Heads of State, you have to give these vehicles identity for security purposes and it is not that they are hiding the identity of the vehicles; they are for security reasons. They are giving them numbers so that they can be able to go through road blocks and to be given free access to some facilities. I thank you.

MS AOL: I think we are not talking the same thing. I am talking about vehicles; pickups being used by military men or the military police because these days we have the police, the military police and then the UPDF. They are all integrated together so you do not know which is which. Their number plates were covered with mud and some were removed. Why do we do this? This Uganda is our country; let us read this book by George Orwell and let us also try to evaluate our work. We can do SWOT analysis or we may not do it. Today you are very big there but you do not what tomorrow has in place for you -(Member timed out_)

12.57
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am also joining my colleagues first to thank God for sustaining the Eighth Parliament up to this moment and then to thank your able leadership and your Deputy for steering the Eighth Parliament under a multi-party system successfully.

When we elected you, I think more or less we said what we are saying but today I want to say that I am not going to stop at thanking you. Particularly, I want to advise the Movement System that they should promote you.  Unless you do not want promotion and you are going to contest as Speaker of Parliament, then I am going to be very happy because that will bring down the good co-operation between you and your deputy and then we shall have NRM to our advantage. I pray that you get a promotion if the NRM also considers that you have done a good job in the Eighth Parliament, like I do.

Secondly, I would like to thank my constituents for sustaining me here, my colleagues at committee level and in the House for the work well done although out there we were described sometimes as rubberstamps and so forth. I think we have done good work for this country. I am going to join the other side not because I was weak - but I think I have enjoyed and witnessed the Seventh and Eighth Parliaments and what I understand in political football and then political machines which has been used to push me out; I have enjoyed it and I hope it will not happen next time because that one is not very healthy. 

I want to say very little about yesterday’s demonstrations. Actually, it was not a demonstration; it was a misunderstanding which was caused by those who were supposed to man the day. I was in the company of the Deputy Inspector-General of Police and we started very well and we believe things were moving on well but when we reached Kisubi, we were brought down by a group of special military police who were wearing red caps in three big Lorries. When they approached us, they did not know we had been cleared to use that route. With their guns and sticks in their hands, they started beating up people. I was there and we were stopped for two hours; they even stopped UN vehicles from moving on; it was very unfortunate. So the truth is what I will defend. 

I will leave this House temporarily with the hope that my political career as an Independent Member of Parliament who joined the Seventh Parliament and has defeated  the politics of the Movement to lure me to join them. Even now I am still Independent and I am going to join those who are independent minded and other party believers to the effect that we are going to represent you out there. If you do not represent us here effectively then I will not hesitate to demand that what I spoke here when I joined the Seventh Parliament that we are preparing to start a Nile country will be a reality because I witnessed what has transpired in the Seventh Parliament and this Eighth Parliament. I wanted us to use this experience to bring this country to enjoy peace and development that we always talk about. 

So with that, I am happy I have played my role very effectively and I am leaving the House with love expecting the House to prove to the outside world that Uganda is now mature politically. If we are mature politically to be rewarded by the tear gas and then the coloured water then I regret to inform this House that we who are going to out there, we are still actively demanding that there should be a change -(Member timed out_)

1.03
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I already hear Dr Kiyonga saying that “Alaso one minute”. I hope it is not true and I pray that I will be given time to put some things correctly on the record of this House and then express myself as well; of course my colleagues have done that.

First, I want to begin by correcting the record, yesterday there was no demonstration and as the Secretary-General of the FDC, I know that we had no demonstration yesterday, what we were doing yesterday was to welcome Dr Besigye back home after he suffered serious ailments when the military brutalised him and half blinded him and caused him to have a problem with his hearing. So, he got out of the country for treatment in Nairobi and then he had to come back on the 11th of May. He was not meant to be coming back yesterday and we have a statement from Kenya Airways to the effect that they got a communication that if they had brought Dr Besigye that day of the 11th May their plane would not be allowed to land in Entebbe.  

The statement was issued by Kenya Airways and it is up to the Government of Uganda to clarify to the world whether it was true or not true. At least for us we know Dr Besigye was on the plane and he was pulled out of the plane therefore causing him to come yesterday. So it was not in our plans that he comes yesterday; our plan was for him to come the other day, on 11th May; that is why he boarded then. So Government takes full responsibility for causing Dr Besigye to come yesterday; it was not our programme, it was Government’s programme and we do not know why you wanted him to come back yesterday.

Secondly, I was part of the convoy yesterday from the airport to home. We worked very well with the police; we agreed on a route with the police and nobody has come here and said we created our own route. Everywhere we passed, we were in agreement with the Uganda Police; unless Government wants to disown Mr Kasingye and Mr Rwego, who are very senior police officials and who were sent to handle that return. We agreed with them and we followed it to the letter.

Mr Speaker, trouble came when the army took over; and I think every time the army comes to take over something goes wrong. Army men joined the procession from behind and from in front and they started shooting. When we consulted the police with whom we had even worked to clear the way – I personally got out of the vehicle I was using and worked with the traffic police men. I would flash the “V” sign and people would understand and we made gains on the road, until army men came in and started shooting, caning and killing people on the road. We were not responsible for that fracas.

Even the police this time, I think they were able to send in genuine police, not the one who put on police uniform when they are not police. Mr Speaker, I think it is important for somebody, first of all, to account to this country; how do you push a presidential convey - I am not President Museveni’s fan, if anything I really do not care what happens to him, but I care what happens to this country –(Interjections)– yes, I am saying it. Why do you want me to pretend?

But what happens to his country if President Museveni gets endangered in that mess? How do you push a whole President of the nation through a multitude of crowds; hundreds of thousands of people! You know they are on Entebbe Road and you push the President there? The first person who should account –(Prof. Kabwegyere rose_)– the person who should explain how the President got into that mess should be the one who manages the President’s convoy. They knew the whole road was full of human beings, they knew they had sent five lorries of soldiers in front and five lorries of soldiers behinds; they knew there was gun fire, bullets and everything on that road and they still sent President Museveni on that road. 

I personally lamented. I said, “How can they endanger the President’s life to this level!” Then the President was followed by his guest on the same road –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker, given the bullets and chaos on that road, I still hold the view that somebody should have directed the presidential convoy elsewhere –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, State House is in Entebbe; the President had arranged lunch for his guests and the only way to go to Entebbe is through that road. Is the hon. Member in order to seemingly think that there was another possibility of how all these guests would get to Entebbe without using that road? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, there was no alternative route by road to Entebbe unless he used a chopper but if it was on the road he had to use Entebbe Road. On the contrary, somebody would say, “Why didn’t he shift the other one to another road?” Maybe there was no other road; I do not know. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, for me I am putting my thoughts forward as clearly as I can. Unless we do not want to care about the guests and our own President; but also think – this is now my view, that President Goodluck Jonathan was lucky that the flying bullets did not get him but the stone got him; because the bullets that were flying on that road could have killed the President. 

Finally, I think it is wrong – those chemicals that are being sprayed; you may sit in this House and do not care, but you have got children for instance along that road. Those chemicals, gasses and liquids have to be looked at again. Otherwise, you might think it will land on Alaso and instead it lands on your grand children –(Interjections)– I will take the information –

THE SPEAKER: We have been here for three hours; finish you submission.

MS ALASO: Finally, Mr Speaker, let me say something on my last day in the House. I am glad that the people of Serere decided I should be here again; and I hope I will do a good job. However, I want to record my personal appreciation to you and the Deputy Speaker; I have enjoyed personal favour from you and the Deputy Speaker. Every time I got up, I have got the opportunity to speak. And it is not that I am good or anything, but I think I found favour in your heart and I would like to appreciate that.

Mr Speaker, I think that the Eight Parliament, as it winds up, my view is that we could have done more and the Ninth Parliament should do more. They should learn from the challenges that have been expressed by our colleagues and deal with the limitations of the Eight Parliament and be able to do a better job in the Ninth Parliament. 

Ugandans are expecting a very strong institution of Parliament, a Parliament which is independent. So we may have to step back and reflect on whatever challenges we have had and see how we can move forward. Particularly, I would like to talk to the Executive and ask them to reflect on issues of multi-party democracy. Do we really want multi-party democracy? Do we want constitutionalism; are we committed – is the Executive committed to fighting corruption and to prioritising the use of the limited resources we have in this country? How far have we dealt with issues of good governance? 

The overall question of our performance is in the public domain and I am not the one to make a verdict. But the public will make a verdict. But I have been honoured and pleased to work with everybody and I will miss the very special people whom we have been with in this House. We wish you every blessing while you are out and those who stayed; we wish you every blessing as you stay. I believe that God has a plan for Uganda and it will come to pass.

1.14
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity to say something and I want to thank the Members of Parliament who have turned up today to transact business. 

Before I start, I just wanted to raise one issue. Colleagues have made various versions in regard to the incidents of yesterday. It is true we had a very successful swearing in ceremony; but it is also true that there were incidents which merit attention from the NRM side. It is my humble request that you permit our side to correct the record in regard to some of the assertions that have been made. That is my simple prayer. 

I want to go on record and commend you and your deputy on a job well done as our leaders of this House. My office, the office of the Government Chief Whip, has worked very closely with the office of the Speaker, Deputy Speaker and Clerk to Parliament and with all the staff of Parliament. We have enjoyed immeasurable support and co-operation from your offices. I only pray that the office of the next Government Chief Whip continues enjoying that level of support. 

It is also true that we have worked very closely with the Leader of the Opposition and the Opposition Chief Whip in regard to ensuring that the Opposition fully appreciates the various Government positions and why we have to push for them. The approach of the NRM side has always been to try and get the Opposition to understand our point of view. 

It is true that in some cases we have agreed, but in others we have not agreed but we have been able to understand why we are not agreeing and why we have to push for the positions we have been pushing; more so when they emanate from our manifesto. I believe we shall continue engaging each other on that front so that we can be in a position to provide the leadership this country badly needs. 

On that note, I wish to congratulate His Excellency, the President, for being sworn in for another term of office. I would also like to congratulate all Ugandans for this peaceful and harmonised way of doing things as a country. History can now bear us out as a country that is maturing along and on the road to a democratic way of doing things. My belief is that we are doing fairly well despite the few dissenting voices I am hearing.

Suffice to say, it can be understood why some people would have loved to subvert the function of yesterday -(Interjections)- fortunately, this did not work out. Hon. Okello-Okello has come out fairly clearly in regard to what his expectations were. I pray that the last few words of hon. Okello-Okello, being the statesman we have all known him to be, ought to be expunged from our records –(Interjections)- because hon. Okello-Okello has been regarded as a statesman and I am sure it must have been just a slip of the mind –(Interjections)- that such words could have come from him.

Mr Speaker, you indicated to the House that there are consultations taking place on the understanding that we now have a new President. Transitional arrangements regarding the Executive and the manner in which the country will be run will be made by His Excellency the President and the whole country will be brought on board in regard to those transitional arrangements.

Almost everybody who spoke before me has pointed out that you and your deputy have been providing very good leadership to this House. I wish to concur with the sentiments that have so far been expressed. However, I would like to assure everybody in the House that the NRM, in its usual tradition, will come out and advise all of us who will be in the Ninth Parliament, on who should be holding the various leadership positions; not only here in Parliament but in Government as well. 

The anxiety that has been created - I would like to assure everybody that we shall sit and generate consensus on the most optimal way to utilise the resourceful people that the NRM has, as a political party. I want to assure the House that we shall give you our best as we have always done.

The issues of individual merit have come up and you also rightly made remarks on the way we should be conducting ourselves as opposed to the way we were conducting ourselves under the Movement System. It is true, particularly for us as whips, that we have always had a problem. The individual merit hangover is still a problem. It is true we are still in our infancy under the multi-party political dispensation arrangement; but my prayer is that Parliament takes off time, allocates sufficient resources so that we can be in a position to build the requisite capacity so that we can be in a position to run the country as a multi-party political system country. I have noticed that we still have a problem and Members always have a problem appreciating the changes that we have settled for and the referendum. I believe that will be taken care of and that way, this will also help us in regard to the way we handle our business as a House.

My view is that we have left a lot of pending business, business to follow which we should have been in a position to clear if the requisite capacity for handling that kind of business had been in place. I hope those who come after us will be in a position to do a much better job than that which we have been able to do.

The expectations on the part of the population are extremely high -(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. This Parliament has rules that govern it. Strangers are not allowed to walk in here just anyhow. This is not a toilet. Is it, therefore, in order – because to the best of our understanding, the past Executive ceased with the swearing in of the President. Is it, therefore, in order for the former Minister of Internal Affairs just to walk into this House yet he is not a Member of the House? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, as far as I am concerned, when he came he was sworn in and recorded as a Member of Parliament, ex-officio in the Eighth Parliament. Let us complete this; let us not delay this matter. We have been here for three and a half hours. I am about to adjourn. Please, wind up.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, we shall continue to pursue discussion and dialogue in whatever we do. Members made some remarks that they feel they are not part and parcel of what takes place in Uganda. My view is that points of concern should always be brought onto the table and we discuss these points and issues rather than giving signals for cessation. I think it can only be unfortunate that as leaders we can settle for that kind of talk let alone encourage it. 

Finally, I want to thank His Excellency, the President for deploying me in the office of Government Chief Whip. It has been an experience. It is a job I have enjoyed and I can say we shall continue to serve this country in whatever capacity we are deployed and we shall always be available not only for the Government side but also for the Opposition for the benefit of everybody in this country.

Mr Speaker, I made a simple prayer when I was starting to make my submission. It is only pertinent that a member of the national security committee brings on board this House in regards to the events of yesterday, particularly involving the stoning of the motorcade of the Nigerian President. I thank you and I hope, Mr Speaker, you will grant my prayer -(Interjections)- it is only proper -

THE SPEAKER: What he can do is to lay it on the Table. Let it become a public document. Whoever is going to do it let him put it on the Table and then I think the entire country should also be informed through the other media.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, I have not had a habit of not following your guidance. I will let the Minister for Internal Affairs - I will let the - 

THE SPEAKER: Let the hon. Member of Parliament lay it on the Table.

MR MIGEREKO: The Member of Parliament, hon. Matia Kasaija. (Applause) 

1.29
MR MATIA KASAIJA (NRM, Buyanja County, Kibaale): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I am the Member of Parliament for Buyanja County in Kibaale District. (Laughter) I think those credentials are not questioned, are they?

I have a few notes, which I wanted to use to make a statement to this honourable Parliament before it closes -

HON. MEMBERS: Order!

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Matia Kasaija, if you have a document, make it a parliamentary document by laying it on the Table. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Okay, Sir. But I want to seek clarification from you: am I not allowed -

THE SPEAKER: Please, lay it on the Table. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Okay. Mr Speaker, I take your ruling. I would like to lay before this Parliament a statement from Government regarding the events of yesterday. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you very much. We note the document and I think the public should have the opportunity to know the contents. Let us use the various media to inform them. Otherwise, hon. Members, I want to thank you very much for [MR MATIA KASAIJA: “I would like to speak as a Member of Parliament.”] We have been here for three and a half hours and we agreed on how we were supposed to end. 

Hon. Members, once again I want to thank you very much for the work you have done in the last five years, ending on Wednesday. You have done a lot and as I said, this Parliament was different from Parliaments before it and comparing this Parliament with the Sixth Parliament is irrelevant. That is what I told you. You cannot talk about the dressing in summer with dressing in winter or autumn; no, because you have to dress differently and this is what happened. 

But again my assessment is that people still long for the Movement System rather than a parliamentary system because some people do not understand how the parliamentary system works. The Parliament under a multi-party system cannot work in the same way as we used to work under the Movement System. That is why caucuses are permitted and no speaker will be here and say, “Do not go into caucuses,” because it is going to undermine your role as Members of Parliament. That will not be done. The Opposition will continue with their caucuses and the other side will continue with their caucus. 

What you must know is that under this system, any Member who is on this side came under one manifesto. The manifesto that is being used by the Executive is the manifesto for a Member of Parliament on this side. The manifesto which you read while you were campaigning as the Opposition is the same manifesto you run and it is the same manifesto your party runs. So, you coordinate and in coordinating you are expected to see that the interests of your side, and the manifesto, are fulfilled. 

But people do not seem to understand it; that is why you see one person aspiring to be a Speaker saying that, “I will stop that.” You cannot. And therefore if you want to stop it, invoke Article 74 of changing the political system. This Parliament has a mechanism of asking for a referendum so that people change the political system from multi-party to the Movement System. I think that would be the best. But please, try to understand the system under which we operate otherwise, you will fail miserably. (Laughter)

Therefore, once again, thank you very much. I am adjourning this House - not closing it but adjourning it sine die - in case there is a need to convene, we can convene but I have already signed the proclamation, which will mark the end of this Parliament. The proclamation will be gazetted and it will be effective on 18th May. Thank you very much. You are most welcome. May God bless you! 

(The House rose at 1.34 p.m. and was adjourned sine die.)

[Thus concluded the proceedings of the Eighth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.]
