Wednesday, 16 May 2012

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS 

The oaths were administered to: 
Moses Kasibante


COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, welcome to this afternoon’s sitting. I wish to make the following statement in relation to the administration of oaths under our Rules of Procedure. It looks like it is a rule we have not been observing closely, but today I create an exception. 

For all intents and purposes, a person is a stranger to this House until he or she has subscribed to the oaths prescribed by the Constitution. So, the procedure following after this one will be that a person who has not yet taken oaths cannot enter the Chamber of Parliament. In future, when a person comes to take oaths, we will draw those bars and the oaths will be administered from behind the bars. After he or she is duly constituted as a Member of Parliament, we then draw out the bars to receive the member into the congregation of the parliamentarians. That is the procedure that will be followed. (Applause) 

This hall is only for Members of Parliament and if you have not taken oath, you are not really a Member of Parliament, so you are not entitled to come here. That is why we have the technical people sitting behind. This area is for Members of Parliament that have dully taken the oath. Are we okay now?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Today was an exception to the rule that we made. But from now on, that rule will be observed strictly. The oath will be administered from there and the member will be received into the Chamber of Parliament. 

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have voters from Olilim, Otuke County, Otuke District represented by hon. Jacinto Ogwal. Please join me in welcoming them to Parliament. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. (Applause) Thank you. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, let me just guide the House a bit. If you have a matter - (Mrs Ogwal rose_) - Honourable member, please resume your seat. If you have a matter that you would like to raise after communication from the Chair, when the Chair finishes the communication, you rise and then you catch the Speaker’s eye. If you do not rise, we proceed with the business. Honourable minister, proceed. Honourable member, you will do that tomorrow. 

2.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, since this is a period in which we are still internalising our rules, I will allow the honourable member. But for all members, if you have a matter of urgent public importance that the Speaker has agreed to for you to raise, you rise when the Speaker finishes communication. If you do not, I cannot lift you from your seat.

2.57
DR JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Mr Speaker, I have taken note of your enlightenment. This is addressed to the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. It is about the status of land at Atira in Olilim Sub-county, Otuke District. 

I refer to the above mentioned area measuring approximately 42.5 square kilometres. On January 16 2012, the Woman MP of Otuke, hon. Nyakecho Annet Okwenye, wrote to the President claiming to have secured free land suitable for animal breeding. I beg to lay the document on the Table - (Interruption)

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thought by now the member, who is my colleague from Otuke, had gathered all the evidence and all the necessary information. This is because we sat in various meetings in Otuke with him and he sat even in some meetings where I was not there. I thought that by now he has all the information for this House to know what happened from the very beginning up to the end.

Is he in order, therefore, to mention my name saying that I wrote a letter yet there is no letter that I wrote in between? Is he really in order to start by saying I wrote a letter such that he plays with the minds of the members of this House? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, those are facts within your knowledge and that of the hon. Jacinto Ogwal. The Speaker has no information to that effect. I am unable to rule on it. 

Honourable member, the rule under which you have risen is to state a matter of urgent public importance. So, if you start talking about last year and January, it may not be that urgent. In which case, you might have to raise a formal parliamentary question to which the minister will respond. But if there is any urgent matter of public importance, proceed and raise that.

DR JACINTO OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay all the documents which I have received on the Table before this Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is the matter of urgent public importance that you wanted to raise?

DR JACINTO OGWAL: The urgency of the matter is that a certain man called Joseph Obote Otiti and some twenty people - we do not know their names - went and inspected the area and demarcated this area. They sent a delegation to His Excellency the President without the knowledge of the owners and also without the knowledge of the people. So, the people of Otuke are making this petition. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is urgent for us?

DR JACINTO OGWAL: What is urgent in this matter is that this land is being given out without people’s knowledge. Some people went to survey it last week and above all, they were escorted by policemen. Sadly, when I went to check the area, I was intimidated by people whom the concerned member and Obote Otiti and his friends had made drunk, and I was not allowed to sit down and address the congregation. The people of Otuke want us to condemn this act. 

So, our prayer is, Mr Speaker, No.1, to halt any further – (Interruption)

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am raising a procedural matter. I seek to know from you whether the honourable member is right to present that issue of a land conflict when he knows very well that when there is a problem with land, you put an injunction. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think in the opinion of the honourable member this is a way of an injunction. (Laughter) Please restrict yourself to urgent matters.

DR JACINTO OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The urgency of the matter is that people are going to kill each other because of the controversy reigning over this land. There are the legitimate owners of the land – (Applause) - and those who support them, who want really to be fully consulted and do not want their land to be grabbed. The honourable Member of Parliament is conspiring with others to grab the land - (Interjections) - Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the names of 2,666 –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal, our rules guide us on the kind of language to use in the House. To say that an honourable member is conspiring is to impute motives other than those which are allowable under our Rules of Procedure. Would you like to withdraw the word “conspiring” and then you proceed and make your point? Please.

MR OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I beg to withdraw - (Applause) - the word “conspiring.” I pray that the minister concerned does the following to stop any further dealings on the land by the Woman MP and the company -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have ruled on this before. If a member rises on a matter of urgent public importance, that member should have all the information. It cannot be supplemented until he finishes. I have ruled on this before. Can you finish please and then we can have limited debate in 15 minutes.

MR OGWAL: Our prayers, we the people of Otuke, to the minister are the following:

1. 	To stop further dealings on the land by the Woman MP, by a certain Mr Joseph Obote Otiti and company on the land, until consultations with all the stakeholders are complete.

2. 	To request you to provide the status on the land as per now.

3. 	To condemn the harassment and intimidation meted out to me by Joseph Obote Otiti and company who hired individuals to harass and intimidate me.

4. 	To restrain Joseph Obote Otiti and the LC II of Atira, a certain Opaka Aliru, from framing some Olilim residents that they illegally possess arms and falsely accusing some of them of being rebels.

5. 	Finally, I call upon every member of this august House to condemn this act -(Laughter) - and ask Mr Joseph Obote Otiti, who is a civil servant by the way and he is not working in my district, with his company, to make a public apology to this House and to me, personally. (Laughter) Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.08
MS ANNET NYAKECHO OKWENYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me time to try and clarify the problem we have in our constituency on the Floor of this House. 

History tells us that in the whole of Northern Uganda, the people of Otuke were the first to be displaced by the Karimojong at the beginning and then recently by the LRA - (Interjections) - Please allow me to mention. May I have the ground? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please proceed.

MRS NYAKECHO OKWENYE: I respect my brother, Ssemujju, and I would like him to just give me his ears. That is all I want from him now.

Secondly, I would like to correct the impression, which is being put across by my brother, that land is being grabbed forcefully from the people of Otuke. This land – (Interjections) - I would like to give you information if you will allow me time – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, honourable member.

MS NYAKECHO OKWENYE: Thank you. The people of Otuke, on the 9th of December 2011, met the President of the Republic of Uganda in Barlegi. While in that meeting, they wrote a memorandum. This memorandum was not written by Annet Okwenye; it was written by the people of Otuke. In that memorandum, the people of Otuke requested the President to do for them a lot of things, among which –

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The matter which has been raised by hon. Jacinto Ogwal is so sensitive that I think it would be in our best interest not to handle it like it is a thing for Otuke versus Otuke. I think it would be proper if we forward this matter to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to look into it and make further investigations on the ground. Here, any stakeholder whose name has been mentioned will be available at least to defend him or herself rather than reducing this House to a quasi court settling Olilim-Otuke land. I think the best would be to have some investigation rather than attempting to settle it here and now.
Mr Speaker, I beg to propose. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a point was raised here about land grabbing and a reference was made to an honourable member. The honourable member is here and that is why I had given her the first option of making a comment. However, in order for this matter to be given the treatment it deserves, I will not permit any debate on this matter now. I will allow the honourable member to make a personal statement tomorrow under the Rules of Procedure, capturing the subject, and then we see how to move forward with the matter. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, you recall that the approved Budget for the financial year 2011/12 amounts to Shs 10,323.75 billion, of which –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are supposed to lay some paper.

MR KASAIJA: That is what I am trying to do.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, just lay the paper.

MR KASAIJA: Okay, I take your guidance, Mr Speaker. I wish to lay on the Table the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.2 for the Financial Year 2011/12. I beg to lay.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such. Thank you very much, honourable minister. 

3.15
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Agago County, Agago): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a petition on the underpayment and suspension of pensions in the Uganda Railways Corporation from the Uganda Railways Pensioners Association. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to inform this House that this petition was considered by this House in the Eighth Parliament and not all the issues in here were considered. So, this is a re-committal so that the relevant committees take into consideration the prayers of the petitioners. If I could state the prayers – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, this is not a petition; this is laying of papers, so there is no issue of reciting of prayers. It has come under laying of papers so just lay the papers. 

MS AKELLO: I beg to lay the petition by the Uganda Railways Pensioners Association presented to this House and signed by Mr Amone Manase, Chairman of the association, and Mr Solomon Sebunjo, the General Secretary, and others. I beg to lay. 

I also beg to lay, together with this petition, a letter which had been written by the petitioners to the chairperson of the finance committee. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that petition was examined by a committee of this House, partially reported on and there is a part that is not yet dealt with. I, therefore, send it to the appropriate committee for appropriate handling. It was for the Committee of Commissions and Statutory Enterprises. Take note and review this matter and report back to this House. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE ON THE AMENDMENT OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

COMMITTEE STAGE

3.17
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you recall we had a long debate on this matter. We were not able to take any decisions but I have been advised that there have been some consultations taking place. Maybe we should ask for some report on this and then we see how to move. Was the chairman involved in these consultations?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Not at all, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can I have some kind of report on this subject. Are you consulting now?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, it looks like the process of consultations is just beginning. So I seek your indulgence for the proceedings to be suspended for a few minutes to allow the consultations go on and then we see if we can reach a consensus on the issue on which we agreed yesterday. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.18
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.18
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered Appendix B of our Rules of Procedure and stood over the matter for consultation. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.19
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo):  Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the next item is a response on issues raised by members on the National Youth Venture Capital Fund. The information is that this matter should come tomorrow when there is sufficient preparation on the subject. So, we cannot have it today.

BILLS
 SECOND READING

THE TRANSFER OF CONVICTED OFFENDERS BILL, 2007

3.20
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Baka): Mr Speaker, the Attorney-General is held up in consultations on the issue of the rules but the committee is ready. I am armed with the minutes and the report of the committee. As soon as the minister is ready, I will present.

BILLS
 SECOND READING

THE UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011

3.21	
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Dr Sam Lyomoki): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee is also ready with the report. If the minister is available, we are ready to continue. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The next item.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE ACCOUNTANTS BILL, 2011
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister for Finance? The House is suspended for 20 minutes.

(The proceedings were suspended at 3.37 p.m.)
  
(On resumption at 6.02 p.m., the Deputy Speaker, presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House was suspended to allow moments for members to interact on this important matter before the House. The interaction has been taking place; can I invite the chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges to report on the progress made so far, and if it has to go to the committee of the whole House, then we will do that. 

6.03
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, DISCIPLINE AND PRIVILEGES (Mr Fox Odoi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We had a lengthy meeting and canvassed many areas. We made substantial progress, and I am pleased to report that we generated consensus on very fundamental issues in respect to the rules. However, we still have a few sticking points, and I must state from the outset that we shall reach agreement even on these few sticking points. We were short of time and we resolved that we should come back to the House and request for more time to allow the parties report to their constituents, to carry out more consultation, so that we can meet and resolve the matters that we did not build consensus on. 
Mr Speaker, I am requesting that you give us time up to Friday to allow all the stakeholders to report to their respective caucuses and to also allow us sort out one or two sticking points that we still have outstanding. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That would have to be Friday morning.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Yes, Mr Speaker. We should be ready by Friday morning. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are aware that we pushed the prorogation of Parliament to Friday, which we should have done tomorrow, because of the urgency of the business that is pending. We have four Bills that are ready and some of them should have been discussed today except that the level of preparation is not very good. The committees are ready and we would have proceeded but there were some difficulties. We have to do the second reading for the Transfer of Convicted Offenders Bill, which is a small Bill and there are no complications in this. We should be able to finish in a short time. 

We also have the University and Other Statutory Institutions (Amendment) Bill. I am advised that the amendment is not much although the issues are involving, but this will not be taking a whole day or something like that. It is a matter that we will be able to resolve very quickly. We also have the Accountants’ Bill. I am told it is a professional piece of legislation and there will be not much debate and we should be able to deal with this one too. 

We also have the Public Order Management Bill, a small Bill of 18 clauses but which has generated a lot of debate in the country. By now I am advised that regarding a lot of the contention that had been built from the party in Government and from the Opposition, based on the committee recommendations there are some issues that have been resolved. So it might be easier now than before for us to move forward with the Bill. 

We have four Bills and we have one and half days. It is important, for the record of this Parliament, that as we end the session, the number of Bills we will have passed should show that we have been doing some serious work. I am not saying we have not; we have passed many Bills so far but we should be able to pass these four before we go. I am therefore asking whether it is possible for us to start in the morning tomorrow at 11.00 O’clock.

MR BAKKA MUGABI: Mr Speaker, it is very possible, but if the Transfer of Convicted Offenders Bill is coming in the morning, our committee will be engaged with the JLOS sector, the Prime Minister and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs tomorrow from 9.00 O’clock to around midday. We have very important issues in the committee. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, can we then agree that we start tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock but we should be prepared to stretch as far as we can? Would that be proper? That means that we would need to all be here to be able to take decisions on these important matters. It does not matter how late we will go but we will try and do our best. After all, I am always the usual victim; I am the one who sits here all through. Many of you can go in and out. So, I am prepared to brace it from 2.00 O’clock up to whatever time the House will be prepared to proceed so that on Friday we have only one matter to be able to finish, if there is consensus, to be finished in one hour and then we will prorogue Parliament. 

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have informed us about the four Bills that we must pass before we go for recess and we have only tomorrow. The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has informed you that they have a meeting with the Prime Minister and others. I am of the view that there are some other Bills that we can handle in the morning, like the University and Other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill. That can be handled in the morning. So we can be in position to discuss some of these Bills and then in the afternoon, we finalise with other Bills. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, certainly there are two other Bills which do not involve the legal committee - the University and Other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill and also the Accountants Bill. Is it possible for us to schedule this time so that we can do this? It looks like today is not a day for consensus; we are not moving very fine on consensus. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, when we were looking for votes, we said that we would come here to serve our country. So, if these Bills must pass, honestly, we have to sacrifice time. It is like when you are in a theatre with somebody who continuously bleeds, you have to ensure you arrest the bleeding.

For that matter, I would like to suggest that the Bills that do not need a lot of legal involvement are handled starting at 10 O’clock tomorrow. That will help us to do those and finish up with the others on Friday. Remember, this is the major reason we are in this Parliament. I urge members to accept my suggestion; it is a humble request.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is our cardinal duty to legislate in this House, among others. I also appreciate the pressure under which we are working. However, at the same time, we need to appreciate the fact that there are a number of committees that have their hands full. There are, for example, committees that have already invited ministers and other witnesses to appear for business. 

In the circumstances, I would like to request that we commit ourselves to start at 2 O’clock prompt and go up to how far we will; after all, there are times when we have met in this House up to beyond 10.00p.m. I pray that we leave the committees to do their work in the morning and we start at 2.00 p.m.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I support the proposal that we start at 10.00a.m. Those few committees that have witnesses can continue with their meetings and work, but with those not doing such work we meet here in the Chamber. For the Bill from the social services committee, for instance, all we need is to have the Prime Minister ensure that at least one of the three ministers from the Ministry of Education and Sports is here for us to handle it. It should have come today but as we were all told, there was no single minister from the responsible ministry. That was the only impediment. So, if we get at least one of those three ministers, it will save us a lot.

Secondly, if we start at 10.00a.m., we will not have to get into the gender unfriendly hours where we have to do a few things after 9.00p.m. Mr Speaker, this would leave us with the only option of escaping. We will say we will be here but in real terms, we will just sneak away –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we will lock the doors from outside. (Laughter)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, you do not have to get to that. Anyway, what I am saying is that we have made provisions to leave home by 8.00a.m and do some work up to at least 7.00p.m in the evening. That should be okay with us because it is quite more comfortable than going up to 10.00p.m.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, is 11 a.m. tomorrow the compromise?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, House is adjourned to tomorrow at 11 a.m. 

(The House rose at 6.56 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 17 May 2012 at 11.00 a.m.)


