Tuesday, 10 May 2011

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you but in a particular way, I want to welcome the Leader of the Opposition who has been away on duty in Nigeria and other countries. He was in Nigeria for the elections and he came back and then went to Mauritius. Now he is here. You are most welcome. (Applause)

Hon, Members, I have received this announcement from the Sergeant-at-Arms. It says:

“Hon. Members of Parliament, the swearing in of Members-elect of the Ninth Parliament will take place on 16th, 17th and 18th May 2011 in the car park of the Northern Wing of the Parliamentary Buildings. This is to request the hon. Members of Parliament and staff of the service to remove their motor vehicles from the car park of North Wing by 13 May 2011 to allow the erection of tents in the car park to take place on 14 and 15 May. 

Motor vehicles which will not have been removed from the car park by 13 May 2011 will be towed away at the owner’s cost. Your usual co-operation in this matter will be highly appreciated.” 

So, you are advised to do that. Thank you.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

2.57
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, since the February 18th elections, you have not seen me in the House. Having heard the results of that election from my perspective, many of you may have wondered as to whether I had taken an early leave; I had not. 

After the elections, I returned to Parliament on a scheduled trip to the East African Community in Tanzania and visit to Rwanda. On my return, I got an invitation from the African Union to go and observe the Nigerian elections. I was supposed to be in Nigeria for two weeks but the elections were extended by one week because the first one was mishandled. I returned from Nigeria and had a brief visit to my constituency and then I left on a Parliamentary Commission delegation to Mauritius. I returned from Mauritius just three days ago. That largely explains why I was absent from the House. 

But even if I had not made those trips, upon the results of the elections, the country knows that the Opposition would have had to elect a new Leader of the Opposition in the Ninth Parliament and from my perspective, the best I could do was to cede face to my colleagues so that those who would lead the Opposition begin to blossom early and from amongst themselves they would identify the person to lead them in my place.

Now that I am here, this morning I went to see the Speaker and requested for an opportunity to make a brief statement and I stand here to make that very brief statement. It has nothing to do with the elections because that is history. I live in the future. I am an optimist and what is done provides lessons. What must be done becomes your personal challenge. 

However, I take this opportunity, since we are going to be prorogued, to express my sincere gratitude first of all to the Almighty God who enabled me to join this Parliament the first time in 2001, my family that stood behind me all this time and the people of Agago who twice elected me to represent them. But more importantly, I stand here really to express my deep appreciation to everyone of you, my colleagues on the Opposition side and all of you on the Government side. I leave Parliament without any complaint against any individual. I leave Parliament without regret that there is something that I did not do in this House that I ought to have done. And I leave Parliament knowing that while I was here I enjoyed the mutual respect from both sides of the House. And so I would like to thank you - all of you - most sincerely, for the work we did together. 

For those who were in the last Parliament and all of you with whom we were in this Parliament, of course as you leave the place that you have been in for ten years, you get driven sometimes by sentiments. You feel a sense of loss because you will not be with your colleagues or you will not be in the forefront that you have enjoyed. But for me, the only regret would be that I will not be working with the friends that we worked with so closely in Parliament. On my side I got the maximum support of my colleagues. They challenge me by their contestation of what sometimes I consider the right thing and they do not consider the right thing. But for five years as the Leader of Opposition, I held my fort, I led the troops and I am satisfied. 

On the Government side, I would like to thank the Prime Minister with whom as Leader of Government Business we worked together. We have had difficult times but we have always remained available to consult each other and to share and many of the colleagues in Cabinet, my brother Daudi, Adolf, I look at the Attorney-General - I remember one time -(Laughter)- when he was having a very difficult situation on the Floor. I got up to help and I told him, I said, “Professor, many times they do not understand us.” And it still remains true but I particularly cherish many from the Back Bench on both sides. Hon. Odonga Otto? Many people also do not understand him but I do understand him very well. (Laughter) 

On the Government side, my brother hon. John Kigyagi who has left Parliament, hon. Banyenzaki who would stand up even when people think he is not right and many others. I do not have the time to enumerate all the names but I want to say thank you very much.

During my trips to Nigeria and Mauritius, I saw things that should be part of my message to this Parliament. When we went for the elections in Nigeria, we consulted all the parties and all of them without exception said categorically that they trusted the chairperson of the electoral commission. That trust was maintained throughout the elections. The second thing was the President of Nigeria – I read from the newspapers that he will be coming here – he repeatedly told Nigerians that nobody should rig elections on his account, saying: “I would rather lose and go home.” He told Nigerians that their votes count and nobody should take that right away from them. The third thing was the Nigerian people. They all said that “Our vote must count.” And it showed in the way they handled their elections. 

I was privileged to be in the constituency of the speaker of the House of Representatives; there were complaints that in the previous elections, he did difficult things including his agents taking away ballot boxes. But in these elections, in Abeokuta City, when the time for counting votes came, the police went all over the town and if they found a vehicle parked and the owner did not identify himself anywhere within 100 metres of a police station, they just deflated the tyres to make sure that no vehicle would be used to carry away the ballot boxes. At counting, the crowd joined the officials in counting: “One, two, three, four, five ... ” The things that you heard after that elections is an internal matter of Nigeria that had nothing to do with that election because the conflict in the north was there before the election and had nothing to do with it.

We need to reflect on these; there will always be a time when we say that our votes –(Interjections)– you were not here for me to acknowledge you. But I can say that I always sat here and enjoyed the Secretary-General of the NRM making his points and sometimes imposing himself on the House. (Laughter) We are good friends.

Then we went to Mauritius. Mauritius is half the size of my constituency, Agago. It is about 80 kilometres long and about 35 kilometres wide. But Mauritius has had democracy since its independence. We met with their Speaker and ministers and they would tell us their stories. They would say, “We were in government in 2001 then we lost elections, then in 2007 we came back and then we again lost.” To them this was absolutely normal. In fact, the Deputy Speaker of their parliament said that once he is in cabinet and he loses, the fastest thing he would do is to begin to live his new life. I was glad that what he was saying is part of my practice. I started living my new life for quite some time and that is why one colleague found me and said, “You look fine and looks like you have adjusted.” I did not have to adjust but only to continue my life from a different perspective.

In Mauritius, the last lunch we had was with their Speaker. We conveyed the greetings of our Speaker and they acknowledged it before conveying greetings to our Parliament. 

At this moment, I want to thank the Speaker. Any counsel that I would give, I cannot give on the Floor. Once I am out, I will be free to share with the Speaker some of the things that I think, feel and have experienced.

Lastly, since I was away, many things have happened. I want to take this opportunity to let my departure not be clouded by anything. It is very unfortunate that we as a country love to learn the hard way and it is regrettable. But we do hope and pray that in the struggle to recognise that we are one people who can actually live together in this country, sharing it without any discomfort and that having a different opinion is not enmity, it is my prayer that the good Lord will open all our eyes to that. Because when that happens we would have arrived.

Finally, let me once again thank you, Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister and your colleagues on the Government side, all my colleagues in the Opposition and Ugandans generally. I enjoyed the goodwill of Ugandans; everywhere I go, they thank me for the good work that I was doing in Parliament. I cannot reciprocate other than thank them now before the House for that positive attitude. I wish all of you God’s blessings. 

For the new Members, the challenge will be for you to make the Ninth Parliament better than the Eighth. For our colleagues in the Opposition, regarding the leader who will come, the challenge will be for you to work with him or her more positively and more closely than you probably did with me. Because it is only in working together that we can succeed. We will still be around. Ten years ago I joined this Parliament; today is my last statement in Parliament but I want to end by saying that after five years, I will be back. (Laughter)

3.13
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I would like to pay tribute to Prof. Latigo - some people are saying you are not dead but I am using that word in a sophisticated manner -(Laughter)– for the special role he has played in Parliament. 

First of all, he has been an effective Leader of Opposition. (Applause) It is not easy to lead people, some of whom are extremely controversial and have a reasonable measure of coherence -(Interjections)- I am not going to mention their names but I am looking at them. (Laughter) 

I wish also to point out that whenever we have had problems, we have bargained with each other, outside Parliament – sometimes we go outside there in order to solve a problem then we arrive at a solution and it is declared and controversies are solved that way.

Finally, because I am a man of few words, many professors have not flourished in practical politics but in your particular case, you have flourished. You have given dignity to the role of professors in practical politics. I thank you.

3.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): As I listened to Prof. Latigo’s words, virtually, of farewell to Parliament, I remembered very vividly the dilemma that faced this country in the 1960s and continues to face this country as we build institutions; the institution of having a party in Government and a party in Opposition, as an alternative to Government. 

In law and in our Constitution, we recognise the Opposition as extremely valuable in keeping Government on its toes and being accountable. To do this role constructively, you need to have the capacity of empathise and I find in Prof. Latigo, the empathy of, “If you were in government, what would you have done differently to influence your thinking?” There are very few people with that capacity. 

The dilemma which I am sure Prof. Latigo will leave to this House is to be a Leader of Opposition in Parliament and you are not a Leader of Opposition outside Parliament; it is a big challenge. If you outshine your boss in Parliament, you will have a problem outside Parliament. And you must toe that line very carefully for if your boss outside felt that you are almost doing an extremely good job, as if you intend to take his job - I just don’t know. Mr Speaker, how I wish we would provide institutional arrangements such that if a Leader of the Opposition is not in the House, a way is found to put him in the House so that his problems are debated here, on the Floor of the House -(Interjections)- that is why we have a debate in the House and we have riots outside the House. We would have resolved everything right here, on the Floor of the House. 

Finally, a personal comment: I think professor, we make two distinctions. You play a role but you also have a person of your own. And you have done both quite well. Prof. Latigo as a man is an excellent man; he is a patriotic Ugandan and he played his role as the Leader of the Opposition in the House quite ably with all the challenges that I have pointed out of being a leader in the House and outside you face the wrath of your colleagues. We wish you well in your new assignment and I am sure there is life outside Parliament. Thank you very much.

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to appreciate hon. Latigo’s role in the Eighth Parliament. People come and go but institutions stay behind. I have had time to discuss many issues with you at different times, which is very rare with some colleagues in the Opposition. I know you have served honourably and you are leaving honourably and I am quite sure you will come back honourably. I only want to say that you have a room in my heart for national duties and we shall always be there to consult you and to work with you where necessary. 

The challenge we have, hon. Members, is that at present we have so many petitions and court cases. People simply don’t want to concede defeat. People don’t want to appreciate that once the voice of the people –(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you. Mr Speaker, I know that the right to petition is provided for in the Constitution and these petitions are pending hearing - close to 104 petitions. It would be highly prejudicial if it remained on record that the reasons petitions were filed in court was because people do not want to concede defeat when these matters are still pending hearing. Is it in order for a colleague to make a prejudicial statement about petitions which are pending hearing in courts of law?

THE SPEAKER: I think his was general. It was not directed at any particular person but it is his opinion that people don’t want to concede defeat.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you for your wise ruling. That is exactly what I was saying. I want to say that leaders should live exemplarily and I want to commend you, hon. Latigo, for being an exemplary Member of Parliament and a good Leader of Opposition. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.22
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I missed the main part of what Prof. Latigo said because I came late; but I am glad that I have had this opportunity to say something about Prof. Latigo as he formally bids us farewell.  

I first knew Prof. Latigo in the days of the Movement when I was the National Political Commissar. We did quite some work with him and I was very happy with the advice I received from him at that time.

In the House and particularly during this term, we had the issue of debating the request by His Excellency the President and Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces to send our troops to Somalia. Initially, it was very contentious and was almost being taken as a partisan issue. I took the initiative and requested for the audience with Prof. Latigo in his office and I would like to tell you, Prof. Latigo, that those consultations we had with you, your articulation and appreciation of what Uganda was going to do, not only have a special place in my heart but it made a difference on the Government side to appreciate that not all the Opposition had failed to see this mission. You really spoke as a nationalist and as a Pan Africanist and I appreciate very much what you said at that time.   

You also came to Kasese a number of times. You came at the wedding of our new king and we appreciated your participation. You also came to campaign for one of your colleagues from the Opposition. Despite the fact that we crossed roads, we went through a very good campaign and your side was victorious on that occasion. 

In my view, if Prof. Latigo could return to the House, that is excellent. You will continue to contribute to national building in that context. But even more fundamentally, I think, your country, Uganda has given you opportunity to join another sector of our society. In political terms, I would describe you as one of our “political elders,” and I think you should remain available from time to time to both the Government and the Opposition.  

If I may support what Prof. Nsibambi said – you are professors but in practice politicians - because Prof. Latigo you are now in position, in the interest of your country, to see what could have worked better on the Opposition and avail it to the Opposition and also to the Government side.  

You are also in position now, without encumbrances of being within Parliament, to come to the Executive and the Speaker and say, “If we take this route, we are going to do better for our country.” We are still building Uganda and whether we are on the Opposition or Government side - as I said, Prof. Latigo, when you came to Kasese, the issue was, “Are we being honest to our country by whatever action we take?”   

Last night some of your colleagues may have watched a programme on NTV where there were people from the tourism industry who were really talking as nationalists. They outlined in their view how much money the country has lost following these two or three weeks of running battles on the streets. Therefore, every time we have something to do, we should ask ourselves, “Is this the best for our country; couldn’t we have a different approach and arrive at whatever objective we are driving at?” 

To you, Prof. Latigo, you now stand in a special position as an elder Ugandan politician and a scholar to avail honest advice to the Opposition and Government so that we can move forward. I thank you in my individual capacity; I think that you have done very well and please, remain available to your country. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.29
THE MINISTER OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on behalf of the National Resistance Movement to say farewell to my colleague and brother, the hon. Ogenga-Latigo. 

I will not take much time because many of the things I would have said have already been said. I just want to say that Prof. Ogenga-Latigo has performed his duty as the Leader of the Opposition successfully because he has been a good debater, he is a good listener and he is obviously someone who talked about what he knows. And in that context, therefore, we appreciate his role as Leader of the Opposition and his contribution to the success of the Eighth Parliament. 

Secondly, I think in him we can see the very exemplification of the old saying that: “The Opposition should not oppose for the sake of opposing.” That where you think Government has a point, you should not hesitate to agree with it and I know that hon. Ogenga-Latigo did exactly that. I would like to thank him for that and wish that those that succeed will follow his example. 

I hope that younger leaders like my learned colleague, the hon. Odonga Otto - I hardly say this, Mr Speaker, because I did not have the information, which now I have that actually he is now a fully-fledged learned man, therefore, a colleague of mine. (Laughter) I hope with that and the experience of the hon. Latigo as the Leader of the Opposition leading in order to promote the well-being of the nation, will be an example to the younger leadership that is coming up to follow.  

I wish you well in your new life. For the next five years, I pledge that I will try to work with you so that if you are to come back, you know how to do it. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, we had exchanged on this with Prof. Latigo that NRM had arrived in his area and it is there to stay; it will even grow stronger. I will be happy to work with you so that we can strengthen that in the next five years so that we can benefit from your contribution. 

Lastly, in the CA, I moved a motion, and I hope time will come when we can revisit this issue. There are very many useful Ugandans who in retirement would be extremely beneficial to this nation if we could draw from their experiences and gain from their wise counsel. We had proposed that we should have a National Council of State. I wish to use this opportunity to call on my colleagues in leadership and the country at large to revisit and re-examine this issue. There are many people who either in his circumstances or those who wish to retire from public life and the kind of politics that we are in but would be beneficial to our society. Our society can draw from their wisdom out of their experience; it is something that I think we ought to re-visit.

3.34
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Hon. Members, on my own behalf and on behalf of the people of Obongi whom I represent in this House, I would like to say thank you to our Leader of Opposition up to this time, Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo. I learnt as a small boy when I was still in Yakinemiji village, Gimara sub-county, when we were looking after goats and there was a fight especially, when sheep engaged in a fight; the toughest ram that deserves to win the battle retreats while looking forward not because of cowardice and withdrawal but with the intention of getting sufficient momentum to move and knock down the enemy and win the battle. 

I look at you as that tough ram moving backwards while looking forward so that by the time you charge forward, you will get the momentum to change my highly respected leaders on the Front Bench to come to this side. Move backwards but come back with the momentum as you look forward. That is the ultimate mission. 

Otherwise, I still remember the day you visited Obongi together with other leaders of the Opposition political party FDC and again came with Members of Parliament on the other side of the House who included the Deputy Speaker of Parliament, hon. Rebecca Kadaga, and others. Your visit helped to highlight the issues of Obongi as one of the marginalised places living at the periphery of things. You brought to the limelight the deplorable conditions of the people of Obongi especially the infrastructure such as the roads that you used.

You have left a mark there and we are hopeful that you will make another mark for the people of Obongi still need people who care to improve their social, economic and political conditions of living. Otherwise, people can forget about them if it is not for daring people like you who can visit even the rural areas in the wet season despite the bad roads.

I am one of the people however on the Opposition side and as one of the young Members of Parliament who wanted things to be done in another way other than the way you did here. I realised afterwards that even a vehicle that moves forward must have breaks and it is the breaks that are responsible for the life of the vehicle, otherwise, vehicles would have crashed many times. You helped us very much; you guided us and thank you very much for restraining us and helping us move forward. We have learnt a lot from you.

The people of Northern Uganda however sometimes judge us harshly, those of us who have been elected and sent to this House. They expect a lot from us and some of the expectations are not the responsibility of a Member of a Parliament. They need change and it has been expressed many times in their lives in many ways. I would like to draw your attention to those needs which have not been fulfilled. In your life outside here, remember Northern Uganda is still in need of organisational leadership for social-economic development so that it can catch up with rest of the regions of Uganda.

Your expertise gained from this House in the field of political leadership and that gained from other areas especially in the academia should not be taken too far away from the people of Northern Uganda. We need you in Northern Uganda as we have needed you in the House. All this I say, for God and my Country.

3.40
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I really felt that it would not have been in order if some of us in the Opposition did not thank Prof. Latigo for all that he did. In all of the contributions the Opposition has been lumped up as a single entity. The task which the professor had was dealing with multiple political points of view and to be able to represent the interests of the political parties as a single Leader of the Opposition.

This complexity was not only in the House but outside the House. For example, we in the Congress walked out of the corporation in the House, our colleagues in the Democratic Party walked out of the corporation outside of the House but still within this august House we have been able in many aspects to come up as a single voice and the credit must be given to the efforts of Prof. Latigo.

I thank the professor for being able to spend time with the young members who joined in the Eighth Parliament and to be able to discuss at length and encourage us to continue with the hard work even when at times it felt that all was lost.

With those few words, I wish the professor the very best and I hope we will continue to work together as we did in many circumstances all the way from Juba, Garamba, across into Congo in an effort to improve the livelihood of the people we represent. Your contributions are still needed and please, be available and give assistance where possible. Thank you very much.

3.42
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, hon. Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance and it is about our dispensary. The dispensary along Nkrumah Road is facing demolition. I have here with me a letter written by the former Town Clerk, David Kigenyi Naluwayiro, dated 09 April 2011 and addressed to the District Director of Health Services. The reference is, “Relocation of medical services from Kampala Dispensary by end of April.” 

It is clear here but I do not have time to read the details but he is quoting a minute of the Executive which date I cannot understand. Here it says, “02 October 2011 –(Interjections)- yes, it is 02 October 2011 and that is the minute of the Executive –(Laughter)- yes, October 2011 to the effect that the dispensary is in a very deplorable state and therefore they cannot rehabilitate it and that the equipment should be relocated to Kisenyi Health Centre. 

The reason is that they cannot renovate a property without clear ownership of the land; that there are issues shrouding ownership of the land and they are therefore not going to renovate this dispensary.

The resolution that was passed on that date is that the current equipment and staff at Kampala Dispensary be transferred to the newly constructed Kisenyi Health Centre that is about to be handed over to council and council should not spend money on renovating the Kampala Dispensary when it has no mandate over the land.

The then Town Clerk directed the district Director of Health Services to implement the resolution of the Executive without the matter even being referred to council. 

He is quoting the minute of the Executive and by Friday last week – actually over the weekend, processes were being handled to relocate and as we talk right now - actually had it not been the intervention of the Executive Director and myself somehow even before I am sworn in, this place would be no more.

We are not so sure about the future of this facility because it is now just the Police who are guarding the place. We wanted to get a clear position from the Government whether actually this facility should be phased out. 

It is a very old hospital which has been serving the poor communities around and it is one of the few dispensaries which at least have some drugs, committed staff and it would be a very big loss if it is taken away. 

There are those behind the scene who want to grab the land –(Interjections)- yes, there are those who are saying, “Just get out of this facility, we get vacant possession of land”, and this is it. 

Mr Speaker, we seek for the intervention of the minister if he is ready to do so. I beg to lay on the Table this document and I thank you.      

3.47
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Mr Speaker, this is the first time I am hearing about this situation. As you know in this country, health services at that level are decentralised. The local authority is supposed to allocate land where –(Interjections)- I do not know what level the health centre is but at that level, land is allocated by the local authority.

We recruit staff for them if they want, we send them drugs as he has stated and we provide professional supervision but what he has been mentioning is the responsibility of the local authority. But given time, I will take it up with KCC and then come back and report to the House –(Interjections)- I have been ambushed and I do not have any knowledge of what has been happening.

MR LUKWAGO: For the record, I had the opportunity of sharing this matter with your junior minister, hon. Kakooza. We discussed it and –(Interjections)- yes, hon. Kakooza is in charge of Primary Health Care and it is not true that the Ministry of Health is not aware of this. I thought that by discussing it with hon. Kakooza, then probably I was informing the ministry. The Town Clerk copied this letter to your ministry. We want an assurance that this property is not going to be demolished – 

THE SPEAKER: I think the essence of this is not whether the minister was informed or not but that you have reported that there is an impending danger to the place. Let the minister take appropriate action to stop it. I think the minister will take it up.

3.49
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise as the Team Captain of the Parliamentary Football Club. 

On Saturday, 07 May 2011, the Parliament of Uganda participated in a friendly football match with the Parliament of Kenya in Mombasa and I am just here to lay on the Table the trophy that Parliament of Uganda won -(Applause)- in the match they had with the Parliament of Kenya. The beauty of it is that we managed to have a two-on-two draw with the Kenyan Parliament on the Kenyan ground. 

The Ugandan team was represented by hon. Elijah Okupa, myself, hon. Hood Katuramu, hon. Joseph Balikuddembe, hon. John Lubyayi, hon. Rose Akol, hon. Jalia Bintu, hon. Simon Oyet, hon. Lule Mawiya –(Interjections)- yes, they were all playing – hon. Alintuma Nsambu, the Minister who scored the second goal for Uganda, hon. Kaddunabbi, hon. Chris Baryomunsi, hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, hon. Fred Badda, hon. Aboud Kitatta who was our oldest player playing number seven (Mr Kitatta rose for recognition) -(Laughter)- and hon. Milton Muwuma. The staff who were with us included Peter Busiku, Peter Odeke, Sekidde, Nsimbe Kassim and Kayigwa. 

Mr Speaker, I want to thank your office for having made it possible for us to participate in this solidarity football match in Mombasa and I want to specifically thank the Prime Minister for having given us a green light to travel out of the country at such a critical moment.

Having said that and just for the record, I was the first to score a goal for Uganda –(Laughter and Applause)- and generally how we played the match, we politicians should learn from it; we were passing balls irrespective of political affiliation. (Laughter) I thank you so much and I want to formally lay this trophy on the Table so that it can be put in an appropriate place in the archives of Parliament. I thank you so much once again, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Welcome back and congratulations! I thank you very much. There is an adjustment to allow hon. Nandala-Mafabi to lay on the Table some reports and then we come to that item of the Prime Minister.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.53
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. Before I lay the reports on the Table, allow me to say something about my term of office as the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament for the last five years. 

At the time I got into the office, there was backlog, which we have cleared. Our colleagues who are coming in the Ninth Parliament will start on a clean plate. We have been able to clear the backlog from as far back as 2000 up to 2009.

Mr Speaker, the Minister of Defence has just reminded me, the only problem we had was dealing with classified expenditure and I must say that we failed to deal with those from 2005 to date. The basic reason was that those accounts have never been submitted to Parliament.

In that regard, allow me to lay on the Table, the Report of the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament for the year ending 30 June 2006. 

Also; allow me also to lay on the Table the Report of the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament on the Report of the Auditor-General for the year ending 30 June 2007; the one for the year ending 30 June 2008; and the one for the year ending June 2009.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for work well done.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yeah! But also allow me to thank the Members of the Public Accounts Committee for the good work they have done and the support they gave me during my term of office as Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament. I wish you all the best. God bless you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Yes, hon. Okupa.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. After listening to Prof. Nsibambi and what hon. Nandala-Mafabi has just said, I got to look at the Order Paper from which I saw a Private Member’s Bill that is supposed to be tabled by a Member who is leaving this House and that is hon. Beatrice Rwakimari. I would appreciate if this House found time to pass her Private Member’s Bill and that of hon. David Bahati before she leaves this House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, next item.

STATEMENT BY THE RT HON. PRIME MINISTER ON PRESS REPORTS THAT HE HAD DIRECTED ALL MINISTERS TO HAND OVER BEFORE THEIR TERM OF OFFICE EXPIRES

3.57
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, yesterday during my absence hon. John Arimpa Kigyagi, Member of Parliament for Mbarara Municipality raised an issue reported by the press alleging that I had directed all honourable ministers to make their hand over reports to the respective permanent secretaries and also vacate their offices before the end of their term of office. 

I want to put it clear that I did not direct honourable deputy premiers, ministers and ministers of state to vacate their offices before their term of office ends as alleged by hon. John Arimpa Kigyagi and the media.

In my circular of 08 April 2011, the honourable deputy premiers, ministers and ministers of state were requested to write hand over reports and hand them to their permanent secretaries by 12 May 2011 when their term of office ends. I added that in those hand over reports, they should indicate the scope of their portfolios, the completed and remaining tasks, the challenges encountered and the proposed solutions.

As I speak, my hand over report is ready and handed over to the permanent secretary in the Office of the Prime Minister. It is clear that I never directed the honourable ministers to vacate their offices before their term of office ends as alleged by hon. John Kigyagi who had been misled by the media. (Laughter) I only requested the honourable ministers to hand over to their respective permanent secretaries. This is because after the President has been sworn in on 12 May 2011, this present Government will be dissolved. New ministers, who His Excellency the President will propose, shall be approved by the Ninth Parliament.

I should add that permanent secretaries, who are accounting officers, have a responsibility to take charge of the property of Government and ensure continuity. I thank you.

MR KIGYAGI: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek further clarification from the Prime Minister. He said he has already handed over to the permanent secretary – the issue I raised yesterday was that these ministers had to be here. So, I don’t know, now that he has handed over, whether he is not here illegally.

Secondly, as indicated by the Prime Minister, the life of the eight Parliament elapses on 18 May as enshrined in Article 77(3) of the Constitution. But while that date is yet to come, we have received e-mails from the administration of Parliament saying that we, the Members of the Eighth Parliament, are supposed to constitutionally be working until 18 May 2011 and so we will receive half the salaries. Mr Speaker, from the time I worked in Public Service of Uganda, I know that one can only receive half the salary if that person is interdicted from work. But even after that interdiction has been lifted, their balances are also paid to them. So, I would like to find out from the Prime Minister and this House, whether this is a correct view. Our mandate expires on 18 May, 2011 – we are not casual workers to be paid on the basis of the days we have worked.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, issues of Parliament on remuneration to Members of Parliament are not within the portfolio of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister; they are under the control of the Parliamentary Commission of which I am the Chairperson. (Laughter)

MR KIGYAGI: Yes, Mr Speaker that is why I have tabled this matter to – it was because you are the head of this institution and I ask you to take up this issue because it might embarrass this House. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: But, honestly, I think last evening as I was closing the office you came to me and you know the steps I took in that regard. I do not want to disclose any information.

4.03
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Handing over a report does not necessarily mean you have left office. You could hand over and say, “This is my report and I will hand over these other small items as time goes on”. 

The only clarification I want to seek from the Prime Minister is: today when I was entering, I saw Prof Kabwegyere driving himself in a Government car. Have you withdrawn drivers from these ministers? (Laughter) 

And secondly, to drive a Government car, you must have clearance from the - if you are not entitled even if you are minister; you must have clearance from the Public Service Commission. I want to also seek clarification if Prof. Kabwegyere has got clearance to drive a Government car.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, the statement I have made is that today I have shown my permanent secretary the hand over report because we normally go through - but then at an appropriate time I shall actually hand over the actual items, including the vehicles.

But let me inform you that as a Prime Minister, when I retire, I am entitled to a vehicle and a driver and, therefore, during this time, the Minister of Public Service allowed the Permanent Secretary to allow me to keep one of my vehicles. So when you see me driving that vehicle -(Laughter)- on Friday, do not get an impression that I am violating the rules of the game.

With regard to the question raised by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, it is preferable that Ministers should have drivers but from time to time, they get problems because the driver may be sick or he may have lost a dear one. Now, those ministers who are versatile like hon. Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere drive, but only to Parliament, but it is better for them to use drivers. I thank you.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE 

THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF ASSETS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, as you remember, we handled this Bill in the committee; we dealt with clauses 1 and 2 and we agreed that because clause 3 deals with interpretation, we stand it over until we finish other clauses and revert to it later. This is because as we move to other clauses, there may be need to define certain terms and that would mean amending clause 3. So, we should not deal with it now. So, let us move to clause 4.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, with due respect to your ruling, I have a problem which goes through the entire Bill in clause 3. This new phrase, “Contracts and Disposal Committee” which I thought we would handle at this stage before we go to any other clause because it features prominently in the subsequent clauses - that proposal that we change it instead of “Contracts Committee”, we add, “and disposal committee”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, that is why we leave it as it is. We shall come to it without prejudice to the amendment you want to effect. It will come because we cannot deal with only one specific term leaving the others. It is rather that we deal with all of them at the end.

Clause 4

MR SEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, before clause 4 put a new clause after clause 3 on page 9. This amendment is for the insertion of section 4(a) to the principal Act:

The principal Act is amended by inserting, immediately after section 4, the following:
“4(a) Procurement procedures under the bi-lateral tied loans;
(1) 	Where a bi-lateral loan or negotiated grant contains a condition that the provider shall originate from the country of the donor, procurement of such a provider shall be in accordance with this Act.
(2) 	Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section(1), where there is a conflict between this Act, the regulations or any directions of the authority and the condition imposed by the donor of funds, the condition shall prevail with respect to a procurement that uses those funds and no others.
(3) 	This section does not apply if the donor of funds is a procuring and disposing entity.”

The justification is that the procurement of a provider under a bi-lateral tied loan should be subjected to PPDA procedures.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have no objection to the chairman’s proposal from sub-clause (1) and sub-clause (2) but the last one; why does he want to bring the donor funds from a procuring and disposing entity? The procuring and disposal entity are our own entities in our Government departments; so that one is covered. If we are transferring an asset to another, it is covered very well in the law. So there is no need for sub-clause (3) to be here.

MR SEBUNYA: I think I will concede on sub-clause (3).

THE CHAIRMAN: Subject to the amendment by hon. Nandala-Mafabi - so I put the question to the new clause proposed by the committee and amended by hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR SEBUNYA: In clause 5, functions of the Authority, insert a new paragraph between paragraphs (d) and (e) as follows:
By substituting for paragraph (n) the following: “Determine the price where applicable work, services and supplies in common use by more than one procuring and disposing entity which may be subject to common procurement and disposal and review the prices from time to time.”

The justification is to expand the mandate of the Authority to set prices for common user items. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amendment, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR SEBUNYA: In clause 8, composition of the board: 
    i) In sub-clause 1(c) insert the words, “Who shall be an ex-officio member and shall not vote”, at the end of the paragraph.

Justification is that the Executive Director is a staff of the Authority and a board member only by virtue of his office.
 
    ii) Substitute for sub-clause 2(b) the following: (b) Include one person nominated by the minister who shall be a procurement specialist. 

Justification, it is important that the board has at least one person with a bias in procurement.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13

MR SEBUNYA: Insert a new clause immediately after clause 12. This is an amendment of Section 24 of the principal Act. “The principal Act is amended in Section 24 by substituting for paragraph (b) the following: 
(b) A contracts and disposal committee and tender boards were repealed and replaced by contract committees by the Local Government (Amendment) Act, 2006.” 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, I have a problem with this amendment. The committee is moving that amendment to provide for a contracts and disposal committee. However, I have a different view about that amendment. 

Mr Chairman, it sounds absurd to have a department – an entity referred to as a contracts and disposal committee. With contracts, it captures aspects, disposal and procurement; they are all contacts. So the other one is superfluous; why add “disposal? It is for no good reason; actually it makes it even complicated to say, “Contracts and disposal unit”. Why don’t we just leave it as the “Contracts committee”?

Even with disposal, there is a contractual relationship – disposing of is also a contract. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to support the Lord Mayor. I do not know why people are saying, “Contracts and disposal committee”. A contract is for purchase or for sale. So the moment we have a committee for contracts, it would deal with both. I do not know where we get this from. Maybe the chairperson will explain to us, but the basic should be “contracts committee”. Let us help you: a contract consists of purchase or sale. So there is no reason to mention contract and add on “disposal”. That means that “contract” has a definition different from “disposal”.  

MR SEBUNYA: In the interest of the argument given, we concede. Let us retain “contracts committee”. It will be understandable that it handles both procurement and disposal.

THE CHAIRMAN: So we go to clause 13?

MR SEBUNYA: Clause 13, rephrased as follows: Section 25 of the principal Act is amended by deleting sub-section (2). 

The justification is the Authority should undertake its own procurement and show best practices in procurement and disposal practices. 

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, I rise to oppose that amendment. The amendment is seeking to delete the section which provides that, “The Secretary to the Treasury shall, for each financial year, appoint an agent to carry out the procurement and disposal activities of the Authority except the micro-procurement activities as described in sections 86.” 

What this amendment seeks to do is to separate the PPDA as an organ and it should not carry out its own procurement and disposal because first of all, we want to avoid the conflict of interest. 

Secondly, it would set an example of good governance. The PPDA is a regulator and, therefore, should not be seen to be procuring. 

For example, the Auditor-General does not audit himself. This Parliament has provided for an auditor to audit the Auditor-General. So, I beg to move that we retain the section. And instead of giving this duty to the Secretary to the Treasury, it should be given to the Authority. So it should read: “The Authority shall for each year appoint an agent to carry out its procurement and disposal activities”. I beg to move. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want, first of all to thank the minister for agreeing; it is true that the Authority should practice good governance. But again you cannot authorise it to appoint. It should be the Secretary to the Treasure because he/she is the custodian of all assets. So, I propose that we retain it as it is for purpose of good governance that the Secretary to Treasury shall appoint. And if the PPDA is worried, then they intervene and state where these people did a bad job.

MR SEBUNYA: We accept the proposal.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 13 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR SEBUNYA: Clause 14, accounting officer: in sub-clause (5) insert the words, “subject to section 74” between the words “shall” and “not” appearing in the first line.

The justification is to allow the accounting officer to negotiate with the best evaluated bidder in cases where the price of the best evaluated bidder is higher than the market price. Otherwise, the accounting officer would have no option but to re-tender, which is a long process. This will lead to low absorption of funds and delays in the procurement process and service delivery. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Clause 15 is on the composition of the contracts and disposal committee, which we now call the contracts committee. Insert a new paragraph (d) in the proposed sub-section 2(a) on page 18, the following: “(d) Members of the board of directors of the governing body of the procuring and disposing entity.”  

Justification, members of the board of directors of the governing body of the procuring and disposing entity are equivalent to those excluded from nomination in this clause.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am having a problem with clause 15 sub-section (7). There are exceptions which are coming up. From my experience, these exceptions are basically applicable mostly to missions whereby the number of staff in the missions is few. Even at times a cleaner becomes a member of the contracts committee -(Interjections)- yes it is true! I think if we are bringing this in the law, we are making some entities become inefficient. They would decide not to put staff in those areas for purposes of maintaining a few and they say, “We can apply this.”  

Here I propose that where the Secretary to the Treasury is supposed to apply this, he must first make sure that one, no more staff can be put in that area or can be rotated. What I want to propose here is that in circumstances like in (7), this should only be applicable where it is impossible on earth –(Interjections)- to put staff –(Interjections)- in that institute. There is a problem. There are missions where people have stayed for 20 years since they were posted there and the law says that after four years, you are supposed to be rotated. If we put this in, we are trying to legitimise these people in the missions not to be rotated in foreign affairs. We must follow the rules to the letter. I think this one – for me I want to propose that we put this one in the regulations; but it should not be part of the law. We should delete it.

MR SEBUNYA: Can you rephrase it? What you said was too the extreme; “applicable anywhere on earth.” Maybe you can rephrase it then we see what to do. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, there are aspects of this clause which bring out the notion of emergency situations. Before you come to sub-clause (7), there is 2(b) where even the accounting officer –(Interjections)- can act in the absence of the committee. The contracts committee can act as a –(Interjections)- committee in emergency situations. Emergency situations are explained in the definition clause. I think this is where the view of hon. Nandala-Mafabi comes in, in situations where it is practically impossible, absolutely impossible. 

We shall have to reflect again on page 9 of the Bill about emergency situations meaning circumstances which are urgent, unforeseeable,  when a situation which is not caused by direct conduct where Uganda is seriously threatened by or actually confronted with a disaster, catastrophe, war or an act of God or life and so forth. There is (a), (b), (c), (d) up to (e). We could look at these sub-clauses and see if they fit within the definition of this phrase, emergency situations. I think that will address the fears of hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

I also have this amendment to propose to clause 15 2(b) to say, “In emergency situations, the accounting officer can act as a committee and only report to the Secretary to the Treasury.” There is need for this accounting officer to submit this same report to the committee in its first sitting when it is fully constituted for ratification. There is need for that clause, at least for the committee, to adopt that decision not to be taken as a decision of the committee when it was done by only one person, the accounting officer. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to propose that to apply this sub-section (6) the Secretary to the Treasury will only practise this where it is totally impossible on earth –(Interjections) 

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, that is already provided for under 7 because 7 talks about, “where the Secretary to the Treasury is satisfied that it is not practicable,” that is what hon. Nandala-Mafabi would call on earth. So, it is properly covered. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, the problem here is to leave this to the discretion of the Secretary to the Treasury to determine whether it is practically impossible or it is not applicable at all. How shall we put there checks and balances so that this discretion is not abused by the Secretary to the Treasury? That is the concern.

MS NANKABIRWA: What hon. Lukwago is raising can be taken care of in the regulations which are going to follow because we are now going into the real administration. We can decide that in the regulations going to follow, which are going to make this act implementable, we can write that down so that the clause is not abused. 

MR SEBUNYA: We can leave it as it is unless there is a new way of re-phrasing to take care of hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s concern. Otherwise, we propose that 7 remains as it is. There is enough control even with the Secretary to the Treasury. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the reason they are bringing this is because there could be conflict of interest. So then we can say that “on a quarterly basis, such entities should file their returns to the PPDA” so that the PPDA can determine if we are really getting value for money. 

MR SEBUNYA: We concede and maybe to confirm with our action, we say sub-clause (8) - then it requires them to report quarterly. Yes, please, as a new sub-clause 8.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, I put the question to it.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.
     
MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, I had indicated earlier, that 2(b) and 2(c) in situations where the accounting officer acts alone on behalf of the committee; I had suggested that there should be a clause to the effect that he or she would report to the committee when it is fully constituted in its first meeting for ratification. Here the provision is that a copy of the activity carried out would be submitted to the authority and Secretary to the Treasury just for record keeping. But as checks and balances I would suggest an amendment.

MR SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, that amendment would be superfluous. First of all, they are saying that the accounting officer under 2(c) shall submit a report of the procurement activity carried out to the authority - and that procuring entity is under the authority - and give a copy to the Secretary to the Treasury for accountability purposes. To seek for ratification retrospectively would be actually dangerous because already there are checks and balances. There is the authority, which has been submitted with a copy to the Secretary to the Treasury, for purposes of accountability. So, your proposal is adequately covered under this.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the accounting officer cannot be on the contracts and disposal committee. You are going to bring problems. In fact this 2(c) should be deleted immediately.

They are saying, “… where he performs the role of a contracts …” he cannot. That is impossible. The moment you do it everyday the accounting officer will perform the role of the contracts committee and you will have this country on fire. He will say, “I did it.” We should delete 2(c). I had not seen it. Mr Chairman, 2(c) should be deleted. 

MR SEBUNYA: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi I think this chapter is for emergency situations and we have described the emergency situations. We have also put in place enough controls to make sure it happens - if it happens once then this is what you do to rectify. Okay, to put a control onto your action.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, emergencies are known. In fact the contracts office has the authority to call his contracts committee to do an emergency procurement or a disposal. There is no reason why the accounting officer should be part - I will explain. The accounting officer is the one who pays and he is the one we are telling to contract and he is the one we are telling to co-sign the contract? That is very dangerous. We must separate the roles. 

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, first of all, we have to read this law in totality. 2(b) provides that where the accounting officer nominates members of the contracts and disposal committee but before the nomination is approved by the Secretary to the Treasury, in accordance with sub-section (2), normally these members are nominated and the ST must approve them. But we are saying that in the event that the Secretary to the Treasury has not, in accordance with the law, approved this committee which happens with many committees -

THE CHAIRMAN: And then there is an emergency situation -

MR KAJARA: In an emergency situation. That is when the accounting officer performs that role of the contracts and disposal committee. Just in emergency situations and not any other time. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, I am worried. If clause 2 which we stood over passes as it is - I am sorry, I will keep on referring to it but “emergency situations” is too broad. If you looked at (d) and (e) it would also include where an investment project is seriously delayed for want of minor items or a Government programme would be delayed or seriously compromised unless a consultancy service is undertaken within the required time frame. If these also constitute emergency situations, it would mean in between the time of the appointment and approval of the members of the contracts committee, a proposal would come up and they say, “There is an investor who seriously wants this to be procured or this land to be disposed of. Please, go ahead.” An accounting officer unilaterally will sit and write and say, “I have given you this land. This is a project which Government has interest in. It is being delayed. We do not want to delay investors. Please, go ahead and take the land,” and that transaction would be lawful. These are situations we have to guard against.

Mr Chairman that is why I am saying there is need for ratification at least for the committee to adopt - for the committee to own this decision and for it not to remain a decision of an individual. That would be very absurd.

DR MAKUBUYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The provision we are discussing relates to emergency and emergency means circumstances which are urgent, unforeseeable and not caused by dilatory conduct -(Interjections)- yes, and not caused by dilatory conduct. So, I think that is what you are trying to cover.

Secondly, we are talking about business and you have dealt with a supplier or a provider in these emergency circumstances and this officer has sanctioned a transaction. A supplier or provider, you are saying maybe I should not provide and I should wait for ratification because ratification suggests that this transaction is not yet concluded. View it from the point of the business person who is dealing with the procuring entity and whether you are actually not introducing uncertainty. 

In the interest of ensuring that there is transparency and all this, is business moving or is it not moving? That too has to be taken into account. I would strongly oppose the idea of ratification. Give this fellow authority and the transaction is concluded because this is not the normal operation. These are the special circumstances as defined here in an emergency. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to seek clarification from the Attorney-General. Supposing we say that when it is an emergency, the contracts committee falls back on the old contracts committee, will it be solving the problem? We want to avoid putting accounting officers in that line. Suppose we say there is an emergency in respect of the way the project has been performed and this has not been approved? The old contracts committee can handle this. That one will solve the problem other than putting accounting officers to be pay masters and even contract. We want to keep them out of there.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think let us stand over this one. We shall come back to it later. Otherwise, we are not moving at all.

Clause 16
MR KASULE SEBUNYA: One, delete paragraph (b) (bb). The justification is that the provision makes the procurement process more bureaucratic and this power should be left with the accounting officer. 

Two, paragraph (c) (ca) (ii) on page 19: delete, “…reference to (a)…” and insert “(i)”. The justification is that the reference to (a) is wrong. The correct reference should be (i).

Three, paragraph (c) (ca) (iii) on page 20, delete the word “setting” and replace it with “approve”. The justification is that 28(1) (ca) (iii) appears to give the contracts and disposal committee operational activities rather than just approval. That is, it sets the reserve price, but then it has to report to the accounting officer for approval. This seems to confuse its role as an approval body.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR SEBUNYA: New clause before 17. Amendment (i) is amendment to Section 32 of the principal Act by substituting for paragraph (a) the following: “(a) recommend the composition of the evaluation and negotiation committees for approval of the Contracts and Disposal Committee.” 

The justification is that procurement and disposing entities not only recommend the composition of the evaluation committees but also that of negotiation committees. Amendment (ii) is that of Section 34 of the principal Act. It is amended in sub-section (2) by substituting for the sub-section (2) the following: “(2) The user department shall prepare a procurement plan based on the approved budget, which shall be submitted to the Procurement and Disposal Unit for implementation when required.” 

The justification is to ensure consistency in the use of words. 

Amendment three is of Section 39 of the principal Act which is done by substituting Section 39: “39. Delegation of powers of the Accounting Officer: An accounting officer may: (a) delegate certain procurement and disposal functions of the accounting officer, contracts committee or procurement and disposal unit to – 
    (i) A sub-division of the procuring and disposing entity or; 
    (ii) A member of staff of the procuring and disposing entity and; 
(b) 	Contract out certain procurement and disposal functions of the contracts committee, procurement and disposal unit or user departments to – 
(i) 	Any other procuring and disposing entity or; (ii) A third party procurement or disposal provider in accordance with the terms and conditions specified in regulations made under this Act.” 

The justification is to allow the accounting officer to delegate within the entity and contract outside the entity to third party procurement and disposal agents or other procurement and disposal entities.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we are creating a very dangerous law here. We are saying that the accounting officer can delegate his functions; we are giving him authority to delegate to some entities including to third parties. When something goes shall we say that, “The law says you can delegate”? That is why I am saying it is very dangerous; we do not need these people to delegate; they should be held personally liable for their act. I will oppose this issue.

MR SEBUNYA: Delegating does not remove the responsibility of the accounting officer. We are delegating the function but not the powers. This is also happening with PPDA. We said that instead of them procuring, it should be somebody else to procure for them. This is the same line of argument and so even the accounting officers can hire specialist personnel. You may want to get a jet but you do not know the details of a jet, so you need another procuring or disposing entity to sell it for you and I think it is within the contracts law.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the procuring entity is free to get the consulting services of the specialised personnel to come and assist but the responsibility of procuring lies with the unit itself. We can tell them that they are free to get specialists but they should be the ones to carry out the procurement.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, I also stand to oppose the amendment. The office of the accounting officer goes with qualifications. To say that certain functions can be delegated – and in addition to what my colleague has said, personal liability should be borne by the accounting officer after delegating these functions. We are not sure whether even the staff you are talking about will be competent to handle some of these matters. You are leaving it to the discretion of the accounting officer to choose amongst the staff whom to delegate. That will be absurd.

Secondly, the reason we are creating procuring and disposing entities is to assign them specific responsibilities and to get to know exactly who is who. Now if we create situations of uncertainties so that in certain cases you may know even the individuals sitting on those committees because the accounting officers have got powers, they can delegate, get third parties and other procuring entities. That would create a very absurd situation. I would request that for purposes of clarity and for us to be specific, let us maintain the status quo.

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, first of all, this amendment was introduced by the committee for expedience. It is normal to delegate but you should remain with responsibility. There are certain situations which would require this kind of delegation as enumerated by the committee. What I am opposed to and I want to amend is to delegate to a member of staff of the procuring and disposing entity. For that one I would say it should be in accordance with the procedures which may be prescribed in the regulations. I think there will be regulations which will be attached to this section explaining the circumstances, when and how and who retains the responsibility. So I would like to support the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR SEBUNYA: For clause 17, (i) substitute the words “alternative procedure” with the words “alternative system”. Justification is that accreditation of a procedure is narrower than a system. 

(ii) Insert the following new sub-clauses: “(6) There shall be an alternative system for the procurement of medicines and other medical supplies. (7) The Minister shall, in consultation with the Minister responsible for Health and the Authority, make specific regulations for the procurement of medicines and medical supplies.
(8) Without prejudice to the general effect of sub-section (7) the regulations made under this section shall – 
(a) Provide for a special nature of procurement of medicines and medical supplies; 
(b) Provide for specific attributes of medical supplies; 
(c) Define which medical supplies are subject to this section; and 
(d) Take into consideration developments in the procurement, storage and distribution of medicines and medical supplies.” 

The justification is to recognise the need for clear and well defined alternative systems for procurement of medical supplies and also enable the procurement of medicines and other medical supplies that are considered as life saving to be done expeditiously.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.)

Clause 20

MR SEBUNYA: (i) In the proposed sub-section (2)(a) (ii) replace the expression “the contract is awarded or the procurement process is terminated”, with the expression, “the best evaluated bidder notice is displayed on the procurement and disposal notice board of the procuring and disposing entity.”

The justification is that bidders may wish to apply for administrative review before contract award and may need to access information in the possession of the entity. The rationale is that after display of the best evaluated bidder notice, the threat of interference with the procurement process is no longer eminent and so there is no justifiable reason for withholding from the public. 

(ii)	Delete the proposed 2(a)(iii). Justification: the clause is redundant since the best evaluated bidder notice has already been displayed.

(iii) In 47(2)(b)(iii), page 23, delete the word, “and” appearing at the end of the paragraph and replace it with, “or”.

(iv)	In 47(2)(b)(iv) (B), page 24, delete the word, “and” appearing at the end of the paragraph and replace it with, “or”.

Justification: the use of “and” is a typographical error.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

MR SEBUNYA: Insert the following new clauses immediately after clause 21: (i) “Amendment of Section 54 of the principal Act. Section 54 of the principal Act is deleted.” Justification: the section duplicates section 7(1)(g).

(ii)	Amendment of Section 56 of the principal Act. Sub-section (1) of section 56 of the principal Act is repealed. Justification: the provisions are already provided for under Section 41 as amended by clause 18.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the new clause 21 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23

MR SEBUNYA: Preference schemes. Substitute for sub-clause (4) paragraphs (a) and (b) the following on page 28: “(a) Where the labour or value addition to the good is more than 30 percent of the ex-works of the goods; and 

(b) The production facility in which the goods are to be manufactured, assembled or processed is in Uganda and is engaged in the manufacturing, assembling or processing of the goods at the time of submission of the bid.”

Justification: the requirement of the breakdown of labour, raw materials and components of the goods originating from Uganda to be more than 30 percent is stringent and will disadvantage many of our local industries.

Delete 59A (8) paragraph (c), on page 29 and the justification is that this condition –

THE CHAIRMAN: I thought –

MR SEBUNYA: It is still clause 23. We adjusted it. 

Delete 59A(8) paragraph (c), on page 29. Justification: This condition is hard to assess and discourages association whether the partnership would strengthen the bid and potentially transfer knowledge to the Uganda partner for fear of not qualifying on these grounds.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have not really understood what the chairman of the committee said but I have a small problem. On clause 23 sub-section (iii), those percentages of margin, they say 15 percent for goods and 7 percent in respect of works and services. What they are saying is that the accounting officer or whoever is concerned can vary contracts by 15 percent or 7 percent? This is quite dangerous. This is one way resources have been wasted. And this is the reason why we are having a lot of arrears coming up in ministries. 

I would propose that instead of having that we give them a margin of preference for goods and services to be 10 percent and for works 5 percent. Justification: To reduce on people having latitude to vary contracts that have huge money because they can give you a contract for 10 billion, when you vary it by 7 percent, that is about 700 million, which is a lot of money. And this is one of the places where public money is being wasted.

THE CHAIRMAN: The solution?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The solution is reducing goods to 10 percent and works 5 percent.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, in proposing this amendment, Government made so many considerations; whether it should be 15 percent, 7 percent or 10 percent. There are margins to be imposed on a foreign bid to make the price expensive. If you reduce it to 5 percent, it will not achieve the purpose for which this is meant to achieve. That grant of margin of preference should be good enough and that is why we proposed 15 percent in respect of goods and 7 percent in respect of works and services. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I think you are not understanding the margin. What we are trying to say is because of that it is open to people varying it every now and then. He says he is within the law but 15 percent of 10 billion is 1.5 billion and somebody can do it to that margin. We should reduce this margin to 10 and 5. We can allow losing 10 percent or 5 percent but not more than that.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, the minister is not being fair to us. Because I am looking at a reduction from 7 percent to 5 percent as proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi and the minister is saying this will cause problems to Government; that there are reasons why Government proposed 7 percent and not 5 percent, and those reasons are not given to us. We have no benefit to share those reasons with you. 

If you listened to what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying, you say 15 percent of 10 billion but that is a lot of money. To me even 10 percent, is still too much. We would still be leaving it open to abuse. If you give these accounting officers the powers to vary these contracts to that extent it is dangerous. So, why don’t you concede honourable minister on 10 percent and 5 percent?

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, what I am saying is the percentages are not variations of contracts but they are margins that are a preference to make a bid that is foreign more expensive so that the locals can take – we want to achieve this preference. If we make the margin so small, you do not get the necessary preference. However, if you insist, we can go by that, although it will not achieve the purpose for which it was intended. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I know a margin; you total something and then you apply the margin. So, I know what a margin is. However, what we are talking about is when you have Shs 10 billion and add a margin of 15 percent, which is Shs 1.5 billion. I know what I am talking about. That is why we are talking of removing it, otherwise if you leave it open, it will be such a big magnitude because Government does big contracts. So, that is why I would like to request the minister to take 10 and five will be the rationale for it. 

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, I would still insist that these margins are necessary to make a difference and to attain what we call a preference between a local and a foreign bid. That is why we are proposing 15 and 7 respectively. So, I propose that we go by our amendment. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 24

MR SEBUNYA: In 59(b)(i) insert the words, “and relevant stakeholders” between the words “authority” and “specify” appearing in the second line. The justification is that there is need to involve stakeholders in the specification of contracts under reservation schemes. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27

MR BAHATI: I have an amendment before clause 27, which I passed over to your clerk. I would like to propose that Section 71 of the principal Act be amended by inserting, after sub-section (3), the following: “A procuring entity shall ensure that all bids shall be evaluated within a period not exceeding 21 days.” This, in real time, is one month.

The justification is to provide for efficiency and timeliness of decision making in the procurement process and to protect the bidders from unnecessary delays, which lead to the bid securities being tied up for a long time and exposing them to the unnecessary price fluctuations. 

The second justification is to build confidence in the public procurement process. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Is this is a new clause? 

MR BAHATI: Yes. 

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, I agree that there must be efficiency and confidence built in the procurement process. It is, however, not advisable that we fix timelines especially clearly talking of 21 days. The effect would be if you do not achieve this process in 21 days, you would have to start the procuring process once again. So, I would like to agree on one aspect where we would say, “A procuring and disposing entity shall ensure that all received bids shall be evaluated expeditiously within a period of time to be prescribed in the regulations.” 

The regulations could prescribe the timeframes depending on the type of procurement. We would like to leave the issue of timeframes in the regulations because contracting a road, for example, may be different from contracting to buy furniture, in which case the authority would have time to differentiate basing on the regulations that will follow. My fear is that if we put these 21 days and the bids are received and not evaluated  within the 21 days, it means that you have to start the procurement process afresh, which would have the effect of even delaying the procurement and service delivery more. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I would like to invite my minister to really agree with me because if you look at the procurement process, we have a timeline for the advertising, we have a timeline for all the other processes but evaluation is one point in the procurement process that has not had a timeline and yet it is one of the sources of delays in our system. So, I think that it is important that we fix it. 

Mr Chairman, I have participated in very huge contracts - look at the Statistics House, Shs 11 billion. If you plan for the procurement process, it is possible to evaluate a bid within a month. Remember that we are talking about efficiency. 

DR MAKUBUYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. First, I advocate for expeditious handling of the procurement process. However, I think that it will depend on what is being procured and the complexity of the documentation which has to be evaluated. To fix a uniform period of 21 days for whatever procurement under the Sun sounds, to me, unrealistic.  

I thought that the honourable mover of the motion would accept that Government is also moving a bit and saying that this timeline can be provided for in the regulations where the minister will first compare the complexity of the evaluation process relating to different procurements and fix appropriate timelines accordingly. But to say that there must be a uniform evaluation period of 21 days, I strongly oppose. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. So, it is “expeditiously”? I put the question to the insertion of a new clause subject to the amendment of Minister Kajara. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27

MR SEBUNYA: Substitute clause 27 with the following:  
“74. Prohibitions of negotiations: 
(1) 	Negotiations shall not be carried out between a procuring and disposing entity and a contractor, in respect of the proposal of the contractor, except where - 
(a) 	The competitive procurement method was used and only one bid was received in response to the call for bids; 
(b) 	The direct procurement method was used; or 
(c) 	The procurement is for consultancy services. 

(2) 	Negotiations under sub-section (1) shall only be carried out where the best evaluated bid or proposal exceeds the budget of the procuring and disposing entity. 

(3) 	For the purposes of the negotiations under this section, the procuring and disposing entity shall investigate why the cost of procurement exceeds the budget of the procuring and disposing entity and may – 
(a) 	Cancel the procurement process and request for new proposals; or
(b) 	Negotiate with the best evaluated bidder in order to obtain a reduction of the scope or the quantities of the procurement.”

Justification: this has been rephrased to specifically provide for exceptions where negotiations may be conducted. This provision is further premised on fact that competition is the best negotiator.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, I strongly oppose the amendment suggested by the committee and I support the original proposal in the Bill. The original proposal provides that negotiations shall not be carried out between the procuring and disposing entity and the supplier or contractor in respect of the proposal of the supplier or contractor. The marginal note is very clear - prohibition of negotiations. We must look at the intentions; the intention is to strictly prohibit negotiations. 

The amendment suggested by the committee has an effect of watering down the suggestion made by the minister to kind of relax and say “Ok, in certain situations negotiations are allowed.” I suggest that we scrap negotiations because it is an avenue for corruption. If we are to stamp out corruption, why do we need negotiations? Let us go into those other modes of disposing of or procuring supplies and other things. I support the proposal as entitled in the original Bill.

MR OKUPA: I oppose the amendment going by the precedent set by the Attorney-General. When you look at the original article, it provides for those negotiations under the regulations, so why can’t we retain it in the original form and keep it as it is in the original Act where it says, “Negotiations shall not be permitted except as prescribed by regulations”? So, the regulations will take care of that; there is no need to import it here. The regulations will cover this, given that the Attorney-General had provided that remedy. Thank you.

MR SEBUNYA: Unless advised by the Attorney-General, we think that there are peculiar contracts where you get only one contractor and, therefore, you need to sit him down and then say, “Please, even though you are the only one, you cannot go beyond this price”. I think that is the spirit.

MR OKUPA: I just want to inform the chairman that in a case where there is only one bidder, you have the option of re-advertising. If he appears for the second and third time, then you can do what you want otherwise, if it is just the first and then you hurry to say, “Let us negotiate”, you can be a victim of a cartel. There are always cartels, and we do not have the anti-trust laws to deal with situations where contractors can connive to arrange for that type of thing. The best thing is to leave the original article as it was. I think the Attorney-General is agreeing with us.

MR SEBUNYA: We shall leave it to the minister, but there some examples that were given by even the PPDA people. There are peculiar contracts, like the non-profitable ones, where you can invite bids and nobody will come up. For example, to construct an expensive sewerage system at no profit; Government may want to put up this strategic investment but there is no businessman who wants to put his money into it. So in the interest of society, we had proposed this amendment, but if the minister can concede I have no problem because he is the one to implement.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, this amendment was by the committee. They were seeking to specifically provide exceptions where negotiations may be conducted. Actually, our amendment is okay but these ones were adding on to make particular exceptions which they mention here. They talk of where the competitive procurement method was used and only one bid was received in response; they talk of where the direct procurement method was used; and they talk of a situation where the procurement is for consultancy services. They enumerate the exceptions under which negotiations may be carried out and they further deny or rule out where negotiations may not be carried out.

The answer is the same in the three - you cancel the process and request for new proposals, which is provided for here in 2(a), and also negotiate with the lowest bidder, which is also provided for in 2(b). Mr Chairman, I propose we go with the amendment of the committee which makes it more explicit. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question - but are we going to sleep here?

MR LUKWAGO: I am not complicating the matter, Mr Chairman. The beauty with the original article is that it has a request for a new proposal which is not provided for in the amendment. It is not the amendment of the committee.

MR SEBUNYA: “For purposes of the negotiations under this section, the procuring or disposing entity shall investigate why the cost exceeds the budget of the procuring and disposing entity and may cancel the procurement process and request for new proposals.” That option is still there; and two, “negotiate with the best evaluated bidder”. As you have said, we have just re-drafted it to make it clear.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33

MR SEBUNYA: Clause 33(1)(b) insert after the proposed sub-section (1)(h), the following: “(i) Donation.” 

The justification is that donation is a method of disposal. Maybe to qualify it further, a donation should be of obsolete items in instances of corporate social responsibility, just like Parliament would want to dispose of computers and give them to schools and hospitals, or by humanitarian assistance. The amounts of this disposal as a donation should be minimal and not substantial.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, I do not know whether we are reading different text. In the committee report, I do not see those qualifications he is talking about. We need to be systematic because tomorrow you will not see these qualifications.

MR SEBUNYA: We have gone on to add “donation”, but when you read further - 33(1)(b) - where there is a public asset to be donated - they are still qualifying – the procuring and disposing entity shall take into account the following factors ....” It is still qualifying the –(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, if you read page 16 of the committee report, in (ii) you are proposing to delete proposed sub-section (1)(a). That means (1) (a), (1)(b) and (1)(c) all fall by the wayside –(Interjection)- yes, because (1)(b) and (1)(c) stem from (1)(a).

MR SEBUNYA: I think this is a drafting issue but when you read, “donation” has been added onto the list of disposing methods; (h) reads, “transfer to another procuring or disposing entity”; (i) would read, “Donation”. When you go to (1)(a), we are proposing, under 33, to delete the proposed sub-section (1)(a). What we are avoiding here is for donation to be a method by default and so we are now putting it up. Down here, we are referring to donation as a default method and so when we put it up here, then it is a main part of disposal. Let me get your information.

MR LUKWAGO: I agree that they want it to be one of the modes of disposal for procurement instead of being a default method. However, if you substitute (1)(a) with your amendment and you leave (1)(b), (1)(c), (1)(d), (1)(e) and (1)(f), it will not make sense. The conditions that you are talking about, that it will apply to obsolete items, with minimal value, for humanitarian assistance, are not here. If you looked at (1)(b), it talks of national security or public interest, health or safety issues, legal or human rights issues, environmental considerations and so on and so forth. So, unless you are to recast and say “yes” I would support your amendment. 

If you said, donation is one of the methods and you put another clause to replace (1)(b), (1)(c), (1)(d) up to (1)(f) to the effect that it would be applicable to (a) obsolete items, (b) of minimal value, or (c) in respect of humanitarian assistance; If it is only that, as you had listed, and we leave out these issues of land or that it shall not apply to the Uganda Land Commission - all these things that are in (1)(c) and (1)(d) - it will be okay.  

MR SEBUNYA: We concede as proposed by hon. Lukwago.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 34

MR SEBUNYA: Delete sub-clauses (5), (6), (7) and (8). The justification is that these are details that should appear in the regulations.

MR KAJARA: In clause 34, the committee is seeking to delete sub-clauses (5), (6), (7) and (8). We already agreed that we can delete subsections (5), (6) and (7) but I oppose the deletion of (8) – the last part. Sub-clause (8) provides that, “The selection method used for the selection of a consultant shall be prescribed by regulations made under this Act and shall include the following: a, b, c up to e.” 

First of all, these selection methods are every crucial to the kind of procurement; and consultancy services are a new area in our procurement process.

THE CHAIRMAN: He has conceded.

MR KAJARA: Okay.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36

MR SEBUNYA: For clause 36, insert new sub-clause (4) as follows: 
“(4) A bidder shall have a right of appeal to the tribunal where the authority fails to issue its decision within 15 working days.” 

Justification: provision to give a bidder a right to appeal to the tribunal where the authority fails or does not make an administrative review decision within the stipulated time frame.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 37

MR SEBUNYA: Clause 37, administrative review; under paragraph (c) on page 42, insert new sub-clauses (2)(c) and (2)(d) immediately after the proposed sub-clause (2)(b) as follows: 

“(c) Upon receipt of a copy of decision in paragraph (b), the authority shall, within 15 working days, review the decision and make recommendations in writing to the procuring and disposing entity indicating any corrective measures to be taken, if any, and giving reasons for its recommendations. 

(d) Where the authority fails to give its decision as provided in paragraph (c), the accounting officer may implement the corrective measures indicated in paragraph (b).” 

The justification is that the authority should report back to the procuring entity within a set timeframe to avoid unnecessary delays which may result into damages.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to it. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39

MR SEBUNYA: For clause 39(9)(a), substitute for the definition of “proceedings” the following: “Proceedings means any application before the tribunal.” 

Justification is that the provision limits the jurisdiction of the tribunal to only reviews. Other matters other than a decision under an administrative review can also be referred to the tribunal.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 40

MR SEBUNYA: Insert the words, “...or a member of the board of surveys” at the end of paragraph (a) and also under the proposed sub-section (2) between the words “entity” and “who”, appearing on the third line.

Further in the proposed sub-section (2) on page 55, insert the words “or disposal” between the words, “procurement” and “shall” appearing in the last line, and thereafter the word “procurement” in paragraphs (a) and (b). 

The justification is that 91(u) limits contracts with members of the procurement and disposal entities in terms of procurement and neglects disposal contracts. There is need to include limitation on disposal contracts.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40, as amended, agreed to.
   
 Clause 41

MR SEBUNYA: Insert a new paragraph as follows: 
“(e) The provider fails to perform its obligations under the contract substantially; 
(f) The provider is suspended by a professional body for professional misconduct; 
(g) The provider is found to have faulted on its obligations under the law.” 

The justification is that there is need to improve performance of providers under contracts and to punish underperformers.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose an amendment to clause 43(2) which reads thus: “In this section, force account mechanism means undertaking the works of a procuring or disposing entity using the personnel and equipment of the procuring and disposing entity.” The amendment seeks to add the words, “or of another procuring and disposing entity”. 

The justification is to allow procuring and disposing entities that do not have the personnel or equipment to engage other procuring and disposing entities to carry out the force account. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, still on that Clause 43, the committee proposes the insertion of the following new sub-clauses: 
“(3) Where a procuring and disposing entity uses the force account mechanism - 
(a) The supplies to be used for the consignment shall be procured in accordance with the requirements of this Act; and 
(b) The procuring and disposing entity shall determine that the direct, indirect and overhead costs to be incurred are less than would be incurred if the assignment was executed by a contractor. 

(4) Where there is an emergency situation or where no contractor is willing to execute the assignment, the force account mechanism may be used without fulfilling the requirements of sub-clause (3)(b). 

(5) For the purpose of ensuring value for money in the application of the force account mechanism, the accounting officer of a procuring and disposing entity shall - 
(a) Make available materials, employees, tools and equipment adequate for the works; 
(b) Ensure that the works are executed in accordance with the applicable technical standards; 
(c) Ensure that the works are supervised by a qualified supervisor; 
(d) Ensure that the employees and supplies used for the works are commensurate to the works; and 
(e) Maintain and manage the records, equipment and supplies of the works in accordance with the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003.”

The justification for the above amendments is to clearly provide conditions and circumstances for the use of force accounts and to provide for accountability of funds by ensuring adherence to standards and value for money.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 44

MR SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, Clause 44 is about regulations. The committee proposes that we rephrase it as follows: 
Section 96 of the principal Act is amended by substituting for Section 96 the following: 
“(1) The Minister shall, on the recommendations of the authority and approval of Parliament, issue regulations for the better carrying out of the objectives and functions of this Act. 

(2) Without prejudice to the general effect of sub-section (1), the Minister shall, on the recommendation of the authority and approval of Parliament, issue regulations for procurement and disposal by a procuring and disposing entity outside Uganda; and 

(3) Regulations made under this section may prescribe, for a contravention of any of the provisions of the regulations or any guidelines issued under this Act, a fine not exceeding 250 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding two years or both.”

The justification is to subject these regulations to parliamentary approval.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 44, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

The Schedule, agreed to.

MR SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I have some transitional provisions, which are not part of the main Act. They appear on page 20 –

THE CHAIRMAN: But, hon. Member, we are already done with that. Maybe let us now go back to clauses 3 and 15.

Clause 3
THE CHAIRMAN: Any amendments to clause 3?

MR SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, this clause is about definitions. I would like to propose the following: 

    (i) Under the definition of “emergency situation” in paragraph (e) on page 9, replace the words “consultancy service” with the word “procurement”. 
	The justification is that “consultancy service” is too narrow yet the clause is intended to allow for emergency procurement of works, services - both consultancy and non-consultancy - and supplies.

    (ii) On page 9, we propose that we substitute the definition of “information” with the following: “Information includes written, visual, aural and electronic information.”
    (iii) Insert the definition of the word “record” after the words “public asset” as follows: “Record means any recorded information in any format including an electric format in the possession or control of a public body, whether or not the body created it.”

The justification is to align that definition with that which appears in the Access to Information Act, but this will also ensure the PPDA’s powers to access information, records and so on.

On page 9, we propose that we insert the following after the definition of procurement and disposal notice board: “Procurement specialist means a person who is engaged in a profession, occupation or calling in which recourse to procurement is directly or indirectly involved and has such knowledge and experience of the practice of procurement.”

The justification is that there is need to recognize the procurement profession in Uganda.

Let me also propose that we insert the definition of the word “urgent” at the end of clause 3, as follows: “Urgent” does not include circumstances that - 
(a) 	Should have been foreseen by the procuring and disposing entity; 
(b) 	Are a result of inadequate planning; and 
(c) 	Are a result of delays by or within the procuring and disposing entity.”

The justification is that the word “urgent” as used in the definition of “emergency situation” in clause 3 on page 9 is not defined in the Bill and so subject to abuse. The definition now restricts the scope of its application to only those circumstances that are not excluded.

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, I would like, in that clause, to propose first of all an amendment to Clause 3(c)(h) which was capturing Bank of Uganda. I would like to say, “Bank of Uganda, except in the exercise of its core function and mandate”. 

The justification is that procurements by the Bank of Uganda will be subjected to PPDA except those under its core mandate like procuring of currency and regulation, and this mandate is given to it by Article 162 of the Constitution.

Mr Chairman, also in this clause, where we are defining a procurement specialist, I am proposing an amendment to say: “A procurement specialist means a person who is engaged in a professional occupation or calling in which recourse to procurement is directly or indirectly involved and has such knowledge and experience of the practice of procurement.” Instead of “and”, we put “or”. Also, instead of “by the procurement professional body” we put “a professional procurement body”. 

The justification is, we do not have a professional procurement body as of now so to put “by the” would mean this is a recognised one, but we can use any professional procurement body, international or otherwise. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15

THE CHAIRMAN: Now we go to 15. There was some disagreement here. Have you thought of the solution?

MR ARUMADRI: Meanwhile as they look out for what they want to put forward, I want to raise this matter as a matter of curiosity, Mr Chairman. This Bill recognises the peculiarity of procuring medicine and medical supplies in clause 17. There is another problematic area of procurement, which is what we usually call “classified items” consumed by the military and it is not mentioned anywhere.

MR KAJARA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. It is the amendment we wanted to put under clause 18.

THE CHAIRMAN: But have you finished 15 now? Are you dealing with 15?

MR BABA: Mr Chairman, I thought I could try and see if I could clarify a bit. Clause 15, in connection to Uganda Missions Abroad, would really be applicable. Most of our embassies are headed by an ambassador and two officers. While they are serving abroad, some emergency issue could arise and one officer comes back say on urgent personal matters, on matters of death, and the accounting officer remains alone. How does he do the procurement in that situation when he cannot go back immediately after a month or so? So, I thought this particular section which we stood over could relate to missions.

Secondly, we have this situation in Libya now, for example, where because of the upheaval there, all the staff have been withdrawn. There is only one member of staff who has been left there to care take of the embassy property. So, what happens when he needs to do disposal and procurement? I thought this section should be left as it is to take care of missions specifically. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put a question on the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: But there was a contention. Have you resolved it?

MR SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I think it was proposed by hon. Lukwago - where the Secretary to the Treasury is satisfied that it is not applicable. It was their proposal not ours.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then I put the question to the proposed amendment by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

MR KAJARA: Mr Chairman, after Clause 18, we wanted to propose an amendment -

THE CHAIRMAN: Under 18 or a new clause?

MR KAJARA: It is a new clause, which is amending Section 42 of the principal Act.

Section 42 of the principal Act is to do with procurement of defence and national security organs which are classified and we wanted to add clause 5 and 6.

Clause 5 is saying, “The defence and national security organs shall appoint a contracts and disposal committee to handle the procurement and disposal of classified items”; 

Clause 6, “The members of the contracts and disposal committee of the defence and national security organs shall be nominated by the accounting officer and approved by the Secretary to the Treasury.”

The justification is that hitherto, the procuring entities in the ministries of defence and national security were not doing work of handling procurement and disposal activities for classified items. So, this now seeks to regularise. Although the committee was doing it, they were not in the law and these activities are not handled by the normal contracts committees since they are sensitive matters. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, clause 46, we have the Schedule 1A and we had wanted to -

THE CHAIRMAN: I called it; there was nothing.

MR SEBUNYA: No; “Organisation to nominate members of the board of directors”. We had a proposal to replace paragraphs 6 and 7 of the schedule with, “The Private Sector Foundation of Uganda”.

The justification is that the board should not be composed of organisations which are potential providers, so we are replacing them with the Private Sector Foundation. It is intended to eliminate conflict of interest.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 1A, as amended, agreed to.

MR SEBUNYA: There is clause 50 - transitional provision. Insert the following after sub-section (2)- 
“(3) A procurement process that had commenced before the coming into force of this Act shall be continued to completion under this principal Act as amended by the Act.”

The justification is to save current procurements.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Clause 50, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTIMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the motion that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTIMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (Amendment) Bill, 2010” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
 
5.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTIMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara):  Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

5.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTIMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read the third time and do pass. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion that the Bill entitled, “The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

“A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2011.”

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations, the Bill is passed! (Applause)

Well, I think we have come to the end of today’s business. Let us adjourn to tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. When do you finish Cabinet? Okay, we adjourn to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. to continue with the business on the Order Paper. 

(The House rose at 5.56 and adjourned until Wednesday, 11 May 2011 at 2.00 p.m.) 
