

Tuesday, 15 May 2018

Parliament met at 2.44 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. First, I would like to inform you about our colleague hon. Eric Musana, the Member of Parliament for Buyaga East who was involved in a motor accident today in Mityana but he has been removed and brought to Nakasero Hospital. I would like to request you to pray for him. He is being taken care of by a team at Nakasero Hospital and our medical team of Parliament is there monitoring his progress.

Secondly, honourable members, we are of course busy still with the budget but we may have to make adjustments because by tomorrow our colleagues the Muslims may start fasting so we may have to shorten our sitting to enable them - both staff and the Members - to go and break their fast. Therefore, we need to work expeditiously.

Thirdly, in the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery we have members of staff from the National Assembly of Zambia. I have not been given their names, and they are all ladies - I want the names so that they can be recorded on the Hansard.

Fourth, honourable members, this weekend, I went to Pakwach and Namayingo and these are the issues that came in from Pakwach. They would like to know from the ministry of finance what has happened to the Wadilai Irrigation Scheme - the Shs 38 billion scheme which has stalled, nothing is going on at the moment.

They are also requesting for a district hospital because it is a new district but I hope that the minister will plan for it in time. They are also complaining that a number of sub counties in Pakwach do not have Government aided secondary schools. They requested Government to quickly handle the road to Arua- Pakwach-Panyimur. 

Unfortunately, there is also a land dispute in Nwoya between the Acholi and the Jonam, so I will be writing to the Prime Minister to see that he takes interest in that situation because I am told it is getting out of hand.

They also complained about the wage bill that they have no funds to pay the civil servants and yet the financial year is ending. They also asked the Minister of Tourism to take an interest in the tourism attractions in that area - the monument of Emin Pasha; there is a place called Nyamulya, they named four places and I would like the minister to see how we can support them on that issue.

On Sunday, I went to Namayingo. It is a new district - not very new but less than 10 years old. They also want a district hospital. They are requesting that one of their health centres Bukimbi be upgraded to a health centre IV. 

The seven sub counties do not have Government-aided schools and they are requesting that in view of their fishing activities, they are requesting that the Government provides for them loans for fishing. They want Government to provide them with good nets so that they stop using bad nets. They also want boats because that is their farm, so they want Government to also support them there.

I just wanted to remind the Prime Minister that in 2015, I was with the President at Bwonda Landing Site and the fishing community brought their issues. The President directed that Operation Wealth Creation should create a project for the fishing communities because the cows and the other things are for the mainlanders. Therefore, the fishing communities require their own projects but it seems no one has followed it up.

Finally, they complained about the brutality of the army in relation to the clamping down on the illegal fishing. Many lives have been lost. I do hope that this matter will be addressed. 

Honourable members, there are a few Members with very urgent issues. Where is hon. Macho?

2.51
MR GEOFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, Busia Municipality woke up on a sad note. A lady of 52 years was suffering from cholera but as I talk, we have ten cases of cholera admitted in health centre IV. I call upon Government to give us urgent attention to see how we can curb that calamity. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Mpaka. He is not here. Hon. Muyanja.

2.52
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here on a matter which is not only affecting Koome Island but I am sure even other areas. On Koome Island, we have only one seed secondary school. The Government promised us to have 29 teachers. However, as I speak, we have only 11 teachers and out of these, we do not have any English teacher at all and all our students are supposed to sit exams in English like other schools.

Therefore, Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Order Members, this is a very serious issue.

MR MUYANJA: Madam Speaker, my people petitioned me and indeed they came to my home because all the documents that I have from the Government show that they have been promising for almost two years now.

Recently, we registered candidates but we could not get good grades at all because someone whom we are using as an English language teacher is a senior six dropout and is not paid by Government and we are just fidgeting as local leaders to see that even our students can be registered for Uganda National Examination Board Exams.

It is my humble request, Madam Speaker, that the Government and the ministry concerned takes this matter very serious with this second term before they open –(Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, colleague for giving way. Madam Speaker, the issue of the so-called required teachers or relevant teachers in most of these schools has not been given the required attention by the education ministry.

Madam Speaker, in areas where we come from, I have visited schools in my constituency. However, a student there can tell you that they last studied English two months ago. When you ask for the teacher who taught English, they will tell you he is a part-time teacher meaning he is a student; some of the students that have failed to get work to do either from Senior Four or Five. In fact, Koome could be lucky that those teachers who teach in their schools could be senior six dropouts. In our schools, the teachers who teach are senior four dropouts who simply loiter around.

Madam Speaker, the information, I would like to give hon. Johnson Muyanja, is that it is not only Koome but it is a general case. I request that you pronounce yourself and give a position so that the Ministry of Education and Sports can take it as a responsibility and do something about it. Otherwise, the young generation is suffering. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of English is important. It is our national language but also the language of examination. You know that, in a few months, there will be mock exams. Can we ask the Minister of Education and Sports, to respond to this issue quickly?   

2.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakabulindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a very serious issue and I have been discussing with my colleague hon. Johnson Muyanja for some time and he had not passed it to me. However, since we normally have top management meetings where ministers are involved, I have noted the concern and we will make sure that we address it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, yesterday we were in the Appointments Committee and we were vetting some of the commissioners for education. We were told that our requirement is 68,000 teachers and we only have 24,000. You better take this issue very seriously.

MR BAKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, I have noted it.

2.56
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Last Friday, on 11 May, 2018, the New Vision carried a headline that cancer causing toilet papers are flooding Kampala markets. In otherwise, it is trying to tell us that all the toilet papers that have so far flooded our markets in Kampala, including napkins and facial tissue cause cancer. Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) released this information and it is their responsibility to manage quality; let them assure us of what is safe or not. You are aware that toilet paper, is one thing that is used everywhere by all of us. 

I request the ministry concerned and is responsible for UNBS to come and tell us whether we are safe or already sick. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should come and inform the country about the safety of toilet papers. It is going to our schools; it is in our homes and the hostels?

MR ANGURA: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay for the record, this New Vision newspaper such that it can be verified. Thank you.

2.58
MR PETER OKOT (DP, Tochi County, Omoro): Madam Speaker, on 14 March 2018, this Parliament approved Shs 1.2 billion to support the eight districts and two regional referral hospitals in Northern Uganda for the treatment and management of the nodding syndrome. 

To date, this money has not reached the accounts of the above districts. It was released as an emergency to be used until the end of this financial year. We are getting closer to the end of the financial year and no money has been released. 

Therefore, may we know from the Ministry of Health and that of finance where we are on this? The nodding syndrome problem still exists. Was this done for public relations purposes or Government is serious and committed –(Interruption)

MR OKIN: Thank you my colleague, hon. Peter Okot, for raising this very important issue. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give is that; it is true this money was passed as emergency to address the current situation of the nodding children. As we speak now, in Kitgum District, this money has not reached the account of Kitgum District Local Government -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: The point has been made that the money has not arrived despite us releasing it. I will ask the minister to explain where the money has gone? Any response on the money for the nodding disease? 

3.00
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Madam Speaker, allow me to thank you and honourable members for this observation. It is true that the money for nodding syndrome has not been sent to the districts. As you are aware, it is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to send this money. He is here and we shall request him to respond.

The principle and agreement in the House at that time, was that the money should move directly from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to the districts and this principle has not changed. Since, I still have the Floor, Madam Speaker, may I respond to the issue of Cholera?

THE SPEAKER: Minister in charge of finance, where is the money? 

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I would like to request that you give me a few minutes to crosscheck and come back to inform the House.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Minister, you can now report on the Cholera issue. What are you going to do in Busia?

DR ACENG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you are aware, we have had very heavy rains for the last many months and the rains are not decreasing. Due to the heavy rains, we have Cholera outbreak in many districts in the country. We also had Cholera outbreak in the refugee camps in Hoima but we have been responding and the response has been good. For example, the Cholera outbreak that we have currently in Kampala, the numbers have gone down. To date, we have only about five patients admitted. 

However, the good news is that we have started bringing in the Cholera vaccines. We started with the refugee camps because the numbers that we were getting there were quite many. We are officially going to launch the Cholera vaccine in July in Nebbi District for all the other districts in the country. However, we are responding and the response has been good. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have now got the names of our guests in the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery. From the National Assembly of Zambia, we have:

Ms Maggie Siwale
Ms Margret Namukazye Nkhoma
Ms Zulu Lomiwedani 
Ms Hildah Chilenga Simwendoh
Ms Mercy Mboroma Chisenga 
Ms Jenipher Kabamba.

You are all welcome. (Applause) Yes, a very powerful team of ladies -(Laughter)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. A colleague has raised an issue to do with the counterfeit toilet paper. I am a member of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. When UNBS appeared before the committee, they informed the committee that 54 per cent of the products within Uganda are counterfeit.                  	
  	 
Madam Speaker, I know that you had directed that the committee on trade looks at the pre-verifications of conformity in respect of motor vehicles. 

I was wondering whether it is not procedurally right for you, Madam Speaker, to direct that the committee on trade also looks at the pre-verification of conformity for all goods produced, those within and outside Uganda so that the investigation could cover that. This is because the companies licensed to do the verification have no capacity to do that to enable the committee to report wholesomely on all these products. 

Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) told us that actually the cause of cancer is the counterfeit products we use and they were basing on those statistics they had. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I will study it and see whether we will have to adjust the other terms of reference. I think we need to support the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. It does not have sufficient inspectors on many of our borders. If we could support them there, it might help. Yes, honourable, do you want to talk about the Bible? I will come to you. The minister has something to say.

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, today the Daily Monitor headline indicated that Government is going to tax our Holy Books - the Bible and the Koran. I thought it is important that we inform Members of Parliament and the country at large because I know many religious leaders have been contacting us to say that Government – this has been a debate that has been going on in the media. We need to clarify that we are not going to tax the Bible and the Koran. (Applause) In fact, under the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2017, we have made it very clear in section 12 that we are, among other things, exempting the supply of Bibles and Korans. Therefore, we are not going to tax them because we believe that as it is written in Matthew 28:16-20, Jesus told us that, “All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me. Therefore, go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit and teaching them to obey everything I have commanded you”. (Applause) That is the purpose why the Bibles and Korans are supplied throughout the country and we cannot stand in the way of spreading the Word of God. 

3.07
MR PETER MUGEMA (NRM, Iganga Municipality, Iganga): Madam Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. First of all, I thank you for whatever you have been doing for me. Colleagues, thank you for your prayers, I am now back in full gear. (Applause) 

I have the plight of my people on my heart. Over the weekend, I had some of my voters who approach me. They are coffee seedling growers and they have not got anything from Uganda Coffee Development Authority since August last year. However, when they tried to find out from their counterparts in Masaka, western Uganda and other areas, they discovered that the farmers in these areas have already been paid their April arrears. 

Is it a syndicate from those people that Busoga has to be taken for granted? (Applause) For the westerners, even in April, they were given everything -(Interjection)- is it because you come from the west? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will ask the minister of agriculture to explain what has happened to the payments. Actually, last week, I had to intervene to get some of my farmers paid by UCDA so agriculture should explain to us what has happened to the payment. 

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker, the procedural point I am rising on is the issue that the toilet paper is multi sectoral – trade, science, human rights and health but more importantly, the health aspect. 

Would it not be procedurally right for the Minister of Health to make a statement in relation to the safety of using the toilet tissues in Ugandan markets? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether it is really about all the toilet paper. I think there are particular types of toilet paper and the minister responsible for the standards and the quality is the minister of trade; so let the minister of trade come and tell us. If there is need for a follow up to identify which ones are causing cancer, the health minister can assist us. Let trade come and tell us which of those are causing cancer.

MR MAJEGERE: Madam Speaker, it is now clear that the land probe is going to take two years and above. There are names that have been mentioned already. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that those that have already been mentioned leave office and the Leader of Government Business comes here and as Parliament we take a decision? You cannot tell what will happen in two years. It is a very long time and you cannot be sure that even after two years, that probe will end. 

Now that we already have some names, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that those names are brought here on the Floor of Parliament and we debate and take a decision? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we will urge the Prime Minister to come and brief us on what is going to happen in view of what is transpiring in the lands commission. The Prime Minister should come and explain to us.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chair, could you please do an executive summary, use 15 minutes. 

3.11
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I present the report, I beg to lay on the Table, the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the Policy Statement for Financial Year 2018/2019.

I also beg to lay on the Table, the minutes for the report of the committee.

Madam Speaker, the report presents key achievements and challenges for Financial Year 2017/2018, key planned output for 2018/2019, budget performance for votes 006 which is the headquarters and 201-236 for the missions, proposed budget estimates for the Financial Year 2018/2019, budget shortfalls for Financial Year 2018/2019 and recommendations made for the Financial Year 2018/2019.

Since I have to be brief, I would like to inform this House that out of the 36 missions plus the ministry headquarters, only 10 failed with compliance for gender and equity. I would like to also inform you that the 10 that failed was no fault of their own because these were new accounting officers in the missions and they were sent out before they were inducted. Ministry of Foreign Affairs has confirmed to me that they are going to invite them this year in July in order to give them the course and we hope that next year, they will perform well.

Madam Speaker, this was great improvement because last year none of the missions was compliant. If we can get 25 plus the headquarters compliant, I feel these people should be given a chance to be inducted and they carry out their duties.

Madam Speaker, the rest of the information is in the main report. I would like to go to the observations and recommendations.

Classification of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs

The committee noted that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is classified in the Public Administration Sector as a consumptive ministry, yet it has a major role in mobilising external resources and attracting foreign investors. Our recommendation is that the status of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should be reviewed and classified as a productive industry and not a consumptive industry since it works to contribute significantly to the productive sectors, especially now in the face of economic and commercial diplomacy and promotion of education and investment.

Government buildings and administrative infrastructure at the missions abroad

This has been a usual story but we recommend that:

i) 	Renovation of existing buildings should be prioritised, especially those that are dilapidated in Brussels. Madam Speaker, allow me to thank you very much for directing the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to find some money for the Brussels Mission. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has gone out but they promised that they would put aside Shs 5 billion to start-off the renovation of the sanctuary. At this stage when we are going to have the budget read out, we want to see whether the Shs 5 billion is somewhere. Otherwise, we thank you for the initiative.

ii) 	The Ministry of Foreign Affairs should prioritise purchase of the land in Washington allocated by the US Government to avoid further embarrassment since the US Government has warned that it shall not provide security at the current location, which is not a diplomatic area. They wanted $5 million.

iii) 	The Ministry of Foreign Affairs should expedite development of the vacant plots of land in Abuja, Guangzhou, Brussels, Dar es Salaam and Addis Ababa which already owned by Government to avoid them being reclaimed or encroached on like it is the case in Addis Ababa

iv) 	Government should review the current National Social Security Fund (NSSF) law to allow NSSF enter into Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) outside East Africa, which PPPs could be a solution to acquisition and construction of Government property abroad.

v) 	Non-tax revenues collected at missions should be kept in a retention account annually and ploughed back to specific missions in a rotational manner for the renovation, construction and acquisition of Government property abroad.

Economic and commercial diplomacy

The committee noted that over time Uganda's foreign relation is changing towards promotion of economic and commercial diplomacy. This is in line with the NDP II and Vision 2040. I will not mention the missions which got his money but we are saying the pilot project was aimed at stepping up Uganda’s strategic efforts on economic and commercial diplomacy through Uganda’s missions abroad. In specific terms, the pilot programme sought to scale up: 

Promotion of Uganda's exports abroad.
Promotion of Uganda as a destination for leisure and conference tourism.
Attraction of foreign direct investment.
Mobilisation of external resources for Uganda's development, and
Promotion of technology transfer.

The committee received a report on the performance of Economic and Commercial Diplomacy in the above-mentioned pilot missions for financial years 2016/2017 and 2O17/2018. Work plans for missions implementing Economic and Commercial Diplomacy in selected pilot missions for Financial Year 2017/2018 are attached as Annexes 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 & 9.

The committee recommends that based on the evaluation report of the funds so far spent by the eight missions, funds should be availed for phase II for roll-out of the programme in more missions.

Outstanding arrears on contributions to international organisations

Madam Speaker, the committee was concerned that the continued failure to meet Uganda's subscription obligations to international organisations not only erodes the country's stature on the international arena but may limit the country's participation in activities organised by those organisations, besides posing the risk of penalties. Outstanding arrears on contributions to international organisations are provided in Annex 1, Page 25 and the total stands at Shs 63,151,740,047.

The committee strongly recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should clear the outstanding arrears to-date and promptly pay the annual subscriptions to these organisations to protect Uganda’s image and interests abroad and to ensure Uganda participates fully in deliberations of these organisations. The committee further recommends that in future, Government should prioritise and only sign up for international organisations that are beneficial to the country.

Loss on poundage for missions abroad

Madam Speaker, the committee observed that this has remained a perennial problem to the sector because of the foreign exchange volatility. For example, for the mission in Berlin, out of the Shs 4.68 billion that was sent, they lost Shs 555 million because of loss on poundage. The committee recommends that the budget system should have 70 per cent of the budget in-built to automatically offset the loss on poundage. This is because when they delay, most of the services are not rendered because the missions do not get money on time.

Establishment of new missions

That is a request and the committee strongly recommends that funds should be secured to establish these new missions, given the strategic importance and economic value in terms of foreign direct investments, trade and tourism that will arise.

Externalisation of labour

The committee observed that cases of gross abuse of Ugandans working abroad continue to be reported and is concerned about the lack of a policy and budgetary provisions to cater for externalisation of labour, which renders many Ugandans working abroad vulnerable and at risk of exploitation and abuse.

The committee established that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has designated consular officers in each of the missions abroad, who among other duties, handle issues of Ugandans working abroad. However, some Ugandans abroad tended to shun their embassies and missions despite the advice that they needed to register with them to get consular services.

The committee was further informed that in collaboration with Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, a labour officer/labour desk would be established at missions abroad to specifically handle concerns of Ugandans working abroad especially, in the Middle East.

The committee recommends that:

Government expedites the formulation of policy framework on labour externalisation that conforms with the International Labour Organisation (ILO) Statute and benchmarks countries that have success stories in externalisation of labour like Philippines.
Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development expedites the establishment of Labour Desks at Missions abroad to supplement the efforts of the missions in monitoring and handling the increasing concerns of Ugandans working abroad, especially in the Middle East.
Massive awareness creation by Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development in liaison with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of Internal Affairs should be undertaken to inform and alert the public about the registered and licensed companies, as well as the right procedures for enrolling for work abroad. The messages on externalisation of labour should be properly packaged to ensure they reach the population at the grassroots through local media, barazas, and Community Development Officers (CDOs) at sub-county level.
Ministry of Internal Affairs should strengthen procedures and mechanisms for border control to check for human traffickers. In addition, checks should be made on the issuance of travel documents. 

Madam Speaker, most of the people harassed in the Middle East are those that are trafficked.

Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should ensure that only those labour export companies that are registered with them are the ones that advertise and export labour.

Madam Speaker, on the radios, we hear someone saying, “Call this number to get a job in the Middle East. You will get a salary of Shs 8 million” and yet it is not true at all.

The Diaspora Policy and the Bill to establish Institute of Diplomacy and International Affairs
On this issue, the committee recommends that Cabinet expedites the National Diaspora Policy and presents to Parliament the Uganda Institute of Diplomacy and International Affairs (UIDIA) Bill, for presentation that will provide the legal framework for the institute, or else a Private Member's Bill would be moved to that effect.

In the interest of time, allow me to go to the conclusion.

Conclusion

Subject to the observations and recommendations made herein, the committee recommends the approval of Shs 196,929,000,000 for vote 006 -Ministry of Foreign Affairs Headquarters and vote 201-236-missions abroad, for the Financial Year 2018/2019 to enable it deliver its mandate:

Vote 006: Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
Wage recurrent	- Shs 5,519,000,000
Non-wage recurrent - Shs 26,255,000,000
Development - Shs 713,000,000
Sub-total - Shs 32,487,000,000

Votes 201-236: Missions abroad
Wage recurrent	 - Shs 22,740,000,000
Non-wage recurrent - Shs 119,002,000,000
Development - Shs 15,930,000,000
Sub-total - Shs 157,690,000,000

This includes the arrears to international organisations, which is Shs 6,752,000,000, totalling to Shs 196,929,000,000. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and Members of the Committee on Foreign Affairs. Honourable members, the report has been signed by the necessary minimum number of members. However, as I indicated earlier, we will have a limited debate of about five or six Members because we want to finish the reports and then go to the Committee on Supply. 

Before Members start the debate, today I want the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to respond specifically, to the recommendation on page 18, in relation to the utilisation of the non-tax revenue. This is because we have talked many times about the state of our missions and the failure by Government to plan. We want the minister to tell us specifically if he commits to this recommendation.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has more than three ministers. In fact, it has five ministers. We are deliberating on the budget, which is very sensitive to this nation. When you look around, you cannot see any minister from that ministry. I am   wondering whether it is not procedurally right that you issue a directive to the ministers in the finance ministry to leave whatever business they are doing or tell us whether the priority area they are handling outside this Parliament, makes more sense to them than the budget, before we continue with the deliberations on the sectoral committee reports for budget estimates for Financial Year 2018/2019. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it seems there are ministers here who are allergic to sitting in this House. I am calling upon the Prime Minister to direct the ministers to come today and tomorrow, until we finish this budget. We are dealing with money but we have nobody from that ministry. 

3.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Okello Oryem): Madam Speaker, let me apologise for the absence of my colleagues. We will inform the Prime Minister of the directive you have issued here. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Should I suspend the House? I suspend the House for 15 minutes and if the ministers of the finance ministry will not be here, we shall adjourn. 

(The House was suspended at 3.33 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.45 p.m.) 

(The Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Asamo, take the floor. Hon. Asamo, isn’t the microphone working?

3.45
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the report but the challenge of the gender and equity compliancy is becoming a pretence to me. For somebody to say we are new is to hide under cover. I think Parliament should start putting sanctions on these ministries that do not comply. Why would you take the money when you are not complying with certain standards?

We are aware that the Equal Opportunities Commission and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development issued a certificate for equity and gender but unfortunately, some ministries just dilly dally and do not want to comply. You can imagine, there are 10 of these institutions which did not comply under that ministry.

I think it is a critical thing that when we pass laws in this country, people should follow them. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to support the issue of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs moving from the consumption part to an area of economic base. Really, Foreign Affairs is our face and up to now, if the minister has not been given money for public holidays or where they can have and host other people, I do not know where we are going. If we are really moving to a middle-income economy, we need Foreign Affairs to be given a lot of money to market Uganda.

I would like to tell you that when you get to some missions, the person who sits at the front desk should resemble Uganda. When you look desperate in a foreign country, then how desperate are you back home?

I think the finance ministry working with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should add that money because anything which comes to us - whether scholarship or sponsorship - goes through Foreign Affairs.

So, Madam Speaker, I would like to support the issue of the committee that this ministry should be added more money so that they move away from the area of consumption and become productive.

That is my point, Madam Speaker.

3.49
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In January, together with some committee members, we visited the US but I was perplexed-

THE SPEAKER: Are you in Foreign Affairs committee?

MR BURUNDO: I am not. I went under National Prayer Breakfast which is here in Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, it was very unfortunate; we had a meeting with the ambassador and the staff. We got information that it is only the ambassador who has accommodation in the US and the remaining staff had to rent. 

Surprisingly, the money which is used for rent is more than the money we can use to buy a house in the US. That was very unfortunate and we received the information from the staff of the Ambassador of Uganda.

So, I would wish to get clarification from the minister and then maybe the chairperson on what really the problem is. Why don’t we buy a house and house these staff that rent instead of paying much money?

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we also had another challenge there; our embassy in the US has very few staff. (Interjections)- Madam Speaker, I would like to be protected so that I can bring up my point well.

THE SPEAKER: Order Members; allow hon. Burundo present his points. 

MR BURUNDO: They have very few staff and here in Uganda, the staff we are talking about are these cashiers; not actually complicated staff or – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, why are you harassing the member? (Laughter)

MR BURUNDO: So, I was meeting sophisticated staff like doctors - you know training a doctor takes a lot of time, but we can easily train accountants in two years. We have so many accountants in Uganda. Why should we lack staff in the US when –(Interruption)

MR AYOO: Madam Speaker, the problem most of the missions abroad are having is that they are supposed to employ local staff that are based in those countries. Sometimes, they are supposed to give them formal contracts. Due to lack of money, they end up giving them informal contract and pay them outside the formal system.

So, in that process, we find our diplomatic mission entering into informal practice of employing people underground. This is all because of inadequate funding. If they had enough money, they would give the employees formal contracts and pay them adequately. In the US, you are supposed to pay them a living wage. You do not pay somebody below a certain standard. 

So, that is the problem with the local employees he is saying are not complicated.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR BURUNDO: I said sophisticated, my brother. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

Finally, Madam Speaker, we also got the final challenge whereby the tourists who are supposed to come to Uganda were supposed to go through the embassy. Of recent, they are supposed to apply online. So, the embassy was giving us information that the number of people who are now applying to come to Uganda has drastically reduced; reason being they do not trust –(Member timed out.)

3.54
MR JOHN BAPTIST LOKII (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs for the report the committee has presented before the House today. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to give my contribution in light to the plight of our foreign missions. We have some of our foreign missions, that are suffering but nobody seems to come to their rescue. I take an example of our embassy in Ethiopia; I also take note of the suffering of our sanctuaries in Mombasa and Zanzibar. 

Madam Speaker, when we visited these sanctuaries and missions abroad last year in August, some of these staff did not want to interface with the committee directly. Some of them chose to hide because of the problems that they are facing in the missions.

Madam Speaker, when we asked them whether they are bound by the diaspora policy that the committee was talking about, which seems not to be in existence - You find that the consular activities, foreign policy are ad-hoc. There is no policy to guide some of the activities implemented by the missions abroad.

When you ask them if they have a charter that guides the activities of the foreign mission; most of them do not have any charter that guides whatever they are implementing. We therefore call upon the Minister of Foreign Affairs to expedite the harmonisation of the policy issues that have increased the suffering of our foreign missions. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.56
MR LAWRENCE ONEGIU (NRM, Ora County, Zombo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs for a very clear presentation you have made and for bringing out the issues to the House. The embassies and missions we have abroad are definitely supposed to market Uganda in various areas to see that we have more areas of development and cooperation.

To me, we need to strengthen this, especially in the area of trade, education, science and technology. The other sectors we can handle by ourselves as long as we can strengthen these three areas.

Secondly, it is important to join essential organisations to the benefit of Uganda. That will help us a lot in these three areas I have mentioned. The cooperation should even be more strengthened in the SOT because we are now taking about SOT collaboration with these countries, it will help us in lobbying with the North. That will be very important.

Another area of importance is that in most cases we have these agreements which we signed. However, when it comes to domestication, we are not tracking progress. Therefore, what is the use of signing and joining these organisations and we come back home and don’t track progress and status of these agreements? Maybe in the coming years, we should be able to strengthen that area as well. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.58
MR DONONZIO MUGABE (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee has reported that the mission reports to finance ministry but when it comes to budgeting their budget goes through Ministry of Foreign Affairs. We happened to visit some of these missions as Public Accounts Committee. It is one of the major challenges they are facing.

First all, ministry of finance delays the release; then when it gets to Ministry of Foreign Affairs it also delays the release to the embassies and then it jeopardizes their work. We have Cuba as our ally and they are supporting ten of our doctors from Uganda each academic year. 

It happens that Cuba is being overseen by our ambassador in Canada. When we went to Canada, he had spent close to two years without checking on Cuba where we have our students.

When it comes to construction and renovation, they are facing challenges especially in Canada where the architectural drawings have to be done by Ugandan engineers and when they reach there, those drawings are not honoured by the Canadian Government. Or when it comes to procurement, the process must be done by the procurement officer from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and it is the ministry and embassy to facilitate the process. It gives a gap and delays all the process that are related to the procurement and all they intend to do-(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and hon. Kahonda for allowing me to give this very important information. The information I am giving is, if you read last year’s budget for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, they also put renovation and repair of the dilapidated buildings. I do not know why you are ever budgeting for the same thing every year. Up to now, you have not renovated those buildings; what happened? 

We need to find out what happened to last year’s budget. Why is it that they did not do the work? And this year they are budgeting for the same thing again. Thank you.

MR MUGABE: Madam Speaker, what I would propose that Ugandan Government appoints an independent ambassador to oversee Cuba activities then two-(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: We closed the mission in Cuba. We have no presence in Latin America.

4.02
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, woman representative Amuru): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Allow me to also add my voice in thanking the chairperson for a good report. My issues are on four areas; one on the renovations of the missions abroad. I recently was at the Kigali Mission; it is something that a Ugandan is proud of. It was not renovated but it was a new building. Even when you enter in the reception, you will get all the Ugandan products there. Therefore, they are not only there but they are also marketing the country. I was very proud of our mission in Kigali.

Then about the establishment of the new missions; if you look at the report, they talk about Doha in Qatar, Dubai and United Arab Emirates. These are the countries that are employing most of our young people. It saddens me that as a country, we do not have missions there. Who is watching over our children that we send over there? I would like to add my voice in supporting the committee recommendation that these new missions be established. 

We are talking about recruiting labour officers and as a Committee on Gender, we agreed that most of these missions where these countries are recruiting our children, must have a labour officer or desk that looks after the interest of our children. Therefore, without these, I see a very complicated situation and I add my voice in supporting the committee in ensuring that these new missions are established.

They also talked about a very interesting thing that is the mass sensitisation about the externalization of labour. I remember when some of the representatives of the external recruiters visited the gender committee; one of the issues that we raised was that Kampala based recruitment must stop.

If you see, most of the people who are coming to Kampala are from upcountry; how about having outreaches to say Gulu, for Northern? We were informed that they have offices in Mbarara. However, other parts of the country are not taken care of.

Therefore for this to be effective, we must have outreach stations outside Kampala. If you do your statistics well, most of the people are coming from rural places to Kampala looking for employment. I take that information-(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Member for giving way. Besides not having upcountry centres, there is a big challenge for our people seeking for employment. There is no standard that shows the requirements when you come to Kampala in order to go abroad. Honourable members, the Minister of Gender Labour and Social Development should clarify on this.

The companies calling our citizens to go abroad should standardise the requirements - we must intervene because we talk for them.

MS AKELLO: Thank you, honourable member, that is why we need these outstations. They invite you for interviews, when it is time to process the visa, you again travel -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: For the record, for the United Arab Emirates we have a mission in Abu Dhabi, we expect a consulate in Dubai, Qatar, Kuwait and Oman. 

40.7
MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have about four points to put forward: 

(i) 	I have information that the allowances given to our foreign officers for tuition for their children is too low. I understand that it is $2,500 and yet most institutions abroad charge much higher than that. 

(ii) 	The Foreign Service allowances are also too low, when you compare them with the foreign affairs officers from the neighbouring countries, you find that the Ugandan officers are in bigger problems. I do not know whether we have made arrangements to increase their money.

(iii) 	We have a problem in Uganda, we know very well that some of the foreign officers that we send to embassies are not specialists. At one time, in Washington, one officer was declared persona non grata because he could not measure up to the standard of a foreign officer and I think that is too bad for this country. We need to stop politicising the foreign offices and start appointing trained personnel. Thank you so much.

4.09
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One time we agreed here that the Ministry of Gender and Social Development together with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should have a data base; it could be based in Foreign Affairs for easy interaction so that we know the number of Ugandans who have gone abroad and to which destinations.

If we are to currently ask the Ministry of Foreign Affairs about it, they might need a whole month to come up with a list of the number of Ugandans who are abroad and to which destinations.

I was in China with a committee and I interacted with the embassy and they said that there are so many Ugandans in Chinese prisons, some on life imprisonment, death row and many others.

They said that the Government of China is willing to swap prisoners because I understand that there are some Chinese who were arrested here for lack of working permits. Some of the Ugandans who were equally arrested there lacked working permits.

If we give them 100 Chinese prisoners, they would swap them with 100 Ugandans; it is up to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and our Government to take up this offer. Thank you.

4.11
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. When hon. Silas Aogon was speaking about people traveling abroad, we saw it as a joke, but it has happened to some of the Members of Parliament here. Some people in Uganda may not know what is needed when travelling.

There is someone who went to the airport with a ticket, visa plus the parents, they had tickets but did not have visas. She thought that provided she had a visa the people she was moving with would be allowed to travel since they had tickets.

On another note, I noticed a problem while I was in London; the Embassy there does not care about Ugandan issues. The Embassy is at the centre of London and our flag should be flying high, but sometimes, it is not there; even when it flies, the flag is too old and you can hardly notice its colours; it is torn.

When we had our meetings in the House of Commons and the House of Lords; we were with you Madam Speaker but the people in the offices do not even come for those meetings.

I thought they would attend and get to know what we need as Ugandans because they are the ones representing us there. If Members of Parliament are there including the Speaker of this House and you cannot attend any of those meetings, what are they doing as our ambassadors? It has happened twice and I did not like it. 

Lastly, and still in London, when you go to the embassy, you can hardly meet a very relevant officer apart from the front desk officers. The whole office is empty, and yet they were aware that Members of Parliament were around.

In one meeting, where they came, they only stayed for not more than five minutes. It is like they have other businesses to look out for other than what took them there.

When you go to China, the people there welcome you, the ambassador is ready to talk to you and teach you how business is done between the two countries. You feel comfortable and you get to know that there is an ambassador and there are people ready to work for our country –(Interruption)

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. A part from the dilapidated buildings which are an embarrassment to Uganda, the appointing authority has perfected the art of appointing political failures instead of professional diplomats who should measure up to the expectations of the tasks.

MR BARYAYANGA: Thank you, there needs to be serious action in these embassies where we have our flagships with those countries. We need to see them, know what they do and have accountability. We need to showcase that they are indeed there and they are our workers - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, to touch on what hon. Aja said, the Parliamentary Commission is going to organise additional induction to smoothen some small edges, which are a bit rough. (Laughter)

4.16
MR ANDREW KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleague to thank the committee for the wonderful report. 

Madam Speaker, you gave me a chance last year to go to Norway and Sweden. The Ugandan embassies in those countries need specialists who know about the beauty of our country, Uganda. We have a lot of potential in Uganda only that we do not have the people working at the embassies who do know about it. 

I used the knowledge I have in tourism to speak to the different people I met and right now about 20 different groups of tourists have come to our country. This is because I was able to talk about the wildlife, our culture, the food especially the “rolex” - (Laughter) - and about the beauty of the people of Uganda as well as their hospitality. 

Finally, Members of Parliament have a great opportunity to travel to different parts of the world. I implore your office, if possible, to ensure that every member travelling abroad carries material relating to what we have in our country. Thank you.

4.17
MS SUSAN AMERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to equally thank the committee for the good report presented. I know that our foreign policy is the domestic policy. However, it has been a problem; we do not have a written foreign policy in this country and when you try to follow it up, you will only be told stories about it. 


When I had just joined Parliament, I served on the Committee on Foreign Affairs.  We tried to push for the foreign policy but to date, it has never been brought to the Floor of Parliament. I do not know how we are going to progress on this.

I would like to add my voice on the issue of the appointments. We always vet the ambassadors before they are posted to the respective embassies. I do not know what they do when we have assigned them to go and work. Why can’t the appointing authority take a decision to take these people for training before deployment? This is important because people who do not have diplomatic knowledge have been an embarrassment to us. That is why they are not performing. So, I would like to request that this Parliament decides that after the names have been nominated and vetted and before these people are sent to their posts, they should be taken for training in diplomacy. It is not a joking subject; it is the future and the face of this country. 

Madam Speaker, the conduct of diplomats is so annoying. We are leaders of Uganda who go out not to play but when you pay a courtesy call to the embassy or the High Commission, what you get there is nasty. 

Last year after some of our colleagues were robbed in South Africa, I happened to lead a delegation of Members on the Committee of Presidential Affairs for training in Pretoria. We decided to request the institute where were to let us pay a courtesy call to Uganda’s High Commission. It took us an hour and a half to be allowed to see Uganda’s High Commissioner to South Africa. 

When we got inside, we wanted to know how the robbery took place and whether or not our colleagues were helped. However, the diplomat at the desk told us that, “People just come here and they go anywhere they want,” yet even us who tried to go there were received lukewarmly. 

The last is about the way our –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: There are some exceptional Ambassadors and High Commissioners. There are some people who are really doing a good job, maybe there are a few, but I think there are some who are doing a good job. 

However, when you are going out, it is important that you give them advance notice because you do not know what their programmes are – yes, you should give them advance notice so that they create time for you but you cannot say, “I have come from Uganda and would like to see you now.” That is difficult.

Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we have been talking about the state of our missions and we are not impressed by your planning; there is none. There is a recommendation that the Non Tax Revenue (NTR) be put on a special account to deal with the renovation and facelift of the missions. I would like to read to you the figures; in 2013/2014, we collected over Shs 13,329,000,000 from those missions. In 2014/2015, it was Shs 14,795,000,000. In 2015/2016, it was Shs 24 billion; and in 2016/2017, it was Shs 25 billion. 

If that money was put on an account and specifically apply to buying property, it would make a difference. Today, we would like you to commit yourself to this one; it has been recommended many times but you have ignored it. 

The second one should do with renting; I have never understood the rationale of renting for 50 years -(Applause)– the money we have spent in renting, we could have bought more buildings and we would now be swimming in buildings. You must explain to us why you want to continue renting very expensively for 50 years. How can that be? We need explanations. 

Can I now ask the minister to explain? The Minister of Foreign Affairs, respond to the issues raised. You start with the explanation on the money. Hon. Kakooza, are you burning?

MR KAKOOZA: Yes, Madam Speaker. I would like to add something, for the benefit of the House, that it is not only the foreign missions but even the ministries in Uganda are renting very expensive buildings yet we passed a policy that we should provide money to construct offices for ministries that have land but nothing has taken place. 

When you look at the policy statements; the expenditure on rent is more than that for constructing a building. What are they doing about it? They should get interested in constructing their own offices. We should have a policy by which Parliament will assert itself to cause policy statements to have money for the construction of ministry offices for those ministries with land presently. Once they construct those offices, it will be cheaper than giving them money to hire for a financial year. 

Finally, to the honourable minister, in relation to the report of foreign affairs, today’s the New Vision newspaper carried a story that Uganda’s envoy to the Arab Emirates is in trouble for reportedly inviting and briefing Members of Parliament about the mistreatment of Ugandan girls working in the Emirates. I thought that the minister should also say something about it because for some of us who have visited those countries, there is much trafficking and slavery. When you go and physically verify, you will not like it. People use Entebbe and Nairobi for trafficking and end up falling into problems.

I think we need to borrow a leaf from the Philippines. Once they export labour, the Government gets interested. Those companies that take those children there are followed up and hold the passports of people who employ their citizens. However, Uganda is “to whom it may concern” we need to get interested.

4.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to apologies for the hiccup we had a few minutes ago when the House was suspended because we were not present; it was because of some reasons including nature.

The second issue is about the Government campus. Madam Speaker, I am happy to inform Parliament that we are in advanced stages of signing a contract to start constructing a Government campus. After construction, we will be using the rental expenses we have been incurring to pay for probably 10-15 years and after which we will acquire that property. 

In addition, we have agreed that the financing of this project is going to be our own institution - NSSF. Therefore, we will be updating Parliament after we have finished all the arrangements –(Interjection)– this is a Government campus. I was responding to hon. Kakooza’s question.

THE SPEAKER: Order! Please let the minister first respond to the issues raised.

MR BAHATI: We will update you properly. The second point is on NTR. Madam Speaker, we have something that we have to resolve because according to the Public Finance Management Act, all revenue collected, tax and non-tax revenue, should be –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Point of order.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I have been in Parliament now I think for seven years and year in year out, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been telling this House that they are doing something about renting. They have just been talking about it with no seriousness in form of documentation about what they are doing. In fact, if you challenge him to produce any document about what he is talking about, there will be nothing.

I think this House has been taken for a ride for a long time on is matter. Is the minister, therefore, in order to come and once again tell - I do not want to call it a lie, but to continue peddling the same information once again? We have heard about this for such a long time and I do not think we can continue talking about it. Let him provide evidence that in the budget there is this provision for starting this particular project. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, really on a serious note, that resolution was taken many years ago for you to stop renting and you have been saying that - what you are saying is stale. Tell us where the land is and when you are going to commence? That is what we want to hear.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I said that we are going to sign a contract with NSSF; we have been negotiating and actually, the signing of the contract is this week on Friday. Therefore, I beg that - (Interjection) - just a second. I would like to request you, Madam Speaker, that on Tuesday, I will come and read the statement to the House and tell you all the details because if I mention something now, I know Members will be asking what that is and so on. It is better we first do things properly, then come, and inform you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Granted, Friday is not far. Proceed with your plans and update us on Tuesday. We want to know about the signing - no, we cannot debate the details now. Let him sign and come and report then we shall debate.

MR BAHATI: The other issue was about budgeting for the same things - I think I heard somebody rising but we did not get clearly, what the honourable was talking about. Of course, in the budget there are things that do not change. For example, rent, salaries. Therefore, we need clarification on what exactly, the Member wanted to get from us.

Now, there has been a question on releases. I would like to inform this House and I can provide proof that every 10th of every first month of a quarter, the finance ministry sends a release cash limit to all spending agencies; it is on record and we can provide evidence. 

Therefore, once we send a cash limit, it is up to the spending agencies to decide on the speed at which they respond to us giving their work plans; the warrants and after that we send the money. There are those institutions that get back to us in one or two days and they receive money on the 13th or 14th of that month. However, there are those that take a month. Therefore, once we send a cash limit, it is no longer in our hands but in the hands of the spending agencies. We have the accounting officer here of Parliament; she can testify to that.

The last one was Non Tax Revenue. Madam Speaker, when we passed the Public Finance Management Act, which spells out three sources of revenue. The first is Tax Revenue, the second is Non-Tax Revenue then we have Appropriation in Aid. If you are in the category of Appropriation in Aid, once you collect this money, we send it back to you for spending at source. 

The Non Tax Revenue, according to the law, is supposed to go to the Consolidated Fund then the spending agency budgets and Government and Parliament approves. Therefore, those who are in the category of Non Tax Revenue, it will not be possible now unless we change the law but we have a way out. The way out is that if we all think that these institutions deserve resources now, then we can improve on what the finance ministry and Government have provided and shift money from one item and put it there to do the work that we think is a priority. Otherwise, for now if it is Non Tax Revenue, it has to go to the Consolidated Fund and it is appropriated by this by this Parliament through the budget. Therefore, it is now a decision of Parliament if we think that the renovation of our embassies takes precedence over others then it is within our means as a House to adjust and provide for those resources. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have not answered queries on renting abroad yet that was my first question. Why are you continuing to rent for 50 years?

MR BAHATI: We are working on project - and the Minister for Foreign Affairs will update us in a few minutes from now - to find a way of how we can stop renting for missions abroad but construct using a private investor, NSSF or any other private investor, to construct for us all over. We have been working on it under the leadership of the Minister of Foreign Affairs. I beg that he updates us in a few minutes.

On the nodding disease, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On Non Tax Revenue (NTR), this money is collected by missions abroad and you never know how much money they are going to collect? Therefore, you cannot budget for it. The missions collect money and we have learnt from other countries that collect that money and put it on the retention account and it is sent to missions to acquire property. That is what we are asking about that the Non Tax Revenue is sent to our missions - this year to London and Brussels, to among others acquire property.

Secondly, on the issue of putting up buildings for missions abroad - NSSF has got a lot of money. We are saying that we need to change the law so that the money from NSSF can be used to construct buildings for missions broad and the ministry pays rent here. Within five or 10 years, we shall acquire those properties. However, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is so adamant about NSSF changing the law and acquiring properties for missions abroad. Therefore, Non Tax Revenue (NTR) can be changed because that money is collected by missions and to help them acquire properties abroad so that can stop renting offices for missions abroad. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you should not worry about -this House is there and if you want us to appropriate money, we will appropriate it. Like now, there is the Shs 25 billion. If it was in an account, we would come here and say, this year; let us support African missions. Shs 10 billion is there and Shs 5 billion is for Brussels - 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, each ministry and sector have presented budgets here though within ceilings. We have provided the resource envelop that we have. What the Public Finance Management Act commands us to do, is that every institution, which collects money – actually it is not missions abroad alone, there is the Uganda Registration Services Bureau collects almost Shs 60 billion every year. There are quite a number of institutions that collect NTR but because of the distortions that we used to have, we said all NTRs should go back to the Consolidated Fund so that it is appropriated through budgeting. 
As Parliament and Government, we must now make priorities. So, if we think that we should, among other priorities, take renovation of our embassies, which we should, as a priority then we can reallocate money to the embassies. If we also think that we should ring-fence the money on the embassies, then we are commanded to amend the law, which is within our hands.

NSSF and the project on renovating our embassies abroad, we have been working on it. I beg that the person who has been providing leadership, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, updates the House on how far we have gone. Otherwise, I would like to thank Members - most of these issues are within our means and let us make concrete discussions on them.

THE SPEAKER: There was something on the funds for nodding syndrome. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we passed a supplementary budget here. The information, I have got – and which is not very good news and we are sorry about it - I think there were some delays somewhere; we will be signing the warrant this evening to release the money to the districts when the minister comes back from State House; it is at his desk. We do apologise that it has taken long because we thought the system was moving but it is very unfortunate, that it has not gone.      

4.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Henry Oryem): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank colleagues for their contribution and concerns on the matters of Ministry of Foreign Affairs and particularly issues regarding our properties abroad.

Let me first thank my sister for her suggestion that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should move away from consumptive ministry to production sector. I believe that this is one way to assist Ministry of Foreign Affairs raise its budget ceiling in order to be able to receive enough funds to meet the challenges that we face as a ministry.

Hon. Alex Burundo raised an issue – I did not understand this particular one - about complicated and sophisticated staff. We have very competent and able staff assigned to each embassy abroad. Whether they are complicated or sophisticated, I do not know that fiction and so I leave it to him.

Hon. Tony Ayoo talked something about local staff. It is true that each mission employs local staff to assist and support staff that come from the headquarters and that is common practice in all missions. It is not only in Uganda but other countries also employ local staff - drivers, secretaries, clerks and cooks among others. The issue of online application by tourists and individuals, I am surprised that there are complaints about application of visas online?  We are in the days of technology - and this is the way. 

Today, it is common practice even in Uganda - if you want to apply for Visa to the United States Embassy or to any of the European embassies, you apply online. Applying by paper or the old way is archaic and outmoded. 

Therefore, I do not know which of the tourists that are complaining that seeking for a visa should not be applied online. We are moving in line with modern technology and how visas are applied online. It is therefore, unfortunate that there are tourists who still want us to go back to the old way.

Hon. John Baptist Lokii raised the issue of our missions in Juba and Mombasa. On the Mission in Juba, yes, their state is not the best. We hope that - money and funds allowing - we will be able to improve the conditions and move to a better address in Juba. 

We do not have a Mission in Mombasa but a consulate. However, the consulate in Mombasa is in a good address and offices.

All our embassies abroad have a Mission Charter and if you have visited any Mission and anyone claims that they do not a Mission Charter; I would like to know which particular mission or embassy made such statements. All of them have Mission Charters. It is against these Mission Charters, that we mark and evaluate them.

Hon. Dononzio Kahonda, raised the issue of Cuba Architectural Plans for our mission there and methods of procurement? Yes, our mission in Cuba is managed by our embassy in Canada; we do not have any embassy in South America. It is true that architectural plans for all our missions are designed in Uganda before being taken abroad. It is in those countries where they are adopted by the engineers in order for us to be able to build in conformity with the regulations there. 

However, I would like to say that this is old administrative policy that I found in office and it is still in practice that all our designs and plans are designed locally and only approved by the country in which we go to do construction. 

The reason procurement is done in Uganda is because we did realise that the Mission in Canada did not have the capacity and individuals capable enough to meet the requirements of setting up contracts and procurement committee, hence the process of procurement was done in Uganda. Otherwise, if they had the capacity, the procurement process would have taken place in Canada.

Hon. Olanya raised the issue of why every year we keep raising the matter of repairing and rehabilitation of our properties abroad. Anybody who is familiar with this matter knows that we have numerous properties abroad; we do not have the capacity and the funds to repair them all at the same time. We repair and rehabilitate them based on the priorities and the monies we have. Hence, every year, we have to seek money for rehabilitation of our properties abroad. 

Allow me to thank hon. Akello Lucy very much for congratulating us on the property in Kigali. This is at least one good story amongst many because everybody who talked after her made it sound as if it is doomsday at Ministry of Foreign Affairs. I am glad that there is light from hon. Lucy Akello because she gave us a glimpse of hope on that matter. 

However, she said something serious about labour officers. I would like to say that there is need for labour officers to be posted to missions in countries where we have our girls go for employment in order for them to supervise the conditions in which the girls work.

Importantly, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has always made it very clear that we avail the structure and the facilities and any ministry that wishes to post their officers there, like Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Ministry of Defense and Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives are free to post their officers to our missions to take responsibility of their roles in those missions. So, we welcome the posting of labour officers in areas where our girls and boys are posted due to labour export. 

However, we have not opened a mission in Doha yet. We do not have an embassy in Dubai. We hope to open a consulate there but we have a mission in Abu Dhabi for the UAE.

One thing I would like to raise here, and which is very important and I urge everybody to take note of is that we do not have labour export agreements with all the countries in the Middle East. There are only a few selected countries where the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has made it very clear that we have labour agreements with them. 

Among the countries that we do not have labour agreements with is the UAE. Therefore, girls who have gone to the UAE have not gone through the export companies that have been registered to export labour to the Middle East. The individuals who have gone to the UAE have either gone on their own initiative or are being smuggled by individuals and they have ended there but they have not used the right procedures to go to the Middle East to work.

Another item that I would like to raise concerns the matter that a colleague said that when they travel abroad, one of the things that they have problems with is – he asked if I know the number of Ugandans abroad. 

Madam Speaker, I have raised this matter in this House several times, including asking Members of Parliament to read the back page of their passports -page 48. I do not know how many people have read page 48 in their passports. I urge everybody to go and look at pages 48 and 49 of their passports and endeavour to read them. 

Page 48 says, “Registration at Consulates Abroad: Uganda citizens resident abroad should at the earliest opportunity register their names and addresses at the nearest Uganda High Commission or office of a Uganda Consulate or in the event of change of address and departure from the countries should also be notified. Failure to register may in, a period of emergency result in difficulty or delay in according assistance and protection.”

Madam Speaker, I do not know how many people, when they go abroad, bother to inform our missions that they are there. In spite us putting that you can now register online, they do not. Those who eventually get into problems, when our embassy staff go to them, they start claiming ignorance. How can you claim ignorance when you had your passport in your hands and when you look through it, it is glaringly clear that you should register. 

Then there is another group of individuals who, when invited to a function and ask them to use the opportunity to register, they start making allegations that the Government is following them abroad, asking, “Why is Museveni following me abroad? I got my own money to come here and Museveni should leave me alone.” However, a few months later, they get into problems and they are looking for Oryem to get them out of that situation. My prayer – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not know whether you have your passport; I would like you to read the first page because these people who say they do not want the Government to know where they are, it is the President who is asking those countries to receive them and give them access. Please read the first page of your passport.

MR ORYEM: The first page states the nature of the passport one holds whether it is diplomatic, official or ordinary passport and it says, “These are to request and require in the name of the President of the Republic of Uganda, all those whom it may concern to allow the bearer to pass freely without hindrance and to afford the bearer such assistance and protection as may be necessary.” So, it states very clearly that this is a requirement in the name of the President of Uganda.
 
Therefore, you are right, Madam Speaker.  So, when one is asked to register and they claim that they do not want President Museveni to know where they are, it does not make sense since it is the same president that issued your passport and has requested that you should be assisted and not hindered when you travel. There you are!

Madam Speaker, let me go to the last item that was raised by the hon. James Kakooza – no, I think the Member of Parliament went to Norway and Sweden and invited tourists to come to Uganda. I urge all the colleagues here that when they go abroad - Madam Speaker, when we go abroad, sometimes we forget that we are not in Uganda. We forget and instead of putting away our differences, we export our differences abroad and you find individuals castigating their country and putting their country in bad light, which is very unfortunate. It is very important that when we are abroad, we do everything possible to promote and assist our country get tourists, trade and investors alike because at the end of the day, tourists and investors who come to this country benefit your country, your children and grandchildren eventually. Therefore, let me thank my colleague who went to Sweden and as a result he has managed to bring many tourists to the country.

Finally, hon. James Kakooza raised the matter that appeared in today’s newspapers. Madam Speaker, I would like to give a full statement on this matter on a later date but if I could just say one or two things about it, with your permission. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, go ahead.

MR ORYEM: Madam Speaker, I am glad that you said in this House that you will assist this House either through a workshop or a seminar to deal with rough edges on how to deal with business in this House. 

Sometime last week, a matter was raised in this House by a Member of Parliament where he alleged that when they travelled to the UAE, they went and saw a slaves market where Ugandans girls and boys were being sold.

Madam Speaker, this was a very unfortunate statement made by a Member of this House. There is no slaves market in the UAE. Let me repeat: there is no slaves market in the UAE. This allegation was incorrect. Whether it was a slip of the tongue or misinterpretation of what was on the ground, the truth is that there is no slaves market there.

That statement, unfortunately resulted into a diplomatic protest being raised by the UAE because they felt that – and it is true – their country had been put in bad light because of that statement. On checking and verifying with our mission by physically going to the ground where it is claimed the slaves market was, it was found that there was not there.

Madam Speaker, because of that statement, the UAE has asked us to give an explanation how that matter arose and we have made it very clear that this House is free to debate as it so wishes.

We have said that in the Parliament of Uganda, Members of Parliament of Uganda are free to express their views as they so wish. Unfortunately, the statement has resulted into the UAE issuing a diplomatic protest. As such – and it is procedural – we have asked our Ambassador, Ambassador Nimisha, to return to Uganda for consultation to allow us find means and ways  - using our diplomatic systems – of regularising and reinstating our diplomatic relations to what it was before that statement was made. 

I regret that, that statement resulted into a diplomatic situation with the UAE. As I said earlier, we do not have any labour agreements with the UAE for our girls to go there. Those who went there went through illegal means and as a result there are those who are suffering or facing difficulties but we are trying everything possible to identity these girls and bring them back to Uganda. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you said something significant – that we have no agreement with the UAE yet the bulk of the Ugandans are in the Emirates. Isn’t it your responsibility to ensure that we have an agreement? As Government, you must have an interest in where your people are going. If there is no agreement, you must make the agreement because our people go there.

MR ORYEM: Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, which is responsible for negotiating and making these agreements and who have made successful agreements with countries such as Saudi Arabia and Qatar, among others, are in the process of negotiating with the UAE and Jordan to enable our girls go and work in these two countries in the same manner as they are able to work in Saudi Arabia and Qatar, through a system that has been agreed upon between the two countries. This is to avoid our girls falling prey to suffering and torture by their landlords. Thank you.

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am the Member of Parliament who raised that issue in the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs meeting. I was also part of the delegation of the Budget Committee that visited United Arab Emirates and this is what we found. 

Madam Speaker, facts do not lie. It was in the official documents of the embassy – in their justification so that we allocate them money for rescue accommodation because the Ugandan embassy was the only one in the UAE, which did not have a rescue facility - they urgently needed money because our girls, who work as maids and run away from what they call “guests” – and end up seeking help from the embassy and it takes some time to process the document – had nowhere to stay. This is what we found out. First, between the months of March and August 2017, 16 of our girls in the United Arab Emirates had committed suicide. There was one case of a girl that had gone mad.

We interacted with three girls we found standing in the hot sun outside the embassy. That is where they were spending the day and night. The Ugandan Government is the only one that required people who wanted temporary travel documents back to their country to pay. For the rest of the other governments, as long as you are in that situation, the document is free for you to travel back. For Uganda, you are required to pay.

Madam Speaker, with that concern, we funded ourselves to visit Fujairah State where we found something called a “labour recruitment centre.” That labour recruitment centre, for all intent and purposes, resembles a well-organised market – there are small buildings. Girls from various countries pack there. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Margret pretended to want to buy one and was offered to buy one. People pay a certain amount to buy these girls. We interacted with a girl from Sheema – was she from Sheema – who was in the stall. She said: “I have been here for three months. I have not yet got anybody to take me.” There is no name you can give it other than modern day slavery. That is what it is; that market exists. It is disguised as a labour recruitment centre but you can go and say “I want Europeans. I want Ethiopians. I want Ugandans. I want these ones” and once one buys them, they take them as their own property. That is the true and honest information.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that issue has been clarified but I think it is important that you as Government go to Fujairah in the Emirates and find out.

MR ORYEM: Madam Speaker, let us not discuss this thing with emotions. Let us be sober in the way we discuss this matter. I am sober and I would like to discuss this matter soberly in order for us to find a solution –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Point of order, Madam Speaker. This is a very serious matter that touches the core fundamental rights of Ugandans but the minister is casually addressing it as if people who raised this are not sober. Is the minister in order to allude that hon. Muwanga-Kivumbi, a renowned Muslim, not to be sober?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think it is in the interest of this country and our relations with the UAE that you actually establish what is on the ground. You need to follow up this allegation so that you can come back to us and tell us whether it is true or not.

MR ORYEM: Madam Speaker, I am due to travel there on Friday. I will go to this place personally and come back and report to this House on this matter. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson of the committee, do you have anything to add to your report?

5.05
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Ms Rose Mutonyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank honourable members, for all the issues they raised. I would like to request the minister to use a diplomatic means to find out what is happening there to the satisfaction of Members and our country.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say one or two things. A Member raised a matter that the delays in payment of salaries and other monies is due to the fact that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development releases money through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. It is not true. The Missions abroad get money directly from the finance ministry. They are also supposed to prepare their own budgets. However, we amalgamated the missions into the ministry’s report. In future, we shall be able to take mission by mission although at the moment, we felt it would take us a very long time.

Further, I would like to request Members, like the minister said, that when they go to foreign countries, they should endeavour, through our protocol office, to make sure that our nearest embassies or the embassies that are accredited to the countries where you are going to, are aware. You may go for a conference or a meeting but it may be that the embassy is not aware. For the embassies to take care of us while we are there, we should endeavour to notify them through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and our protocol officers so that the other end can receive us.

With those few remarks, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank honourable members very much, for receiving our report. All the comments will be for the good of the ministry and the country at large. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Sectoral Committee for the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the Ministerial Policy Statements and Budget Estimates for financial year 2018/2019 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to the report for the Committee on Health because the Minister of Heath has been here every day in the House, since last week. I invite the Chairperson of the Committee on Health to come and present the report.

MR PETER OKOT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The not so good news that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development gave us regarding money meant for the Nodding Syndrome puts a big question on efficiency; how systems run in this ministry. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come back tomorrow to inform this House that this money has been signed since he mentioned that this evening, the money would be signed?

This money was approved two months ago. If in two months, there  is no system to track that things are moving, I am worried, Madam Speaker, that even this time round, we may wait for a month until the end of this financial year, without any money going to support people with  the nodding syndrome. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the minister to come back tomorrow to assure this House that the money has been signed to be sent to the affected districts? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please come back tomorrow with the warrant showing that the money has been sent and lay it here on the Table.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Okello Oryem has just told us that he will be going to the United Arab Emirates to find out if there is slave market or not. 

However, I would like to say that hon. Oryem Okello is known all over the world as the Minister of State for International Affairs and so I think he will not get the right information. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we set up a committee to go and find out rather than the minister going alone because he will not get the right information? It should be Parliament to send a committee to find out and report back to the House. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let me reflect on it. I will give my advice in the afternoon session tomorrow. Chairperson of the Committee of Health -

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I led a delegation to the United Arab Emirates and you have heard the version of hon. Muwanga-Kivumbi. I feel that it is only fair that you also hear the version from the leader of the delegation, particularly on the matter that is being discussed.

We know there are problems. However, this is what we found in this particular market that is being referred to - we found a place where people who look for jobs and supply opportunities for employment meet. It was a meeting point for those two groups of people; those that are looking for jobs and those that are ready to offer jobs. In other words, it is too much to call it a slave market. 

Even in Uganda, we have these kinds of people. In Mukono, we have people who provide these kinds of opportunities. I think it is unfair to call this a slave market. It should be expunged from the Hansard. It is not correct. You can call it a market but not a slave market; it is not one. Ugandans leave here to go and look for jobs and this is where they meet with their employers. I know there are problems when they meet these employers at their places of work but this is just their meeting point; it is not a slave market.  

MS EGUNYU:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. While I did not go where they went, what is the definition of a market? A market is a place where goods or services are sold and bought. In this particular market, it is people being sold and bought. If you say that we remove this from the Hansard, it is very unfair. It should be put on the record that it is a slavery of people and it should not be changed.

Madam Speaker, you guided that you are going to think about the matter; my suggestion is that we should get a committee that will go there to see what is taking place there and report back to the House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have already taken a decision. Let us proceed with the Committee on Health. You have only 15 minutes.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON HEALTH ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FY 2018/2019

8.14
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Mr Micheal Bukenya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since Members have had the report for the entire week, I am going to summarise it in about 10 minutes. 

The presentation is in accordance with the Constitution and the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. I would like to inform the House that the sector has 25 votes but we are going to struggle to summarise since you got the chance to read through the report.

Madam Speaker, the sector performance for the first half of the year was below because of the issues outlined in the report, based on Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act and counterpart funding issues.

There are also issues with compliance with the ministerial – of the statement with the Equity Commission and the main culprits were Uganda Cancer Institute (UCI) and Masaka Regional Referral Hospital. In our assessment as a committee, we thought that the leaders in these institutions are not competent or well conversant with what they are required to do; we made a recommendation to that effect.

I will go to page 10, which shows us the sector outlook where we are moving from Shs 1.8 trillion to Shs 2.2 trillion, which is an increment of about Shs 430 billion. The details in the different votes are reflected in Table 7.1 at page 11 of the report. I will then start on the few issues that are itching and reoccurring every year.

As you are aware, Madam Speaker, this year we have already had two intern doctors’ strikes and the ministerial policy statement does not address those issues, mainly because we do not have a policy for interns or a policy for training. There is no policy for training intern doctors and senior health officers and so we continue getting challenges because we have no policy yet the numbers of these doctors are increasing day by day.

On issues of human resource, we still have challenges on the accommodation for staff and recruitment of critical staff in different areas. The committee made the relevant recommendations that are seen there.

Of much importance is the National Health Insurance on page 16, which has been on the shelves for over 12 years. The policy allocates Shs 3 billion shillings to fast-track the implementation of this activity but as you are aware, the Bill has never come to Parliament and the recommendation is that the ministry fast-tracks the introduction of the National Health Insurance Scheme.

Madam Speaker, there is a lot of talk on preventive health care but there is no direct funding in that direction. There is no special funding for preventive health in the policy statement and also for the community health extension workers. 

On uniforms for health personnel, the budget was Shs 10 billion but the policy statement allocates only Shs 3 billion every year. By the time you finish the cycle, maybe some have retired and you have new ones. There was a requirement of standardisation and allocation of an extra Shs 7 billion.

In Kampala here, in two of our new facilities - Kiruddu and Kawempe - we have challenges regarding drainage and sewerage but the policy statement did not allocate anything to cater for that and the recommendation is that money is availed to sort out that mess.

Madam Speaker, this year, we have had issues on alleged fake drugs on the market, which have been there but they are more pronounced this year and most pronounced was the Hepatitis B vaccines. Our recommendation is that the National Drug Authority Act should be amended to provide for severe punishment for the culprits who fake drugs. Further, National Drug Authority (NDA) and Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) are urged to be more vigilant. Also, the Ministry of Health should have a policy on vaccines, especially those that are not on the national immunisation schedule. NDA should also conduct massive sensitisation campaigns on these unsafe drugs.

Of much importance is reproductive, maternal and child health services. Our indices are still very poor with:

Very high maternal mortality; 
High neonatal mortality;
Very high total fertility;
Under-five mortality; and 
High adolescent pregnancy rate of up to 60 per cent in some districts in Eastern Uganda.

Our recommendations are as follows: 

The ministry should urgently come up with a policy and guidelines on adolescent and sexual reproductive health. As you are aware, the Ministry of Education and Sports took a lead in this and they publicised theirs recently. 

The ministry should also ensure that there is availability of comprehensive emergency obstetric and neonatal care. As you are aware, we have over 150 health centres IV in the country but only about 43 per cent are offering the comprehensive care; which is the reason they were established. There are no clear guidelines in the policy statement on how this is going to be fulfilled.

Government renewed its commitment to commit $5 million every year on reproductive health care issues but which has not yet been met, even in this policy statement.

Madam Speaker, there is inadequate allocation on health promotion, communication and environmental health. We urge the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to emphasise this in the next planning cycle.

In the manifesto for the NRM and the many promises that have been made, every sub-county should have a health centre III and every county should have a health centre IV. However, money to achieve this was provided to less than 50 per cent and so we urge the finance ministry to increase on the allocation.

The biggest challenge in the sector is that the Ministry of Local Government is the main implementer of the sector programmes yet there is no clear linkage between the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Local Government. 

In one of the examples I will give, the permanent secretary visited one of the health units in the districts and the health workers assured him that he was not their direct supervisor and that they were recruited by another group at the district. Therefore, the committee recommends that an inter-ministerial committee be established, with clear guidelines and reporting mechanisms to the House, to monitor service delivery.

One of the interesting things in the year was the hiring of Cuban doctors at a fee that is much higher, maybe six times, than what is offered to Ugandans. The committee recommends that if the Government is interested, they should advertise these jobs and Ugandans apply at the rate that they are giving the Cubans. If they fail to attract them, then they can bring in the Cubans.

On medical supplies and diagnostics, our regional referral hospitals do not have radiological and diagnostic equipment. When one gets involved in an accident in Mubende, they are driven to Kampala for a Computed Tomography (CT) scan or a Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). You get an accident in Gulu, it is the same thing yet we think because they are regional referrals - there should be equity in the country. Therefore, we are requesting the Government to avail some money to improve on this.

There are particular programmes and projects in the sector and also some Acts that have been passed. Madam Speaker, because you are much interested in the Uganda Cancer Institute Act, after two years, I would like to tell you that after the struggle, finally it is coming into force this year with the institute having a full board.

However, we need to take note that the Ninth Parliament passed the HIV/AIDS Act and the Immunisation Act and also recommended for the creation of the Immunisation Trust Fund and HIV/AIDs Trust Fund but up to today, they have not been implemented, with the finance ministry saying there is not enough money. The HIV/AIDS Trust Fund was valued by the health ministry and they required an extra Shs 10 billion to do it.

Vote-specific observations

Uganda Cancer Institute - a lot of money has been allocated there but they have challenges of being visible. They emphasise treatment instead of prevention and early detection and we want them to change direction into that.

Uganda Heart Institute has had some ground breaking surgeries this year but they are being challenged by space but also the number of Ugandans with heart diseases is increasing. So, we would like them to emphasise prevention of heart conditions because some of these ones are preventable but also we are requesting they are provided - they have already established an area where they will put their homes but for better development, we request that Government secures money to help them expand.

They say they already have a loan that has taken two years in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to be processed because of issues they cannot really break down.

National Medical Stores - money allocated to the National Medical Stores was increased by over Shs 40 billion and we thank the finance ministry for that. However, as we start the year and do the Test-and-Treat Policy of 90-90-90, the money for ARVs will not be enough for the next financial year. So, we expect to, in the middle of the year, run out of ARVs. Therefore, we need an extra Shs 60 billion and another Shs 35 billion for anti-malarials and Shs 5 billion for mama kits and laboratory services are underfunded to the tune of Shs 44 billion.

Uganda Blood Transfusion Services (UBTS) - The budget for UBTS was doubled this year and we thank the finance ministry for that. However, they have challenges with mobilisation. We propose that maybe we cut Shs 1.2 billion from their allocation and give it to Uganda Red Cross Society to help them in the mobilisation because they have challenges of choosing between red and blue blood and many other challenges of the organisation; we think the Uganda Red Cross can do a better job. 

Health Service Commission - You realise that a good amount of money on the budget is sometimes returned as unspent but it is mainly wage allocation and it is because Health Service Commission is not given enough money to conduct recruitments. In this financial year, they had to get an extra Shs 250 billion to recruit. So, we request that they are facilitated in this direction to deliver their output. Also - as hon. Bahati promised to construct an area for all Government ministries, they are spending Shs 750 million in rent yet their estimate is Shs 3 billion to construct a home. They have land that was allocated to them at Butabika. Further, although their salaries and gratuity were enhanced, nothing has been provided in the policy statement. 

Virus Research Institutes - Their allocation was increased by more than 300 per cent but they still have challenges in securing their land. One of their forests, which they used for research, the Zika Forest, is being encroached on by the big people in Wakiso.

Mulago National Referral Hospital - Madam Speaker, this is one of the institutions that do not have a strategic plan. A lot of money has been invested in the super specialisation and we had expected the hospital to be operational about a year ago. However, to date, it is not yet operational and it is not clear when it shall be operational.

So, we recommend as follows:

That the ministry updates Parliament with a clear plan on how they are going to operationalise this super specialised hospital because it is not clear whether it is going to be cost sharing or for free or purely private.

That Government fast-tracks the commitment to finance the operationalisation of this hospital without delay because this money has been spent but we are likely to spend another year when we are just looking at structures.

The committee recommends that upper Mulago; the maternal and neonatal hospital and the super specialised hospital are run independent of each other for better efficiency. 

Being that Mulago services are being run from Kawempe and Kiruddu hospitals, we think that if Mulago returns in July, money to a tune of Shs 7.5 billion should be availed for the functionalisation of Kawempe and Kiruddu hospitals to ease the pressure on Mulago.

We were contacted by the doctors who are trained in organ transplant; they do not know where their law is but we have also never seen it in Parliament. So, we would like this Government to introduce that law and it is processed to facilitate their operations.

Butabika National Hospital - You know it is a small hospital of 500 beds but when you go there, you would find more than 850 patients. So, there is overcrowding. 

Also, psychiatrists and mental health practitioners are very few in the country. We have only 34 psychiatrists who are based in training institutions. So, there is a challenge there and we think there should be some affirmative action to train mental health practitioners. This one should be taken also to the regional referrals in order to ease the stress there because many of them have small mental units that are not staffed. Also, there is need to avail resources to construct a bigger facility.

The biggest challenge also was on the regional referrals. Government of Uganda provides over Shs 25 billion as Capital Development to regional referrals but if you total their capital development requirements - they have big projects that can total up to Shs 150 to 200 billion. Mbale, for instance, has a project of Shs 22 billion but it is given Shs 3 billion every year. The committee is wondering how many years these hospitals will take to complete these projects.

Madam Speaker, as you will see the recommendations, we asked the referrals to bring us their contracts and it is one week now; we do not see any contracts. So, the committee recommends that this money be first held as we re-evaluate and realign. Possibly, the committee recommends we break that Shs 25 billion and say we construct Shs 5 billion staff houses in Lira and complete that in a year rather than spreading Shs 1 billion for each district and we construct for the next 20 years.  

Constituency Health Assembly Fund - There used to be a fund that was given to health sub-counties to facilitate meetings and monitoring of development. Last year, the committee agreed with the ministry to allocate to the Health Centres II and III the health assembly fund.

We request that this money be returned because there is going to be construction in addition to the other responsibilities. There is going to be constructions of health centres III in different sub-counties by these local governments. They need to be monitored and it should be clear. It is because if you allocate Shs 500 million and you do not monitor, we are going to go back to how they constructed health centres IV with very bad theatres.

Secondly, as we emphasise prevention like the people who launched the malaria forum and many others like NCDs, we would like to take charge and participate in popularising the prevention strategies. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to emphasise the importance of the National Ambulance Service. We need a national ambulance system and the ministry has planned to do it in phases but we need money to operationalise it.

Madam Speaker, before I conclude, allow me read the figures in the annex. However, before I get there, we have challenges of counterpart funding. As you are aware, I have put an annex of up to Shs 36 billion for counterpart funding requirements. You have seen pictures of Busolwe Hospital and many others. Even in Kayunga Hospital they are working; even with vaccines, there is not enough money to offer counterpart funding to donors to complete this project. So, there are challenges there.

If you allow me, Madam Speaker, to read through the actual allocations:

Vote 014 – Ministry of Health 
Non-wage is Shs 52,170,000,000
Wage is Shs 11,420,000,000 
Domestic – (Interjections) – Okay, the total allocation of Vote 014 is Shs 1,050,490,000,000
Uganda Cancer Institute Shs 93,070,000,000;
Uganda Heart Institute Shs 19,570,000,000;
National Medical Stores Shs 300,090,000,000;
Health Service Commission Shs 5.2 billion;
Uganda Blood Transfusion Service Shs 20,180,000,000;
Mulago Hospital Complex Shs 94,550,000,000;
Butabika Hospital Shs 14,750,000,000;
Arua Regional Referral Hospital Shs 9,490,000,000;
Fort Portal Regional Referral Shs 9,830,000,000;
Gulu Regional Referral Hospital Shs 9,250,000,000;
Hoima Regional Referral Shs 9,240,000,000;
Jinja Regional Referral Shs 11,890,000,000;
Kabala Regional Referral Shs 8,100,000,000;
Masaka Regional Referral Shs 8,870,000,000;
Mbale Regional Referral Shs 13,420,000,000;
Soroti Regional Referral Shs 8,160,000,000;
Lira Regional Referral Hospital Shs 8,860,000,000;
Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital Shs 10,650,000,000;
Mubende Regional Referral Hospital Shs 7,920,000,000;
Moroto Regional Referral Hospital Shs 6,800,000,000;
Naguru Regional Referral Hospital Shs 8,660,000,000;
Uganda Virus Research Institute Shs 7,377,000,000; 
Local Government Votes 501-850 Shs 545,640,000,000. 
The total allocation is Shs 2,282,060,000,000.

Madam Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee meetings and a copy of the original signed committee report. I beg to lay and submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Chairperson and the members of the Committee on Health. The report has been signed by the necessary minimum number of members. Before I invite the Members, I have two questions for the minister.

One, I have heard reports that Mulago will be open in July but we do not have the specialists to work in that hospital. Are you training them? Will they be there in July or December?

Secondly, I would like to know whether you have provided for water ambulances for the island communities like Kalangala, Buvuma, Sigulu, Mayuge and the common islands of Mukono. 

5.39
MR COSMAS ELOTU (NRM, Dakabela County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and the Chairperson, Committee on Health, for the work well done. My issue is very specific and I do not want to waste a lot of time. I know it is a Government policy that ambulance systems are going to be abolished or are abolished already but Madam Speaker, you will bear witness with me that when you were in Soroti launching the women’s hospital, the people of Soroti asked you to support me to lobby for the replacement of an ambulance for Atirir Health Centre IV, which is located at the intersection.

Before Soroti district was divided into Amuria and Kaberamaido, Atirir Health Centre IV was the only health centre IV serving the entire district. Therefore, it is quite a big health centre that almost serves the three districts of Amuria, Soroti and Kaberamaido.

For some of you who may be aware, a very tragic incident happened in March 2016 when an ambulance that was taking a pregnant mother to Soroti Referral Hospital was involved in an accident. Seven people died including the driver, mother, two nurses and the attendants.

Madam Speaker, I rise to request that a replacement ambulance be procured for Atirir Health Centre IV. I am not asking for a new ambulance or any new programme as such but purely a replacement ambulance because this is a very important health centre IV; it serves virtually all the four districts. Soroti district does not benefit much from it but Amuria, Kaberamaido and part of Lango do.

I, therefore, request that in addition to all the priorities in the Ministry of Health, let the ministry provide for one ambulance, which is a replacement ambulance for Atirir Health Centre IV. Thank you so much.

5.42
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for according me this opportunity to address Parliament. I would like to support the committee report and my concern is about National Medical Stores (NMS). 

As we look at this budget, there has been monopoly by NMS. What the community deserves as far as drugs in health facilities are concerned - when communities make requisitions, NMS supplies contrary to those requisitions. My argument is, if Government can change its position and use both the Joint Medical Stores and NMS, we would move forward.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, my concern is about the cancer institute. I would like to appreciate that the committee has allocated Shs 93 billion to the Uganda Cancer Institute. I strongly support this but I would like to urge that this financial year, this money be used when we approve the Budget.

For those who have had patients in the cancer institute in Mulago, you can shed tears. You find patients sleeping on the floor, the rooms are congested and the medicines are not there. It is terrible! I would like to urge that this money that has been budgeted be used in the cancer institute to save Ugandans. I thank you so much.

5.44
MR STEPHEN KISA (NRM, Luuka County South, Luuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on the issue of health centres III in this country. Most health centres are in a very sorry state. The facilities and equipment are lacking in these health centres III and yet the aim was to provide a service near to the people. However, you find that most of these health centres III do not have electricity. Those with electricity cannot pay the bills. 

I have an example of a health centre III where they do not even have a delivery bed for the mothers. Even those with beds have only one bed so the mothers have to wait for their turn. I do not know whether delivery can also wait -(Interjections)– but this is the situation in most health centres III.

Madam Speaker, this accounts for the rampant death of our mothers in this country. Midwives who are employed in health centres III that do not have electricity sometimes use torches and their phones. In the absence of electricity, they can only work on ailments during the day. Night time emergencies are not provided for.

the Ministry of Health should pay serious attention to the health centres III because they are near the people and given the situation that even the roads in many of these villages are in a poor state, we cannot transfer patients to larger health centres as they are very far. 

Madam Speaker, I am appealing to the Minister of Health to prioritise fixing the country’s health centres III, particularly by equipping them with enough maternity equipment and connecting them to power that can help in service delivery.

Madam Speaker, we were told that most of these health centres III were supposed to have a particular number of workers; between five to seven but when you go to a health centre III, you will find less than three people attending to patients –(Interruption) 

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, colleague for giving way. Madam Speaker, my colleague has concentrated so much on health centres III but the same applies to health centres IV. 

I wonder whether the ministry has taken time to know the last time Namwendwa had a doctor or how many staff I have in that area. Health centres II are about to be closed. There is an area in Kyeya where a lady, who is not a qualified midwife, is handling delivery cases in all the four parishes. The District Health Officer told us that the ministry was not helping them. 

Madam Speaker, as my colleague said, the ministry must help us staff these areas because we cannot play around with human life.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am trying to give a chance to Members to speak on the different sectors. There are those who spoke on Finance, on Legal and on Foreign Affairs.

5.49
MS MARGARET ALEPER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for this report. According to their observation, 59 districts do not have general hospitals and 29 counties do not have health centres IV.

I would like to give my district of Kotido as an example. Kotido is as old as 1975 but it does not have a general hospital while Jie County in Kotido does not have a health centre IV. Patients in Kotido District access referral services from the neighbouring districts like Matany Hospital, which is 72 kilometres from Kotido, Abim Hospital, which is 45 kilometres away, Kaabong Hospital, which is 45 kilometres away and Moroto Referral Hospital, which is 125 kilometres away.

Therefore, I agree with the committee recommendation that Government should avail funds to upgrade health centres III to health centres IV. In addition, in future, health centres IV should be upgraded to general hospitals because their construction is very expensive.

Madam Speaker, I also take cognisance of the committee’s observation on the national ambulance service system. This is very key in providing pre-hospital care to the critically ill, the injured and emergencies. Sometimes, expectant mothers carried on stretchers and motorcycles making many mothers to lose their lives. With the establishment of the national ambulance service system, many lives will be saved. I totally agree with the committee’s recommendation that Government should identify funds to establish a national ambulance service system.

Madam Speaker, the other area of concern is uniforms for health personnel. Uniforms are very critical because they instil a lot of confidence and pride in health workers because they appear identical. The uniformed personnel also help to curb corruption especially from workers who may wish to extort money from patients. 

I agree with the committee’s recommendation that Government provides an additional Shs 7 billion so that this facilitates the procurement of uniforms for health workers. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.52
MS GORETTI AJILO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. If I heard the chairperson right, he talked about sanitation and drainage problems in Kiruddu and Kawempe hospitals; that there was no provision for the sewerage system.

This problem is very alarming. I have a patient that goes to Kiruddu every week for a certain procedure. It is a new facility but the sewerage system is so poor and smelly. I do not know whether this is not adding more diseases to the patients who are there because it is unbearable. Something has got to be done in this budget to work on the sewerage system.

In addition, concerning indoor spraying, in Kaberamaido district there is a recent trend that has been observed on people who are participating in the indoor residual spraying. A number of them have fallen sick; I have lost two people and as I speak, one was referred from Kaberamaido Health Centre IV and another to Lacor Hospital and all of them present the same symptoms. They vomit blood - I do not know whether it is a coincidence or it is something to do with management of the toxic substance. Are they given the right sensitisation on how to handle this or maybe they are not given the right attention after spraying? I am told that for such substances, you must take a lot of whole milk. In addition, they are also not being paid in time. 

Finally, I would like to talk about the issue of ambulances. Recently, I talked about an accident that happened in Kaberamaido where a truck overturned and people died. We do not have a single ambulance in Kaberamaido. In the process of transporting these casualties on pick-ups, some died on the way. Therefore, Kaberamaido should also be considered for ambulances. Thank you.

5.54
MR ELLY ASIKU (NRM, Koboko County North, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I observe with concern the statement from the chairperson that Mulago Hospital, the apex of national referrals, does not have a strategic plan. Therefore, how are we moving? 

Secondly, the issue of health insurance started a long time ago but I do not know when it will ever be implemented. We are grappling with lack of funding for the health sector and this was supposed to be a strategy to address that. Honourable minister, when will health insurance be implemented? I remember in the initial stages when I was still working at Mulago that I was part of the team that was working on the policy. 

I also would like to talk about the issue of National Medical Stores (NMS) having monopoly over supply of drugs and medical sundries. I remember when National Medical Stores was being empowered to do this role, the objective was that as a nation, we would be able to receive drugs at a cheaper price. As I speak, evidence is that actually the cost of drugs and medical sundries has jumped up. Wouldn’t it be appropriate to try and review this policy? 

My view is that subjecting National Medical Stores to competition will be the way forward because in that monopoly, they seem to be relaxed in terms of ensuring that these drugs are secured at the right time, at the right price and are driven by the requirements of the various health facilities –(Member timed out.)

5.58
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend the Chairperson of the Committee on Health for the report. I would like to talk about the issue of health centres III at sub-county level. I support and commend Government policy on having health centres III in every sub-county. It is not good enough to upgrade these health centres to health centre III, health centre IV or to district level without having enough structures in place. 

Madam Speaker, if you move across this country, you will find that there are health centres III but you will be surprised to find that in some of them, children are sharing wards with adults and women are sharing wards with men. If the Ministry of Health looked at their reports, they would find out that the number of times people are being re-admitted is increasing. Why? You take a child to a facility with a particular disease but the child leaves with another one because he or she is sharing a ward with a person who has a different disease. 

Therefore, it is not enough to have health centres III in every sub-county. Rather, we would like to call upon Government to plan and budget to increase the number of wards. In Pakwach district, there is a health centre III in Alwi sub-county but they do not have enough wards to accommodate patients. We know that the population is increasing and that there are different types of diseases that we never had in this country before.

I would also like to talk about the issue of staffing. In a health centre III, you may find only two health workers. Sometime back, I was in Kamuli at a health centre II as you cross to Kayunga district. To my surprise, I found a guard and the Village Health Team (VHT) diagnosing and prescribing treatment for patients. 

The same thing happened in Mayuge district during the last census we had. There was a classroom teacher who was diagnosing and prescribing treatment. You would rather find a health worker in a classroom teaching instead of a classroom teacher in a health facility putting our people to death. 

Therefore, the issue of staffing is very important. We cannot simply have these facilities – (Member timed out.)

6.01
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee chairperson for the report. In the chairperson’s report, she mentioned an issue about Busolwe Hospital, which was built before some of us were born; I am told under the Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) Government, it was the only hospital. Right now, the hospital is dilapidated with sewage leaking everywhere. Can you imagine that even the beds are off? We tried to bring papyrus mats but they are all finished. 

I would like to request the minister to interest herself and move upcountry one of these days. This is the hospital where the late Dr Margaret Mungherera came from and she was the first female chairperson of medical workers in the country. What I am saying is, the President has pledged several times - even people from the Spanish Government came to Busolwe. May we know when Busolwe will be rehabilitated? I am told that it needs counterpart funding. 

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here. Tell the people of Butaleja and the people of Uganda whether the Government is not going to work and we see a way forward. Otherwise, honourable minister, this is pathetic. We were told that after Lugazi Hospital, they would come to Butaleja. When our voters come to Kampala and see Lugazi is almost complete, they ask, “When are they coming?” 

On the issue of Mulago Hospital, like a Member said, it is the apex of national referrals. We heard that it is soon opening but I am told that you are going to charge Ugandans. By the time a sick person from the village of Butaleja and others reaches Mulago, he has spent enough. How do you expect a villager, who is going to pay loans, to pay in Mulago? I would like the minister to come out clearly on this. 

We have the Wandegeya Analytical Laboratory. The media brought it out that the only DNA machine was stolen and that the body parts of Afande Andrew Kaweesi and Susan Magara were stolen. That centre is under the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Can they address the country on the Floor of Parliament whether it is true or not because nobody has come out? People are in prison. If they can steal body parts from the Minister of Internal Affairs who are the custodians of guns – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am giving an opportunity to Members to contribute on different reports so I want those who have not spoken on the other reports. If you have spoken, please wait for others. 

6.05
MS SARAH WEKOMBA (Independent, Woman Representative, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairperson and the committee for the report. However, in the report, I did not hear something to do with our power systems. Some areas are hard to reach, for example in Bulambuli, and there is no power. In most cases, mothers who are taken to hospital in the night cannot access certain services so I recommend that we need to have solar systems in hard to reach parts of the country.
I also heard about HIV drugs running out in a few months. There was an HIV/AIDS Trust Fund that was passed but it has not yet been implemented. I think we should also look at that. If we are going to run the country, we need to plan and know the time when the drugs will run low. I, therefore, call upon the minister to throw more light on that -(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Thank you so much. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give is, there is an issue of blood banks. In Soroti specifically, there is no blood blank. The people who come from Katakwi and neighbouring districts are suffering. Every time we need blood, we have to run to Mbale and this is a challenge. The people are asking for a blood bank.

Secondly, we need refrigerators. Once someone dies and people feel they should keep the body for some time, there is a big challenge. Therefore, Soroti Hospital needs a refrigerator. That is the information I wanted to give my sister - and mattresses for Kumi health centre IV.

THE SPEAKER: You are smuggling in your contribution.

MS WEKOMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)

6.08
MS OLIVER KATWESIGYE (Independent, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good recommendations.

I do not want to demoralise the chairperson of the committee. However, we have been hearing about these good recommendations day in, day out but nothing has been done. However, we thank you for the effort and we believe that this time, we are going to see some changes.

Madam Speaker, you were in Buhweju recently. Nsiika Health Centre IV that you saw - His Excellency promised that this health centre is going to be upgraded to a district hospital. It has taken six years since they talked about it. There has been a song of upgrading health centres III to health centres IV. This country is known for taking loans. Why can’t we take a loan and do this work once and for all because we need to save the lives of the people?

I have eight sub-counties in Buhweju but only three sub-counties have health centres. I have only one health centre IV and three health centres III, which are not fully functional.

Madam Speaker, I think Government should look at these projects and work on the pending ones as early as possible because we are tired of lying to Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, I also have a concern on recruitment of health workers. Nsiika Health Centre IV has only 34 per cent staffing while in all health centres III, if you go there today, you will only find one or two health workers and most of them are not on the payroll. I think that regarding health, we are still lagging behind in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I do not want to talk much about Buhweju but it is a hard to reach area and a hard to stay area. These workers do not have where to sleep. I think we need to look into this issue. Health workers - (Member timed out.) 

6.11
MR OJARA OKIN (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two very short clarifications to seek. First, you know that we set standards on how we should run these health facilities: health centres III, health centre IV, the hospitals and regional referrals. 

The clarification I would like to seek is, who sets these standards that we are not able to meet and why do we set these standards that we are not able to meet? I would also like to ask the minister, when are we going to see a sample of a health centre either III, IV or a hospital, that completely meets the required standards that you have set? Otherwise, we are going to continue lamenting that this health centre lacks this and that.

I would like the honourable minister to assure us when exactly we are going to see a sample of health centres that meet required standards. That is clarification number one.

Secondly, we have had a situation where, in the last financial year, there were major renovations of traditional hospitals that were going on. I think we have done about three or four yet there were others that were earmarked for major renovation. I have not heard anything indicating that the remaining health facilities are going to be renovated. 

Madam minister, what is going on? Are we going ahead to renovate those health facilities that were earmarked for renovation or we are just going to let the programme die? I seek those two clarifications. Thank you very much.

6.14
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My contribution is going to be premised on the law. There is a very big disconnect between the planning and budgeting processes at macro level to the extent that when you look at our budget, it is largely driven by the policy support instrument of International Monetary Fund (IMF) than the National Development Plan.

Madam Speaker, when you look at section 13(6) of the Public Finance Management Act, it is to the effect that the annual budget shall be consistent with the National Development Plan, the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and the Budget Framework Paper.

When you read sub-section (7), it is stated that the annual budget shall be accompanied by the Certificate of Compliance of the annual budget of the previous financial year issued by National Planning Authority.

Madam Speaker, when you come to specifically the health sector, which we are talking about, in the last financial year, the entire health sector complied by 51.7 per cent, meaning that 48.3 per cent did not comply with the National Development Plan. Therefore, you cannot talk about development in the health sector when we are taking a different direction in the sector.

When you come specifically to the Ministry of Health, it performed at 21.3 per cent. I would have expected the chairperson of the committee to inform us – there was a question of absorption of funds to the sector. Whereas there was 86.9 per cent release, the ministry absorbed at 4.9 per cent as far as budget support was concerned. The other monies they absorbed were off-budget projects, where they actually concentrated.

I am getting worried that if compliance of our budget in terms of the health sector - I talked about the health sector but generally, when you look at the report issued by National Planning Authority, it states that Government compliance at micro level is 41.9 per cent of the entire budget. This means that we are on a different direction; going somewhere else yet we are talking about Vision 2040 and attaining the middle income status by 2020. 

Madam Speaker, this means that if we are to be very serious about this budget process, in the remaining two years even for us to achieve middle income status, the economy must grow at 17 per cent, which is not possible. I would therefore like to implore Government that we must attain a policy reversal so that – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, just to complement what hon. Paul Mwiru has said, I would like to reiterate my instructions to the Government that in your policy statements, you must inform us how you are complying with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). It is very important.

6.17
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The health sector is bad. I am glad that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here and I hope that the Minister of Health is paying attention. 

The health sector is very bad everywhere, even in Kampala. When you go to all these hospitals, be it the new Kiruddu Hospital, Kawempe and Naguru, there is no medicine at all. Recently, with this cholera outbreak, I was visiting Naguru Hospital. When a vehicle arrived from Entebbe Medical Stores, it only brought fluids and there was no medicine. This is the story throughout the country. We went to Abuja – (Interjections) - Madam minister, I am telling you the correct information. I am not talking for the sake of talking. There is no medicine in all hospitals. 

Madam Speaker, we went to Abuja and pledged that we were going to put 15 per cent of our budget in the health sector. What do Ugandans want? Medicine in the hospitals because you are not going to buy food in their homes. Put medicines in the hospitals so that these people are able to go and work in their gardens and pay taxes. 

According to the Minister of Health, Mbale Hospital is a centre of excellence; it takes care of all districts around it. Why don’t you give it equipment like Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) machines and X-ray machines? The Intensive Care Unit (ICU), which the Norwegians built in Mbale, does not function. As an individual, I buy items and take them to the hospital yet the Government is there. This is a fact, honourable members. 

What do Ugandans want? Medicine in the hospitals. Even Chloroquine and antimalarial drugs are not in the hospitals. The doctors are seated there with long lines of patients. They prescribe drugs and tell them to go and buy it but the patients do not have money to buy medicine. 

You are asking for big monies for supplementaries for certain places. Put all that money in the hospitals and Ugandans will be happy. You should also work on the roads so that we are able to take our food to the markets. That is all we want. However, 87 guzzlers and ministers who do not come here - What a waste for this country.

Please, Madam minister, look at these hospitals. I would like you to wake up and go to Butaleja and Pallisa and see the condition of these hospitals -(Member timed out.)   

6.20
MR CHARLES GUTOMOI (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was in Lira yesterday and two women came to me asking for money to buy malaria drugs as there were no malaria drugs in Lira Regional Referral Hospital. 

I think that if we are to do serious work, policy review should be taken seriously. It is not about improving the regional referral hospitals we have in this country; let us have Mulago in the east, north and west. If we have national referral hospitals created in the three regions, I think it will help with what is happening in the real Mulago here. 

There are some patients from Lira District who are supposed to come to Kampala for HIV/AIDS review. They come monthly to collect their drugs from Kampala. How long are we going to allow this? 

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying that people travel from Lira to collect drugs from Kampala? Why?  

MR GUTOMOI: They are supposed to come here to be reviewed. In Lira, there are no HIV/AIDS drugs. 

Madam Speaker, I wonder why Apac Hospital has not been mentioned for rehabilitation. When you go to Apac, the district health hospital is in a pathetic state. We had been talking about these things in the Eighth Parliament. Why is Apac Hospital not being considered for rehabilitation? We know that the population is increasing, the number of patients is increasing and the types of diseases are increasing. In my area, we are burying about two or three people who die of cancer. How many types of cancer do we have and which one is better?

On the ground, if people hear that you are suffering from cancer, they declare you dead. The reason for an increase in crimes in this country is because many people are sick. When they think there is no way out, they commit different types of crimes and when you investigate, you find that these are persons who have failed in life. Therefore, I think the best thing to do, besides stocking the regional referral hospitals with drugs and staff, is to create national referral hospitals in three more regions. That is my cry. 
Besides that, those who lived in internally displaced peoples camps (IDPs) in northern Uganda, are the ones who are sick. One time, we requested that before they go back to their respective villages, they should be checked. The then Minister of General Duties, Mr Mukula, promised to take up this matter but it has never been done. Some of these people are still there and have never visited a hospital. Nobody knows their status. Can’t we do this in northern and eastern Uganda? This is the reason why we demand – (Member timed out.)

6.24
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. In West Nile and Moyo District in particular, there is a new programme that is being implemented by the UN and other implementing partners because of hosting refugees. It is called Refugee Host Population Empowerment Project (ReHoPE). This has been set up in order to help all those districts that are hosting refugees. Under this programme, a number of health centres II have been upgraded and they now have maternity centres where women can deliver. In Moyo, there is one called Ori Health Centre II, which has been upgraded. Another is Goppi Health Centre II and another four or five. 

My request to the Minister of Health is that the structures are already there but there is no equipment. There is no medicine, no beds, the number of nurses and midwives are not enough and other logistics are not enough. My request to the minister is, please interest yourself and come on the ground and perhaps commission these health centres II that have been upgraded so that you can see the problems there and then come in to help. 

In addition, Moyo Referral Hospital is overwhelmed by patients coming from Obongi, Yumbe, Adjumani and other areas. We will be very happy and grateful if Moyo Hospital could be upgraded to a regional referral hospital because we also have Sudanese refugees who are referred there for complicated cases. Therefore, increase the number of doctors, clinical officers, midwives and provide other logistics. This is our request from Moyo District.

Otherwise, we thank you very much and we thank the Government of the Republic of Uganda for helping UN implementing agencies in upgrading the health centres II.

6.28
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, District Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, chairperson for the report. I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee or if the House can guide, on the scope of the committee vis-à-vis the private providers that Government still gives help to. Are you paying attention to these providers? Do you check on them and listen to their issues? 

That brings me to another issue that I would like us to honestly start a conversation about; the issue of free medicare versus paid medicare. We all know that there is no free medicare in this country. Even in our constituencies, people are paying. Medicine is finished on the very day it is sent. Therefore, I think we should stop pretending about this and discuss it seriously. For those who can afford to pay, let us pay. 

We have concentrated much on medical facilities upcountry areas but I would like to testify to you that even in the city, the medical situation is appalling. Many times, I have gone to hospital, either myself or my relatives, for admission and they will say, “There is no bed”. If you get a bed, you will be put in the maternity ward or the general ward. Therefore, we need help in all these facilities across the board. 

Health services in the city are not okay so we need the minister to come here and give us a comprehensive report. How does Nairobi manage the private sector in their hospitals? They are so organised. People will even give you a call to follow you up or to confirm your appointment. However, here - for instance sometime last month, I went to Nakasero Hospital but I had to abandon the trip because the queue was so long and there was no possibility that I would see a doctor in the next two hours or so. This is despite the fact that I had money. Let us bring that conversation back to the House, I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I received reports from my constituency that the supply of medicine had not been adjusted to the tune of the census. There has been no adjustment.

6.31
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to seek clarification from the honourable minister emanating from the fact that the decision to create new districts and administrative units, like sub-counties, is a political decision.

The NRM, in its manifesto, promised the people of Uganda, especially districts without district hospitals and sub-counties without health centres III, that in this Kisanja or this term of five years, all those districts and sub-counties would have district hospitals and health centres III respectively. 
May I seek clarification from the honourable Minister of Health whether the ministry has a road map that states that, funds allowing, these are the sub-counties that will have functional health centres IIIs in this financial year, these are the districts without district hospitals that will have district hospitals in this financial year? If this road map is there, would the ministry be at liberty to share with Parliament so that we get to know?

For some of us representing new districts, this is a political issue. New sub-counties are political so if that road map is there, I would request the ministry to share it with Parliament so that we get to know and inform our people that our district has been earmarked for this financial year, funds permitting. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.33
MR ROBERT MUSOKE (NRM, Budiope County West, Buyende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the Chairperson of the Committee on Health for coming up with such a wonderful report. I would like to specifically talk about the recommendation from the committee that Government should address all challenges related to motivation of health personnel in a comprehensive manner, including provision of decent accommodation and medical supplies.

Since time immemorial, we have had a cry of inadequate supplies at health facilities at different levels. This has been coupled with the absence of medical personnel. Professionally, I am a teacher. If you go to class and there is no chalk, you cannot teach and when you fail to teach, the public dubs you a bad teacher. I am just giving an example. Equally, in the health sector, one of the reasons why health workers are not at the facilities is lack of equipment.

Madam Speaker, I would like to give an example. There is an on-going exercise of testing for Hepatitis B and vaccination but in my district, when we came in as leaders in the community, we had to procure gloves. Otherwise, health workers had failed to execute their duties because they had no gloves. Therefore, Madam Speaker, we might push to have health workers at health facilities but unless we make sure that the facilities or equipment are there, we might not get good services. 

Secondly, I am made to understand that one of the justifications for the creation of new political units is to make sure that services reach the public easily. Health facilities are always left behind. As hon. Obua has just put it, we who represent new districts have a challenge and the health department is squarely resting on our heads – (Member timed out.)

6.37
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we should usher in a new dispensation that ministers should respond in writing because we do not have time and they do not have time to answer. In future, they should respond and maybe send these responses on our iPads so that we know the actions being taken by the ministries.

Honourable minister, we are being repetitive but bear with us. I would like to repeat the matter of health insurance. I was one of those who tried, as committee chairperson, to push for health insurance legislation but it stopped somewhere. The last time I heard, the Ministry of Health was haggling with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on where the funds shall be and that stalled the whole legislation. 

Please, help us. Next year, we shall sing the same song that we need health insurance. We need to contribute to our health. People are crying that there is no medicine. This software can only be helped if we have money to spend on medicine. This cry will never stop until we have enough money, contributed by all of us, in this health scheme. 

Madam Speaker, there is a Member of Parliament who had an accident. I do not know him but he is in Nakasero Hospital. What Nakasero Hospital did was to call Parliament and say, “Who is the insurance person for this MP?” (Interjections) He is called hon. Musana. We do not have insurance and with the money we are given, how is he going to be saved? He has to appeal to Parliament for more resources. Please, health insurance is important.

Madam Speaker, as I told you, Mulago super specialised complex is about to come on board but that hospital needs new legislation for proper governance. We cannot combine super specialised facilities with the normal hospitals. We need to legislate here. 

Madam Speaker, I hope you will call us one day, organise a seminar with the Ministry of Health so that we all know what is going to happen after the re-entry of Mulago Hospital. We need to legislate very fast. Even if we get specialists in the new Mulago complex without legislating, it will – (Member timed out.)

6.40
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work well done. Sometimes when we get a chance like we have today, we can then address how our people suffer.

For the last 30 years, very few ministers, apart from hon. Kibuule who accompanied me when we had a crisis, have crossed to see how the islanders suffer. (Interjections) I know the areas I am talking about. When we talk of the islands, people cross to Kalangala and Buvuma where there are ferries but I am talking of areas where we are using boats to cross.

Pregnant mothers from Kalangala or Buvuma can cross with a ferry to a delivery centre but people from Koome and other areas are using canoes. This is the right time, when we are planning, for the minister to plan for engine boats, which can be used as ambulances for the people. When you go there, there are no hotels or places to stay.

Last time, I had people who had suggested donating some support but they said, “How do these people sleep?” When you look at the funny houses – they are not even houses. When there is a problem and one house catches fire, all the 2,000 houses will catch fire.

This is the right time for the Minister of Health to consider those people. We have one hospital - This is the right time, we really have issues, which must be addressed – (Interruption)

MS AMODING: Thank you very much, hon. Muyanja, for accepting the information -

THE SPEAKER: He has gone. Hon. Muyanja had finished.

6.43
MR RICHARD OKOTH (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues on which I need clarification from the minister and maybe the committee chairperson. There is an issue of poor work attitude and ethics of the doctors, which is manifested through absenteeism. They are never in the hospitals. Whereas the nurses are there, the doctors are never there. This is very well exemplified in the case of Naguru.

Madam Speaker, when Naguru Hospital was still in the hands of the Chinese, the services were very good but the moment the Chinese handed over the facility to Ugandans, we went back to our mode of operation. I would like to know how the ministry is planning to address the issue of poor and unethical work by our doctors.

Secondly, the management and supervision of these general hospitals are decentralised under the district local governments. However, the districts do not have the capacity and competence to supervise these general hospitals. Therefore, I would like to know whether the Government has plans of recentralising general hospitals in order to improve services there. 

In terms of appointment, the districts do not have the capacity to supervise and appoint competent medical teams. What plans does the Government have to address the issue of decentralised services in general hospitals? Thank you.

6.45
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to build on his point because we have these general hospitals, which are dilapidated and poorly managed. We have been lamenting about this problem day in, day out. Can’t we take action?

We have referral hospitals with votes. Couldn’t we create votes for these general hospitals so that they are centrally managed by the ministry? We keep a District Health Officer (DHO) in the district who is a non-performer. He or she stays there for 10 years but you have nothing to do with him or her; you cannot rotate him or her to any other place. The country is really suffering and I think the House should take a decision on this matter and decision should be taken now. In this budget, at least let us do something for the general hospitals. We should direct the minister to give votes to the general hospitals so that we appropriate money directly to them and have them under the Ministry of Health.

Secondly, I have personally come to agree that for now, we need Cuban doctors. Ethics in the medical field has gone, there is no more discipline and morale in our system so I think for now - this is an emergency. We should get the Cuban doctors to help us in this difficult situation –(Interruption)

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give my colleague is, there is a health centre in Buyenda - It is unfortunate that the Member of Parliament for that area is sick. It is the only health centre IV in Buyende. The doctor who presides over that health centre IV, I have been reliably informed, appears only once a week. He says that whatever the circumstances, he will only be in the health centre on Wednesdays. That is the information I have.

THE SPEAKER: Is that the one in Kidera? Kidera is the only health centre IV in Buyende.

MR MUSOKE: Madam Speaker, it is true that with a population of 400,000 people, the doctor comes once a week. Remember that this health centre IV is at the periphery of a district so in case a patient is referred, he or she has to move a distance of over 80 kilometres to access that health centre IV. However, if the patient comes to the health centre on a day when the doctor is not there, he or she has to wait for a week before being attended to. I will take the information - (Laughter)
	
MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I think there is general consensus that we need to recentralise these hospitals. I have smelt that the minister is also in agreement - 

THE SPEAKER: Have you finished?

MS NAMUYANGU: Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the opportunity to seek clarification from the honourable colleague.  I think this is a disease affecting the whole country. I have been looking and we are 454 Members of Parliament but how many Members of Parliament are here? It is not only today. 

Mulago Hospital is not under the local government. You can go there and find out if all the medical people are there. We need to come up with a solution to handle this issue squarely rather than blaming the local governments.

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. Allow hon. Komuhangi to make her contribution.

6.40
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have one matter of concern and this is about the raised percentages of maternal deaths.

In my district, we bury about two to three women per week and I have been attending these burials. (Interjections) I beg your indulgence, honourable colleagues. To me, it is very alarming. I have been asking for maternal audits at the district level but I have not received any audit at all.

I would like to ask the minister, what strategy do we have in place to curb maternal deaths in the country? One of the women who died in the health centre - yes there are delays but you find a woman operated twice. Sometimes they operate a woman but when they are stitching her uterus, the woman passes on. However, there is not even a policeman who follows up this case. They bury them as usual and the matter ends there and you go back to bury another one.

Nobody is bothered about the deaths of mothers. As a country, can we focus our efforts to reduce maternal deaths in the country? That is my concern, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are still expecting, from the minister, an audit of maternal deaths. Other Members will speak on the other reports, let the minister respond.

6.43
THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the chairperson –

THE SPEAKER: Could you use a few minutes?

DR ACENG: Allow me to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Health and I will be very fast.

Madam Speaker, I will start with the issue raised on Mulago. It is true that the renovation of Mulago has taken a while and I would like to appreciate all of you for your concerns. There have been many changes on the dates for completion of renovation of Mulago National Referral Hospital. Even now, there is a new change. Renovation is not easy work; you meet many challenges along the way. This is what the contractors have been encountering along the way. 

The earliest date, probably, will be October not June. Every time they meet a challenge, we are called and shown the challenge. This is an old building and they are discovering things that were put underneath, in the walls and so on and we want a perfect building. I think we need to appreciate that ROKO Construction Limited is trying its best to give us what we want.

On the issue of specialists in Mulago, the Ministry of Public Service worked on a new structure for Mulago that has been approved. Already, the structure was given to Health Service Commission to begin recruitment and the process is on-going for these specialists.

Regarding water ambulances, these are some of the projects that are in the pipeline that we have been discussing with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I believe that at an appropriate time, we shall have an answer for you.

Allow me to go straight to the challenges that Members have raised on human resources. We really appreciate that there are gross challenges with human resources in terms of numbers, recruitment, retention and attitude and so on. The issue of human resources will need a multi-sectoral approach; it cannot be health alone. For us to attract and retain these people, we need to address some of the social services in the various districts.

These doctors also want to stay in places where they can access certain things, especially the ones who are researchers. They want places with information technology, better housing, lighting and so on. Therefore, we need to address it together as a team. 

However, we will also need to have more money for recruitment of human resources. As you are aware, sometimes wages are provided but then the money for recruitment is not provided. That is why the Health Service Commission ends up saying it cannot recruit. Meanwhile the wage is there and it goes back. Where money is provided for recruitment, wage is not provided so it has been a bit of a challenge. We have been trying to address that and I believe we have reached a level where both have already been handled.

However, human resource structuring needs to be undertaken and the Public Service is doing this. In most of the facilities where we are having complaints in the local governments, restructuring has not been done for a long time. The human resources we have are not commensurate with the growth in population so the structures are constructed yet the number of patients is many. This is the process that is on-going. 

We also need to appreciate that at least there has been some salary enhancement and we hope that it will motivate some of the health workers to stay and work wherever they are.

Madam Speaker, allow me to clarify on the Cuban doctors. I know the issue has been very contentious and has raised a lot of eyebrows. However, if Health Service Commission were to give you information - when they advertise, especially for specialists, there is nobody who applies –(Interjections)- for many reasons and one of them is, they do not want to work in those rural areas but that is where people are dying. All of them want to stay in Mulago, Kawempe, Kiruddu, Naguru and Jinja. Are we going to leave people in those other areas to die? We need specialists who will sit there. 

Much as the issue of the Cuban doctors has raised eyebrows, we also need our doctors trained, especially the interns. The numbers are very high – (Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, specialist doctors in this country are not paid more than Shs 1.2 million per month in this country. We had a specialist doctor in Nebbi hospital who the Government was paying Shs 1.2 million while the local government added Shs 500,000 to enable this gentleman to work there. On the record of Government, on their wage bill, they sometimes talk of Shs 3 million or Shs 2.5 million but in actual sense, these people do not get more than Shs 1.2 million. 

The Cuban doctors are to be paid six times more than our doctors are getting. Before I bring the point of order, we know that when foreign countries send doctors to a country like ours – like the Chinese doctors have been working in Naguru – the country sending pays or there will be some other arrangement.

In 2001, we sent five doctors to Eritrea and that was under an arrangement of the World Bank Human Resource project to help Eritrea. It was indicated that they would be receiving US$ 2,500 per month. When they reached there, the Government there started giving them US$ 1,000 per month. Dr Rubanga Onyuthi, my own cousin, is one of them. There was also Dr Edgan from Teso land, I do not recall the other three.

With this kind of underpayment of our own specialists and then we are bringing foreign doctors and going to pay them much higher, is it in order for the Minister of Health to allude that our specialists deliberately do not want to work in the villages and yet the people I am talking about are not only specialists but born in Nebbi and they want to help Nebbi? 

The general view is, once there is a specialist doctor, you can attract so many other interns who can come there and be retained later and that is the policy the Government has brought. Is the minister therefore in order to lie to this Parliament? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the country would like to know what the package is that you are offering the Cubans as compared to the Ugandans. If you are going to give them Shs 5 million and you give Ugandans Shs 1 million, what do you expect? I think you need to tell us. If they are going to be better, of course they will come but what are you doing to our people?

DR ACENG: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, it is not true that our specialists are paid Shs 1.2 million. The current salary is:

Medical officers (special grade) - Shs 1.9 million
Consultants - Shs 2.6 million
Senior consultants - Shs 3.4 million

This is because they are of different categories. Let me give you the figures for enhanced salaries:

Medical officers (special grade) - Shs 3.7 million
Consultants  - Shs 4.2 million
Senior consultants - Shs 4.5 million	

Madam Speaker –(Interjections)- I am coming. Can they give me time, please?

THE SPEAKER: Allow the minister to explain. We have asked her a question, let her explain.

DR ACENG: Madam Speaker, as I indicated, there are many reasons why our specialists – and I am talking about specialists, I have not talked about general doctors – do not go down. One of the advantages why they prefer to stay in the centre is because they moonlight; what you have been hearing Members talking about. They move from facility to facility and they allocate only one to two hours in each hospital. At the end of the month, they earn lots of money. 

They cannot do that in the rural areas because there are no facilities for moonlighting in the rural areas. This is something that we are not going to change soon because we allowed this under our laws. They are free to work in private as well as public hospitals.

Back to the Cuban doctors, first of all, it is not yet a policy that has been concluded. Secondly, if we are to bring in Cuban doctors, we are only bringing in specialists for purposes of training our interns and offering specialised services. Thirdly, they will only work in the rural areas. Four, if we are to bring them, we only agreed to pay them US$ 1,500.

That is about the Cuban doctors. We are not bringing in any doctors other than specialists - (Interjections) - Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Order Members. Allow the minister to present her response.

DR ACENG: Madam Speaker, allow me now move to the National Health Insurance, which has been very contentious. I would like to inform you we concluded this Bill and it is currently before Cabinet for consideration and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has provided money in the next financial year to begin its implementation. Next - (Interjections) - there was Shs 2 billion in the policy statement.

On the issue of Kawempe and Kiruddu, I agree with the Members on their observations that we have had challenges regarding this hospital. I would like to make a few comments:

First of all, Kawempe and Kiruddu are referral hospitals. However, it is also true that they do not have any budget allocated to them. They have wage that was initially under KCCA but hopefully, the wage will be moved to these very facilities. They, however, do not have any budget allocated to them.

Kawempe and Kiruddu have been having sewage issues because hospitals have heavy sewage that needs to be disposed of either in the national sewer line or to a lagoon. Unfortunately, during construction, this was identified but not provided for. So, each of the hospitals had septic tanks constructed. The septic tanks have to be drained every two weeks.

Right now, National Water and Sewarage Corporation has begun the process of connecting Kawempe to a major sewer line. (Interjections) KCCA has to provide land to ensure that we construct a lagoon for Kiruddu and this is ongoing.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are saying that it was identified but it was not provided for. Wasn’t it part of the contract? Wasn’t it anticipated? 

Hon. Namayanja who was once a mayor had said she handled that issue.  

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Kawempe and Kiruddu have approved plans and the plans have connections to the sewer lines. I do not know whether it was the contractor that altered the plans or it is an omission. This is a serious issue that needs to be investigated thoroughly. How come that the plans were altered? I was in KCCA and I was part of the team that approved those plans.

DR ACENG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I clearly stated that it was identified in the plan. However, resources were not provided for it. (Interjections) As I clearly stated, National Water and Sewerage Corporation is now in the process of connecting Kawempe to the major sewer lines. However, for Kiruddu, there is no major sewer line near it. It needs a lagoon and KCCA is looking for land nearby so that we can construct a lagoon to drain that sewage.

Madam Speaker, let me go to the issues of infrastructure; the health centres. I would like to appreciate the honourable members for raising this issue severally. The good news is that we are on track. 

First, this Parliament provided a loan; the Uganda Reproductive Maternal, Neonatal and Child and Adolescent Loan. However, the money provided under that loan for construction to upgrade certain facilities was only Shs 14 billion; Health Centres II to Health Centre III. The process has started especially in the districts with very poor maternal mortality rate.

I will also go ahead to answer the question of maternal mortality; that loan was to address maternal and child health. It is rolling out a voucher system under results based financing for women to access services, when they need it and at any time they need it.

The second loan, Madam Speaker, is the current Intergovernmental Physical Transfer Loan that will soon come to Parliament. It is a new loan but many of you may have noted that under the indicative planning figures, the figures are already there. It is to upgrade Health Centres II to Health Centres III.

Thirdly, Cabinet has approved that we secure another loan to construct Health Centres III in sub-counties where there are no Health Centres III. So, that is the first process. The others concerning Health Centres IV and the district hospitals are projects in the pipelines that are being discussed.

Madam Speaker, I will complete with talking about Busolwe. Busolwe Hospital’s budget, as you are all very much aware, has been approved and the funders are available. However, because Busolwe and Kawolo Hospitals were moving together, the funders felt they wanted to review their Bills of Quantities themselves and also ensure that counterpart funding is provided on time before they start. The funders will be in the country on the 30th of May to meet with us. If we are in agreement, they will start on Busolwe.

The project of Busolwe is on track. However, Madam Speaker, all these projects stalled because of counterpart funding because either very little or none is provided at all. Yet, the conditions are that counterpart funding must be provided if the funders are to provide money for it.

Mr Speaker, allow me go into the issue of National Medical Stores and the lack of medicine in the country. First of all, we must be cognisant of the fact that the population has grown. We carried out a national quantification exercise, which shows that if we are to have adequate medicines for the entire country, we need Shs 1.3 trillion provided every financial year. 

National Medical Stores only has Shs 280 million every financial year. We really must appreciate that this is grossly inadequate.

Last year, a Health Centre III was receiving Shs 1.8 million for every quarter. Surely, National Medical Stores cannot do a miracle. However, this particular financial year, money has been increased and they have also been moved up to about Shs 2.5 million and this will increase the medicine for the facilities.

However, our facilities are admitting people who really do not need to be there. We need to emphasise prevention. We are admitting patients with malaria, diarrhoea, flu and so on. We requesting for more hospitals; it does not make sense.

Really, we need to emphasise prevention and the honourable members here are in position to support me to talk to the population to wash hands after using toilets and sleep under mosquito nets so that we have fewer people admitted.

I would like to thank those who have been doing it and especially, the Speaker. I would like to thank you because you have been supporting us so much including the Parliamentary Forum on Malaria. Can I request the others to also take up the mantle and preach prevention?

The last issue that I really would like to make an appeal on is the issue of uniforms. It is true that money is being provided for uniforms. However, you give a uniform; in the next one year or two, it is gone. We cannot have all the money at once. 

So, every financial year, Shs 3 billion is provided for uniforms and we have been moving stage by stage. We are done with the regional referrals and we are moving to the general hospitals so that they have uniforms provided to them.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of constituency health assemblies raised by the chairperson, I beg to defer. When this money was provided for constituency health assemblies, it was grossly abused and mismanaged. The money is provided for allowances distributed to the people who come for the meetings. The chairpersons of these meetings are supposed to be honourable members of Parliament but they are not available for these meetings. (Interjections)

The districts where we sent the money; to date I do not have a single accountability for Shs 10 billion. That money was meant to enhance non-wage for Health Centres IV and III. I request that this money remains there so that Health Centres IV and III can have enough non-wages to handle their utilities rather than sending this money and I never get accountability. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is still asking for accountability and yet, I do not have it and I will not get it. That is my humble appeal.

On the issue of regional referral hospitals and their money for development; yes, I agree that there is a challenge with the development budget. It is little money but other regional referrals went ahead to sign contracts of very huge projects.

When we sign contracts, there are legal issues attached. However, also we have JICA that came in to support. There are hospitals that have development budgets that are counterpart funding for JICA project and we have already signed an agreement with JICA together with Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

My humble request is that the facilities that have JICA supporting them this financial year should not be touched. However, also the other facilities, the legal issues must be taken into consideration. Otherwise, we shall start having litigation like we did with Gulu regional referral and we are still paying up to date. We need to take those into consideration.

The last issue that I must comment on is the issue of energy for lighting of the facilities. The project under Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development for rural electrification did a good job and a lot of solar was installed in some facilities. The process is still ongoing -(Interjections) - it is true.

It is also true that some of the solar systems were stolen. However, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development has again secured money now to connect facilities in the sub counties to the power grid and the process is starting next financial year. Therefore, my request is that we give a little time to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to complete this work.

Lastly, the issue of refugee hosting districts -(Interruption)

MR MIGADDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the NRM Government for trying to do some affirmative action. I sit on the Committee on National Economy and I know a loan is coming to extend power to a number of sub counties. The Minister of Health in response to that has tried to comfort the House that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is extending power to the remaining facilities to the national grid. Buvuma is not on the National grid yet we have health centres.

Therefore, is the minister in order to also include Buvuma health facilities among the health facilities that are going to benefit from this loan yet they also do not have power? Is the minister in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister has said that where there is no hydro power, she is supporting with solar energy. Therefore Buvuma is okay. (Laughter)

DR ACENG: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for protecting me. The issue of the refugee hosting districts; we are very cognisant of the challenges being faced by the refugee hosting districts. And we are in very close discussions with the High Commission for Refugees and with many partners who have now come on board and have indicated willingness to support and improve facilities in the refugee hosting districts and provide some funding. As soon as we are done with the discussions, we shall share the information with the Committee on Health and Parliament so that we can know what we are going to do for the refugee hosting districts moving forward. 

Madam Speaker, lastly, on the blood banks, it is not possible to have blood banks in every district as they are extremely expensive to manage. We have tried very much to ensure that we have blood banks in certain regions and we are still very cognisant of the fact that we are left with three regions where we need to put blood banks. We are in discussions with Finance and it is one of the projects that are still in the pipeline for securing resources to address at least a blood bank in Moroto and in the other regions where we don’t have blood banks.

However, we are working closely with the blood bank to ensure that we have collection centres in many of the districts so that whatever is collected and screened can be taken back to the district. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, do you have any comments?

7.22
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Michael Bukenya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to talk about three issues briefly. One is about refugees. It is not only refugees but also foreigners in Tororo and Kapchorwa; Kenyans are treated first in our hospitals and the same applies to Kasese when they are not refugees.

Therefore, we estimate that about 30 per cent of what hon. Bahati gives us goes to foreigners and we think National Health Insurance will help us quantify because Ugandans will be going with cards.

Secondly, Constituency Health Assembly was not Shs 10 billion but it was Shs 5.4 billion. I am surprised that I have more than half of the Members here who would come and report to me that they held meetings and the ministry did not get any crew of what was taking place. However, this helps in monitoring and we can improve it especially since the ministry cannot do maternal audit or supervision of construction. Therefore, if we get involved in preventive health care, it will be important.

Lastly, the issue, which I am passionate about is about the Cubans. Honourable members, they are saying they are bringing 200 Cubans –(Interjections)- yes, for the regional referrals and they will pay them Shs 5.5 million.  The least specialist at this level this financial year is being paid Shs 1.9 million gross and the consultant who has worked the years I have worked and more is getting about Shs 3 million at the moment.

However, when the Cubans come, they will need interpreters, give them accommodation and many other benefits, which will be about Shs 10 million. Therefore, the committee proposed that the regional referrals are 14 and they need a minimum of eight specialists each. Those are about 140 doctors.

They are bringing 200 at a higher cost; let them advertise these jobs at Shs 5.5 million with the attendant benefits and see if Ugandans will not go there. (Applause) I have been there and that is where I came from. Therefore, there is no way we can buy foreigners and then - thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I put the question that the question now be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FY 2018/2019

7.25
MR GEORGE KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I lay at the Table the minutes and attachment of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure that we had when we were going through the ministerial statement. In the interest of time -

THE SPEAKER: You could use just 15 minutes.

MR KUMAMA: I will only go through the executive summary, a few observations and recommendations because you already have this document. Madam Speaker, the budget performance for the financial year 2017/2018 of the votes under the committee’s purview was generally impressive. Save for the low absorption of the external finance component of the development budget of UNRA and the poor performance, barely 40 per cent, of some of the Government of Uganda funded development under Ministry of Works and URF; notably the Standard Gauge Railway, Bukasa In-land port, construction of selected bridges and the East African Trade and Transport projects. Some areas of dismal performance were also attributed to the lengthy procurement processes especially for some donor funded projects that are subject to rigorous approval processes at every stage of procurement.

The committee notes that while there is unanimity among the votes, the PPDA Act and the regulations thereunder may require appropriate amendment to eliminate red tape in procurement. This should not compromise the pursuit of transparency, accountability and value for money. 

There is heavy reliance on external financing, which was noticed by the committee. In the works and transport subsector, the committee observed the heavy reliance on external financing for road projects.

The low levels of absorption of borrowed funds and its implication on Uganda’s escalating and already worrisome levels of indebtedness. The committee recommends the streamlining of planning and execution so as to ensure efficient and effective utilisation of borrowed funds. 

The committee further noted that the duplication of mandates in the roads sector and the need to harmonise it through legal reforms for which the committee has recommended the need to expedite appropriate legal reforms by the Ministry of Works and Transport.
On the uncertainty over the future of the Standard Gauge Railway line, the committee recommended the realignment and harmonisaiton of the project management set up in the Uganda Railways Corporation in compliance with the URC Act.

On the planned re-establishment of Uganda Airlines, the committee is cognisant of the ramifications of the move by the African Union Commission to open up Africa’s skies to the market and improve intra-African air connectivity by granting unrestricted air traffic rights to the established civil aviation companies under the Single Africa Air Transport Market.

The committee recommends an approach to mitigate the risks and potential losses. It also takes cognisance of the skewed regional distribution of the tarmac roads in Uganda where the north and east were barely 30 per cent of the existing tarmac roads.

The committee recommends the need for greater equity in the distribution of the road infrastructure projects. 

The committee also noted with concern the challenges afflicting the compensation of project affected persons for the various infrastructural undertakings; characterised by delays in the acquisition of the right of way and its adverse effects of project implementation and timeliness of output.

The committee therefore recommends adequate planning and sourcing of the compensation function as well as strengthening the office of the Chief Government Valuer to ensure adequate timeliness and fairness of the compensation process. 

The committee is cognisant of the housing deficit in Uganda, which is currently estimated at two million units with an annual growth rate of 300 per cent. The committee recommends Government intervention to lower housing mortgage rates and incentivise private sector real estate development. 

The committee notes the adverse effects of prevalent staffing gaps across all the votes under its purview. The committee recommends adequate planning and resourcing to purge the endemic human resource gaps. 

The pursuit of increased local content in the infrastructural projects: considering the colossal volume of resources being vested especially in the transport infrastructure development and yet most of such projects are being undertaken by foreign companies, there is need to entrench local content provisions in the contracting of projects with the view of skills and technological transfer and retention of capital and guaranteeing the multiplier effect of such projects on local communities. 

Improvement of project monitoring and evaluation: the Ministry of Lands and Housing and Urban Development sub sector, the Works and Transport sub sectors are rife with major projects, the bulk of which are externally financed.

In order to derive value for money from these interventions, there is need to improve contract monitoring, supervision and evaluation of all projects to ensure adherence to standard quality and attainment of agreed upon milestones.


The committee has recommended the need for more resources towards roads and infrastructure maintenance as a strategy to ensure the longevity and value for money of roads and other strategic infrastructure that are a major cost driver for the country at the moment.

The committee notes the need to strengthen local level institutions such as district roads, committees, district land boards and area land committees through greater sensitisation, adequate resourcing, staffing and support supervision to mention but a few.

The committee noted budgetary shortfalls in some strategic areas such as community access roads, the land fund, operationalisation of the ministerial zonal offices and has still recommended the need for additional resources to these priority areas.

Generally, the committee is optimistic about the improvement of the performance of the votes under its purview. The mitigation of performance bottlenecks in the areas of funding, procurement, staffing, execution and improved monitoring, will grossly aid the performance of the votes and further improve their output in the financial year 2018/2019.

Budget for the Financial Year 2018/2019

The committee recommends that House approves the budgets of the votes under its purview. The committee is handling six votes as indicated on page 11:

Vote 16: Ministry of Works and Transport 

Recurrent Expenditure - Shs 81,051,629,000
Development Expenditure - Shs 853,073,984,000 
Total  - Shs 934,125,613,000

Vote 113: Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA)
Recurrent Expenditure -  Shs 98,613,884,000
Development Expenditure - Shs 2,894,429,992,000 
Total - Shs 2,993,043,876,000

Vote 118: Uganda Road Fund (URF)
Recurrent Expenditure - Shs 616,047,023,000
Development Expenditure - Shs 6,470,000,000  
Total - Shs 622,517,023,000

Vote 500: Road Grant to Local Governments 
Development Expenditure - Shs 23,440,249,000 
Total - Shs 23,440,249,000

Vote 12: Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development 
Recurrent Expenditure - Shs 39,459,073,000 
Development Expenditure  - Shs 145,917,390,000 
Total - Shs 185,376,463,000

Vote 156: Uganda Land Commission
Recurrent Expenditure - Shs 1,250,987,000
Development Expenditure - Shs 29,824,816,000 
Total - Shs 31,075,803,000

The rest of the literature can be read by Members. Let me go to the recommendations on page 15.

Over Reliance on External Financing for Development Interventions
The committee notes that out of the approved budget of Shs 461.1 billion for vote 016 for the financial year 20l7/2018, Shs 236.6 billion, equivalent to 51.3 per cent, is externally financed. While it may be fashionable to rely on external financing for development interventions, continued over-reliance on external financing will only worsen Uganda's external public debt, which stood at Shs 24.9 trillion as at November 20l7. 

The committee is concerned that while the major lenders - International Monetary Fund and World Bank - continue to postulate that Uganda's external debt level is still sustainable, Uganda continues to suffer poor absorption of some of these borrowed funds. This implies that the country continues to incur interest on unutilised or poorly utilised borrowings. In any case, the reliance on traditional macro level quantitative matrices, moreover set by the lenders, for debt analysis blurs the actual qualitative impact of debt on the quality of life of Ugandans.

The committee recommends that the borrowed funds should be put to their intended use efficiently and effectively. This requires streamlining project conceptualisation, planning and management to ensure that disbursements are matched with actual implementation of activities.

Members will look at the table that indicates the proposed budget for financial year 2018/2019. I will go to the observations and recommendations on page 16.

Observations and Recommendations

Duplication of Mandates over Roads

The committee notes that while the Government has over the years devoted colossal resources to the development of the road network in the country, the responsibility for the construction and management of roads is a fragmented one characterised by duplication and potentially posing the risk of wastage. 

Currently, the Ministry of Works and Transport, Uganda National Roads Authority, Uganda Road Fund and local governments, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Ministry of Tourism Wildlife and Antiquities are all engaged in matters of roads at various levels and in various parts of the country. Some of these road works are done without the purview of the Engineer in Chief of the Ministry of Works and Transport.

Cognisant of the planned amendment of the Roads Act, 1949, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Works and Transport ensures the effective streamlining and delineation of the mandates of the various entities involved in the roads sector. This should be done with a view of enhancing inter-agency coordination and greater economy, efficiency, effectiveness and sustainability of the investment in the roads sector.

Imbalance between National and DUCAR Road Development

Although Parliament recommended that additional Shs 118.8 billion be provided for road rehabilitation under the Ministry of Works and Transport – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I will give you five minutes to conclude. You have used fifteen minutes.

MR KUMAMA: Thank you. I will go to the recommendations on page 19. The committee therefore recommends that five per cent of the annual national road development budget be allocated to the DUCAR roads.

For the financial year 2018/2019, the committee recommends that Shs 151.77 billion be reallocated from the Shs 1,612.7 billion of the Government of Uganda funded development component of UNRA to the Ministry of Works and Transport for the development of the DUCAR roads network. This will grossly enhance accessibility and ease the movement of people, goods and services around the country.

The justification for the reallocation from UNRA is the low absorption of the Government of Uganda development funds, which is attributed to delays in the procurement process and finalisation of road designs.

Of the Shs l5l.77 billion, the committee recommends that Shs 116.77 billion be allocated to the rehabilitation and construction of DUCAR roads, starting with 116 districts. The remaining districts will be considered in the subsequent financial years. Shs 10 billion should be allocated to the completion of selected bridges especially those that were not addressed by the Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme (CAAIP) that constructed roads in the communities without bridges. The remaining Shs 25 billion should be allocated to the low-cost sealing of roads using the latest technology, at a unit cost of Shs 300 million per kilometre to cover an extra 27 kilometres, as the NDP II annual requirement of Shs 50 billion and the recommendation by Parliament of the same amount has not been availed in the projected budget for financial year 2018/19.

Investing more resources in the DUCAR network will enable optimal utilisation of the recently acquired road construction equipment.

Rehabilitation of District and Community Interconnectivity Roads 

The committee notes the deplorable state of many district and community interconnectivity roads, which has adversely affected the movement of people and commodities from village to village. The committee is of the view that rehabilitating such roads will grossly improve the socio-economic conditions of the masses.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Shs 33 billion be reallocated from the Shs 72.2 billion of the Standard Gauge Railway (SGR) Project, whose performance in the financial year 2018/2019 was barely 40 per cent, to the Ministry for Works and Transport for the rehabilitation of community interconnectivity roads. In addition, given that Government is yet to secure a financing agreement with the Exim Bank of China and the Government of China for the SGR, the project is unlikely to take off in the financial year 2018/2019 therefore, predisposing the project to the likelihood of a dismal performance. 

In addition, the realignment of the SGR project setup with the Uganda Railways Corporation (URC) organisational setup will lead to efficiency gains in terms of administrative costs, hence justifying the reallocation to the rehabilitation of district and community interconnectivity roads. 

The committee recommends that Government appropriately prioritises and adequately funds the SGR project as a core NDP II project.

Re-Alignment of the Organisational Setup of the SGR Project with the Mandate of Uganda Railways Corporation

The committee notes that instead of establishing a parallel and costlier project organisational framework for SGR, Government should have harnessed the more institutionalised URC. This would rationalise the cost of public administration and ensure better coordination and sustainability of not only the SGR project but all future railways developments.

The committee, therefore, recommends the organisational structure of the SGR secretariat as it currently exists be fundamentally realigned and rightly placed under the URC. This reduction of the cost of public administration will enhance the institutionalisation and harmonisation of the development, operation and maintenance of the rail transport sector in Uganda.

Rehabilitation of the Tororo-Gulu Railway Line 

The committee recommends that Government expedites the process of sourcing for funding for the rehabilitation of the Tororo-Gulu railway line and the allocation of the requisite counterpart funding of € 13 million from nationally available resources in the financial year 2018/2019.

On the impending arbitration between Rift Valley Railways and the Government of Uganda, Members can read that literature. However, the committee expresses deep reservation about this planned arbitration process and recommends that the Attorney-General should read future Government contracts of the vestiges of such unnecessary overseas arbitration provisions.

In the same vein, drawing from the experience of the cost of a similar arbitration in London between the Government of Uganda and Heritage Oil and Gas Ltd, the committee recommends the streamlining of the contents of the agreements between Government of Uganda and service providers in a manner that safeguards national interest and guarantees economy, efficiency and effectiveness for the people of Uganda.

Synchronisation of the Computerised Driving Permit with the National Identification Database

The committee recommends that as the Ministry of Works and Transport finalises a transitional plan for the Uganda Computerised Driving Permit (UCDP), it should liaise with the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) with a view of creating points of interface with the national identification and registration database. This could be the inception of the synchronisation of citizen data, which will generally ease the management of society.

Strengthening Transport Regulation and Road Safety

The committee notes that the high cost of traffic accidents requires a multi-sectoral and inter-agency approach, which can only be attained if matters of road safety are engendered as a crosscutting thematic area in national development efforts.

The committee, therefore, recommends that road and traffic safety should be considered and streamlined as a crosscutting thematic area in the management of public affairs. This will require the various relevant sectors to engender road safety wherever applicable in the planning, execution and evaluation of their activities.

In addition, the Government of Uganda should address the capacity and resource constraints of the relevant institutions engaged in road safety management, so that they can address the severe road crash challenges.

The committee further recommends that urban authorities should strengthen the regulation of boda bodas and matatus (small omni-buses) including but not limited to the restriction of access to certain areas of the city and towns, and limiting their operations to the outskirts. This will help reduce traffic congestion and the risk of accidents. In addition, Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA) should provide a conducive environment and scale up a city bus transportation service to replace omni-buses.

Development of Multi-Modal Transport Infrastructure

The committee recommends that Uganda's transport development policy engenders a multi-modal transport development strategy of uplifting other modes of transport, namely water, rail and air, to augment the investment in roads and guarantee the longevity of the national transport infrastructure.

Civil Aviation Authority (CAA)

Expansion Works at Entebbe International Airport

While the committee welcomes the capital investment into the only international airport in Uganda, the committee notes the need for CAA to strengthen contract supervision and monitoring to guarantee the fidelity of works and ensure value for money on this investment.

The State Of Upcountry Aerodromes

The committee is also cognisant of the effect of the current setup of CAA as both a regulator and operator of aviation services in Uganda. 

THE SPEAKER: How much time do you require?

MR KUMAMA: Madam Speaker, 10 minutes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay 10.

MR KUMAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The report is quite big but there are many issues. The committee is also cognisant of the effect of the current setup of CAA as both a regulator and operator of aviation services in Uganda. This setup inhibits CAA from devoting the requisite resources and attention to development of operational capabilities at the expense of its regulatory function. 

The committee recognises the need to delineate these functions and will address this in the Civil Aviation Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2017 that is currently before the committee.

The Implication of the Single African Air Transport Market (SAATM) on Plans to Re-Establish Uganda Airlines

The committee recommends that the re-establishment of Uganda Airlines is gradually done beginning with the building of capacity. This can be done preferably through developing domestic and regional aviation before plunging into the bigger international aviation market that is currently dominated by bigger continental airlines with stronger financial muscle and a high level of market dominance.

You can read about Uganda Road Fund and the details in the table that follows. I will go to page 33.

Observations and Recommendations 

You can read some of these. The committee recommends that the additional funds for maintenance of unpaved roads on the DUCAR network be reallocated to development of low cost seal roads whose life is 10 years. This is because Section 42 of the Uganda Road Fund Act, 2008 states that designated agencies shall ensure the development, rehabilitation and maintenance of public roads in a manner consistent with the economy and set standards.

The committee recommends that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development urgently issues regulations for the Uganda Road Fund Act, 2008 within one month of adoption of this report.

Rise in the Cost of Inputs 

The committee recommends that Uganda Road Fund is availed Shs 200 billion whether Parliament approves the proposed fuel levy or not.

Honourable members, you can read through the cost implication of oil roads. I would like to implore Members to read through this because of time. You can also read the recommendations on road infrastructural designs. 

Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development

You will read through the table that shows the budget performance as at end of March 2018. It shows the recurrent and development expenditure. 

Low Absorption of the Externally Funded Component of the Development Budget

The committee notes that as at end of March 2018, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development had only absorbed 38 per cent and 32 per cent of the total budget and releases respectively. The dismal performance of the Albertine Graben Regional Sustainable Development Project (ARSDP) was attributed to delayed procurement and civil works, which constitute more than 70 per cent of the project.

The poor absorption of the Competitiveness Enterprise Development Project (CEDP) was attributed to limited aerial photography coverage and bureaucracy in obtaining permission to fly over restricted areas.

The committee, therefore, noted that such delays, especially for externally financed projects, encumber the country as interest is incurred on un-absorbed disbursements.

The committee notes the need for the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to strengthen the project management aspects of planning and forecasting to forestall delays in project implementation.

Decline of Compliance with the National Development Plan II

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development fast tracks the realignment of the strategic plans of the votes under its purview in tandem with the NDP II targets.

Delayed Legal Reforms

The committee recommends that the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development follows through this undertaking and ensures the expeditious tabling of the said Bills.

Chronic Reliance on Supplementary Budget Requests by the Uganda Land Commission

The committee notes that the persistent inadequate funding to Uganda Land Commission to compensate absentee landlords has culminated into the accumulation of areas to the tune of about Shs 1.7 trillion. The committee was informed that most of the supplementary requests in FY2017/2018 are a result of directives to acquire land for Government use.

The committee recommends that the Uganda Land Commission streamlines its planning function and liaises with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the most expeditious modalities for offsetting the outstanding arrears.

An Additional Shs 10.4 Billion Required for the Acquisition of Land for the Amuru Sugar Project

Since the said funds are required for the compensation of additional landowners who had initially rejected the surveying and demarcation of their land, the committee recognises the urgency of this and recommends that an additional Shs 10.4 billion be allocated for this purpose.

In addition, the committee recommends that the ministry should secure all public land to prevent future cases of facilitating relocation of people who settle on public land.

The Need to Strengthen the Land Valuation Function under the Office of the Chief Government Valuer

The committee recognises the need for adequately staffing and retooling the office of the Chief Government valuer to improve the valuation function across the public sector. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development requires Shs 10.06 billion for retooling and adequately staffing the office of the Chief Government valuer in FY 2018/2019. With effective valuation services, the volatility that has characterised land valuation and compensation will be ameliorated. 

The committee recommends that the sector prioritises the office of the Chief Government Valuer with the available sector resources. 

Strengthening Ministry Zonal Offices (MZO) 

These are offices that have been opened up in the country. The committee recommends that Non Tax Revenue (NTR) be availed to the MZOs as appropriation in aid to plug the funding deficit for the operationalisation of the ministry zonal offices.

Staffing Gaps at the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Public Service conduct a robust manpower audit across MDAs. They should either revise the staff establishment of the MDAs to suit what Government is able to maintain, and with it an appropriate revision of the entities’ mandates, or devise realistic strategies of improving the staffing levels.

Members can read about the inadequate staffing and tooling of local land administration structures. 

The committee recommends as follows: 

Increase budgetary allocations to MZOs to at least Shs 36 billion;
Harness the CEDP project to build capacity;
Improve support supervision to local levels;
Plug the staffing gaps at the local level.

The committee also observed that there is need - The ministry wanted additional funding for the compensation of the following people:

1. 	Dr Buwule Muhammad Kasasa - Shs 19,400,000,000. They had already received a supplementary of Shs 7 billion. The difference should actually be paid to them.

2. 	American Procurement Company also got a supplementary of Shs 6 billion and had a balance of Shs 7.43 billion. They want that money availed to them.

3. 	Ankole Diocese also needs a compensation for their ranch - Shs 9,957,114,000.

4. 	Mbarara Archdiocese – Shs 10,787,425,000. They had already received a supplementary of Shs 2 billion.

Madam Speaker, in view of time, I beg to move. I also take this opportunity to lay on the Table the report of the committee alongside the minutes and the attachments. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair and the members of that committee for that elaborate report covering a large area. Honourable members, the report has been signed by the necessary minimum number. We can have some debate for about 20 minutes. 

8.08
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to extend my gratitude to the committee for a very elaborate report and their effort to see that they prioritise where the money should be put. 

I would like to mention a few things briefly on account of time. I happen to be the chairperson of the district road committee in Soroti. One of the fundamental problems that we face is in regards to maintenance of the roads that connect one district to the other. A number of these roads do not fall under national roads but also on the other hand, the district funds are limited to maintain such roads. I would like to request the honourable minister to look into the process of gazetting of roads from district to national roads so as to ensure that these roads are well maintained.

To re-echo the issue of road equipment that the ministry supplied to the districts, you recall last financial year when we raised this matter here, Madam Speaker, you were chairing and you reassured us that the loan that Parliament approved for the purchase of the road equipment included municipalities. However, the road equipment has been delivered but municipalities have been conspicuously left out. We would like to know from the minister what happened to the road equipment for municipalities.

As I conclude, I would like to raise the issue of the road fund and I would like to thank –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: I will give you a minute to conclude. 

MR ARIKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I congratulate the committee because the road fund budget has been increased, particularly the allocation that will go to maintain roads in the district. I would like to urge the ministry to focus more on the aspect of low cost filling of roads especially in urban areas. In the municipality that I represent, for instance, every now and then we find ourselves allocating a substantial amount of money to procure murram to fill the roads and to upgrade the roads and within a year, these roads get washed away. I would like to ask that we push in more money. 

Madam Speaker, as you recall, last financial year you had offered, as somebody that is also monitoring a municipality, to see to it that we find specific amounts of money and allocate this to a certain amount of kilometrage in urban area roads. With time, we would then see dust getting out of the urban centres of Uganda. I thank you. 

8.12
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, District Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start on the issue of the road fund allocation. The committee on page 33 spells out the criteria of allocation of this money. Recently, I looked at the allocation for the coming financial year for town councils, districts and so on. 

The recommendation of the committee should really be emphasised by this House. When you look at the amounts allocated for the town councils, subcounties and districts, you fail to understand whether UNRA, the road fund or those who allocate the money really follow the criteria. I would like us to emphasise the importance of this recommendation. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would like to make a comment on monitoring of our road project. I do not know whether the ministry and UNRA have a team of people to monitor contracts, especially on the national roads that are not tarmacked. When contracts are awarded, Members of Parliament and relevant authorities are not given the information about such contracts. As Members of Parliament, our role of oversight is prescribed yet we are not privy to this information. We do not know the people who have got these contracts and the details of the contract, so we cannot really track the activities. This has resulted into poor performance of these road contracts. 

I will give an example from my district. There is a road from Corner Kilak to Adilang, which was given to some contractor and they were supposed to be on that road for three years after completion of the contract. However, these people ended up using the whole three years – (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Conclude quickly.

MS AKELLO FRANCA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The contractor remained on this road for three years constructing and yet the total amount of time that was given for construction was about a year and then they had three years of maintenance. By the time the time the three years elapsed, the construction was not yet finished and of course maintenance was not there, and nobody followed this up. That is why I thought it was important to emphasise monitoring by UNRA. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know the committee chairperson was pressed for time but I did not hear anything about the ferries. I did not hear about Kigulu, BKK, the Lake Bunyonyi ferry.

8.15
MR FRED BASEKE (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I have two issues to raise.

My first issue is on UNRA, under the cost of compensation and challenges. The committee chairperson is talking of staffing levels as a main challenge but I would like to inform this House that sometimes compensation is left to the contractors. I will give the example of my constituency where we had challenges. Uganda National Roads Authority left the work of compensation to the contractor and we had to make sure that these people were compensated. 

If it had not been for the intervention of the Speaker, these people would have been cheated. You would find a person with six acres of land but they have written a contract to be compensated with Shs 300,000 and that person is supposed to leave the place. Therefore, in terms of streamlining the compensation, as we talk about staffing levels, we should also talk about the responsibility of the different Government entities in terms of determining the compensation levels.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I support the committee’s recommendation to reallocate the additional funds from maintaining unpaved roads to the low-cost sealed roads. However, I would like to know from the committee whether they were able to determine the unit cost of construction of the low-cost sealed road per kilometre, because that would give this Parliament a picture of how much money is needed in terms of coming up with a low-cost sealed road. Thank you.

8.17
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to go straight to the first clarification I am seeking from the minister. 

Honourable minister, I see a lot of marginalisation first of all in the distribution of tarmacked roads and UNRA roads. As I talk now, in the whole of Lango sub-region and northern Uganda, there is a lot of marginalisation. I would like to give an example of my very own road, which serves Kole, Oyam and Omoro. This road is called the “Great North Road” but the section from Corner Aboke via Iceme and Ngai is impassable yet we have a very big religious site there. There are swamps, which cannot be crossed by the faithful. I would like to ask: when shall we see your ministry working on this road?

Secondly, I would like to support the committee on the issue of reallocating Shs 33 billion from the national roads to district roads, which they raised on page 19. If there are roads which help the farmers and local people more, it is these community and district roads. We give UNRA a lot of money yet most of the roads remain undone within the districts and subcounties. The ministry gives about Shs 6 million or Shs 7 million per subcounty yet we have very many roads under the subcounties and districts. Therefore, I support the committee on this.

Finally, the committee mentioned the Standard Gauge Railway Project from Tororo to Gulu and some work has already started –(Member timed out.)

8.20
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Nebbi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two or three issues to mention and one is related to the Standard Gauge Railway Project, where there is some kind of recruitment already taking place. Somebody tickled my own son – a quantity surveyor. When he put in his application for a job, it was followed by a request for him to first accept to join the army and be trained as a cadet officer. He reluctantly, said: “I cannot. I do not want to join the army but I would be happy to work with you.” It has to be clarified whether all professional workers in the Standard Gauge Railway Project should first join the army.

Secondly, thank you, Madam Speaker, for coming to Pakwach. When you were talking today, you mentioned some roads but it was also good that you came in a helicopter. If you had come by road to Pakwach through Wadelai – Actually, that road is now being used by vehicles that transport relief items to Arua, Yumbe and Moyo. If you had travelled on that road, you would have noticed that at virtually all the points where you have culverts, they have been destroyed. 

We have problems on that road and somebody needs to help us. I am saying all this because I remember at some point last year, it was mentioned that the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) had actually accepted to support us and make sure that such roads are accessible for their relief items.

Lastly, when I heard the distribution of tarmacked roads in the country, the north and east seem to have fewer tarmacked roads. What came to my mind after this is: Can somebody do an analysis of those roads and also look at the allocation from Uganda Road Fund? Most likely, you will find that as the distribution of tarmacked –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Just close the statement.

MR ONGIERTHO: I would be happy if an analysis is done because you will find that where the distribution of tarmacked roads is less in these regions, the allocations from Uganda Road Fund to some of these areas is even less. In that case, you see that kind of marginalisation, which I think has to be corrected.

THE SPEAKER: I hope the minister will explain to the country that disparity – 30 per cent of the tarmacked roads are in the north and east and the others are elsewhere. Explain why and when you will correct it.

8.23
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, that was supposed to be my point number one but you have made it clear and I would like to thank you very much.

I have few things I would like to say, and one is to thank the committee for a very good report. The report is actually clear and telling us about the disparities and challenges that we are going through. One of the challenges I would like to raise is the low absorption of some of these monies; can you imagine it is at 38 per cent only! We are getting billions of shillings in terms of loans but UNRA seems to be sleeping. You can imagine that by March this year, it was 38 per cent only. At the end of the day, you will find that we are going to pay a lot of interest on this money and value for money may not be seen. That is one critical thing I wanted to raise.

Related to that, Madam Speaker, is the absence of a national physical development plan. Despite the law being there, this plan is not there. I am wondering how we operate. It is just like a ship without a compass. What direction are we taking? Even as Parliament made it clear that the law is here, there is nothing like a national physical development plan. Why? The minister should tell us. This is a very big problem.

The other issue is on local content. Out of the 30 roads that are being worked on, 24 are being managed and constructed by foreign companies and yet we are the ones borrowing money. We are actually donating that money to the foreign companies yet our people are suffering and getting peanuts. I do not know what the ministry is trying to do to rectify these issues. These issues are very critical - (Member timed out.)

8.26
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for an elaborate report. 

If there are sectors where we have made strides, infrastructure is one of them. However, one issue which needs to be emphasized is local content. This country is grappling with the exchange rate, where the exchange rate of the shilling to the dollar is increasing every other day. Almost, 100 per cent of the loans and contracts we go into are in foreign exchange. 

The ministry should come up with clear measures on how they are building local capacity. We cannot talk about contracts being awarded to these local contractors if we do not have capacity, and for a long time, we have been talking about it. Many of the contractors that have been awarded local contracts have failed. You mentioned Dott Services Limited, Mukalazi among others. Therefore, there is need to build their capacity.

The other issue is about physical planning. This country was declared a planning area. Many urban areas have detailed plans but they cannot implement them because they do not have resources, save for a few that are benefiting under the Uganda Support to Municipal Development Project (USMID), which is about expire. What attempts are being made by the ministry to ensure that physical plans can be implemented? Today, you can trace where you want to go using Goggle Maps. In the current setting of Goggle Maps, where every second there is a corner, it tells you the direction to take - (Member timed out.)

8.28
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. I have about three issues I would like to bring forth. The first is about the low absorption of external financing by UNRA. Most colleagues have alluded to this. It is quite a big problem. 

Every time we borrow funds from outside and we pay interest on these loans yet we are not absorbing them. Last week, we were told about our debt burden as a country. I think we are not doing well there. Every time we are increasing on the debt burden. I wonder why we borrow funds when we are not able to absorb. I think something should be done about this.

The second issue that I would like to talk about is the high unit cost of roads. The figures we have been given here range between Shs 3.5 billion to Shs 4.9 billion. I imagine these are for the local roads. It is even worse for Entebbe Express Highway, where they gave us a figure of Shs 33 billion. Surely, why do we have these disparities on the cost of roads per unit?

At one point, we were given a comparison that showed that in the region, Uganda’s cost of construction of a road is more expensive compared to other partner states of the East African Community. I am again wondering why we have these disparities in the cost of road per unit.

The committee talked about lack of funding for community access roads. In my district, most of our communities rely on community access roads. Right now, there are a lot of rains and most of the roads are very impassable –(Member timed out.)

8.31
MR GORDON ARINDA (NRM, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am trying to look at the average unit cost per kilometre of these UNRA tarmac roads. If you look at the average unit per kilometre, it is Shs 603.56 billion. A number of examples have been cited here: Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi Road, a kilometre is Shs 4.09 billion; Akisim-Moroto, a kilometre is Shs 4.9 billion; Soroti-Katakwi-Akisim, a kilometre is Shs 3.98 billion. You can see a number of disparities. I wonder whether this could be as result of the engineers who prepare the Bills of Quantities (BoQs) or a collusion to defraud Government.

Some of these roads are actually within the same region. However, there are a lot of disparities in terms of the unit cost per kilometre. I think we need to look at this. Probably, as Parliament, we need to come up with the unit cost of a kilometre in a particular region. Otherwise, I think that our Government is being cheated, and this is as a result of the Public Private Partnership (PPP) regulations, which favour these engineers.

On USMID roads, a kilometre is Shs 1.5 billion for those municipalities which are implementing the USMID programme. We also have our small municipalities and some town councils that use fake accounts and are given about Shs 300 million to construct one kilometre of a road.

These disparities are bringing contention within this country – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER:  Please, conclude 

MR ALINDA: I wanted to conclude. I recently had a problem within Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality. They are working on a road whose unit cost per kilometre is Shs 300 million. They are trying to compare it to Mbarara, which has a USMID road at Shs 1.5 billion. The people in Bushenyi are now saying that the engineers in Bushenyi are cheating because they compare Bushenyi with Mbarara and yet these are two different programmes. 

As a Government, I think we need to come out and clarify some of these things so that the people know and do not say this engineer is cheating us. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

8.34
MS PAULINE KEMIREMBE (NRM, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My comment is from page 26, about strengthening transport regulation and road safety. The committee noted that there is need for more resources to target transport regulatory interventions to reduce incidences of accidents.

Most of the accidents are caused by boda boda cyclists who do not know road safety tips. These boda boda cyclists are many but they do not have permits. They say the reason they do not have permits is because they pay the same amount as those driving mini buses. 

Madam Speaker, I am of the view that we should introduce riding permits at a cheaper cost so that these people get permits. In the country, we have more than 500,000 boda boda cyclists. If the amount could be reduced, I think more income would be generated. We should at least introduce riding schools for the boda boda riders. It was noted in the committee report that between five to twenty boda boda accidents occur daily. This was only in Mulago Hospital. What about the upcountry hospitals or these nearby hospitals? 

Therefore, I feel that people need to be sensitised in order to reduce on the accidents. However, preferably, we should introduce riding permits for them at a cheaper cost, not the Shs 300,000 that they are charged. You will find more people acquiring the permits compared to the few boda boda riders who currently have them.

8.36
MS SYLIVIA NAYEBALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As one of the beneficiaries of the Ssembabule-Kanoni-Mpigi Road, I can say that the Uganda National Roads Authority has done us justice. Our road is very good and we appreciate it. 

However, in the event that they are concluding construction of the road, the compensation is really not good. Crooks from Kampala are now using this opportunity to go and converge with the locals and hold meetings with them, claiming that they are going to help them come to Kampala to get their compensation. I would like to call upon UNRA and the ministry to have an organised, timely compensation plan, mainly for those new roads and for us whose roads are complete. They should help us so that our local people are not affected.

Secondly, there are a lot of accidents on our new road. I do not know if the ministry has any arrangement to put up signposts to curb speed. Every week, I am involved in burials because of the new smooth and nice road that has a lot of traffic. I call upon the ministry to help us, mainly with the trading centres, and see if accidents can be reduced especially for our local people.

Lastly, I am perturbed; I do not know what happened to supporting our local companies. We had local construction companies such as Zzimwe Construction Company that was for the late Kasagga, Mukalazi Technical Services Ltd, and others. However, right now when we get reports, all the support goes out of the country. I do not know what happened to Uganda. We either lost confidence in ourselves doing good work or it is corruption that is eating us up. I pray that the ministry and others support and build our local companies so that we can bring revenue to our country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

8.38
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first of all thank the committee for the elaborate report that has been presented. 

I thank Government for prioritising infrastructure over the past one year. However, I would like to also note that whereas my colleagues have talked about the regional imbalances, I would like to talk about sectoral imbalances. I know that the oil sector is going to accelerate the economy but agriculture will sustain it. We need to seriously think about the development of roads leading to the productive agricultural areas. A lot of resources have been committed to these areas in terms of materials but the roads are in a very sorry state. 

I come from an area where most of the fish, which is exported, comes from. I have about 20 landing sites, of which only two have some roads which are in a very bad shape. I have on several occasions called on the minister to make some interventions, especially during the rainy season, because trucks carrying fish for export cannot go from Kiyindi landing site or Ssenyi landing site. I would like to call upon Government to seriously think about these production areas, the way we thought about the oil zones, so that we can prioritise these areas for tarmac roads.

Secondly, new equipment has been provided to the districts but it is being underutilised on account of underfunding. At the moment, districts are negotiating with UNRA to give them fuel to pay for their allowances to utilise their equipment. It is only prudent that these districts are properly funded. I think we also need to review their mandates. Districts are in a position to handle the current national roads – (Member timed out.)

8.41
MR NATHAN ITUNGO (NRM, Kashari South County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for a good report. However, I have two issues to raise.

The first issue is on the money for the Project Affected Persons (PAPs). I am on the Committee of Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) and our report I think is in the House. Money which was meant for compensating people was given to Chinese companies and they deposited that money on a fixed account and got a lot of interest. However, that interest was recovered. Therefore, honourable minister, I would like to know if you have come up with new strategies on how to manage the money for the PAPs.

Secondly, honourable minister, there is a road in my constituency, between Mbarara and Ibanda. When people are compensated, they surrender their land titles and pieces of land are carved off and taken by UNRA. Since 2010, these people have not got back their land titles. They go to UNRA offices but they are told to wait. The recent information we got was that some titles got lost and they are trying to make new ones. Therefore, we would like to know the fate of the land titles which UNRA took to carve off pieces of land, which was paid for.

Lastly, I would like to talk about framework contracts, which my colleague there raised. Uganda National Roads Authority gets contractors to work on some roads and my experience is that the contractor is supposed to work on the road in cycles - cycle one up to cycle four. However, UNRA does not give information on which cycle a contractor is handling. The first cycle is about bush clearing and the rest, for example. The second cycle is to put murram and culverts, etc. – (Member timed out)

8.44
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity accorded to me. At the same time, I would like to thank the committee for their good report. I have only two issues to raise.

First, I would like to talk about the factors that would qualify a road to graduate from one class to another - let us say a road that would be elevated from a class of murram to tarmac. There are four factors: productivity of the road; the traffic that is on that road; the terrain of the area; and even the strategic area in which that road is located.  

Madam Speaker and the honourable minister, we have been talking about the Isingiro-Rakai Road, which is 109 kilometres. It is the road that connects us to Tanzania and Rwanda. It is the road which transports the matooke we eat here in Kampala, Juba and even other countries. It is that road that brings rice from Tanzania to Uganda. Why has this road been left out? 

I perused through the document and even the other time, I met the chairperson and told him about the same matter. However, it is as if you do not take it seriously. Madam Speaker, it would be more prudent to consider this road because it is quite productive. This is the road that the refugees use to transport their products. The little murram on the road can easily be swept away by those heavy machines and we would like this road handled. We want it to also be identified so that we can have a good road like other areas. 

Another issue is -(Member timed out.)

8.47
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. 

Madam Speaker, Uganda is a landlocked country. I would like to thank the chairperson for the report but I also would like to bring to the attention of this House once again the fact that the road from Uganda to Kenya, like I have reminded this House time and again, is not okay. I know the minister has sugar-coated this in the few discussions I have had with him, and he has said that we are going to have Trademark East Africa work on that road. However, this is taking long. 

Just two days ago, there was heavy rain and that road was blocked. It was so disappointing that we had a traffic jam in Kenya and Uganda and the Kenyans pointed fingers at us for not doing our part. How I wish we had this on the budget. 

Madam Speaker, I also happen to represent kilometre zero of the standard gauge railway - that is 0, 0.1 as it moves. However, when you look at the requisition by the Standard Gauge Railway Project to compensate the people along the corridor where the railway is going to pass, they had a budget of Shs 72 billion, unfortunately, Shs 33 billion was removed. 

Therefore, our people surrendered their land sometime back and they are not able to use it now; they are not realising any value for it. How I wish we could give them the Shs 72 billion so that the whole corridor from Tororo via Kamuli and Kampala is cleared and then we will wait to go to China and mobilise resources to come and start that.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I thank the committee members for the observation they have made as far as reinstating Uganda Airlines is concerned. I wish we go for brand new aeroplanes so that even Members of Parliament will not have any choice but travel in our own - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, he has reminded me of the Busoga railway loop. Is it being considered or not? That is the line that used to go from Jinja into the hinterland and out - Jinja-Kakira-Mbulamuti-Namaganda- 

8.49
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My comment is still on the standard gauge railway. Looking at the report, it appears that the Standard Gauge Railway Project may not end this year.

Madam Speaker, in the same report, URC is proposing to rehabilitate the Tororo to Gulu line and they are costing it at € 32 million. So, I am wondering, if the standard gauge railway is already in the process, why are they again going to spend more money to do that rehabilitation?

Madam Speaker, in the same report, it has been stated that Government is trying to carry out arbitration with RVR. We are all aware that RVR failed to manage the railway project and Government decided to withdraw. Right now, from the report, they are mentioning that the Attorney-General has agreed to go to London and arbitrate. Can the Minister of Works and Transport give us details on this matter? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Before the Member of Parliament for Kakuuto County comes up, I would like to remind Parliament that this House vehemently objected to that concession but they did not listen.

8.51
MR CHRISTOPHER KALEMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work well done. 

I would like to comment on UNRA. When you go to our districts or constituencies, the UNRA roads are not well maintained. In some areas, they are even worse than the district and community roads. This is because in maintaining their roads, UNRA does shoddy work; for example, on the Kyapa-Kasensero and Kyotera-Mutukula roads they just poured soil and after three weeks, potholes appeared. I therefore appeal to the honourable minister to follow up UNRA. The Kasensero Road is now blocked; the drainage has been blocked because of the size of the culverts they used. People cannot now go to one of the biggest landing sites in the country.

I therefore appeal to the minister to follow up the contractors who were contracted for Kyapa-Kasensero Road. It is just 41 kilometres. I do not know why his contract is not terminated. He signed a contract of three years. It is terrible! Thank you, Madam Speaker.

8.52
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. 

Madam Speaker, I have one issue to raise and that concerns Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. I would like to support the committee’s recommendation on page 51, which is about the additional funding of Shs 9.9 billion for acquisition of land in Amuru. 6330377- 1801113

Madam Speaker, unlike the people of Amuru, in Kiryandongo District we have a sugar investor. The company is called Kiryandongo Sugar and it was allocated land by the Uganda Land Commission with bona fide occupants. Some of the bona fide occupants have stayed on the land for more than 30 years. 

In the case of Kiryandongo, Madam Speaker, the compensation and the resettlement exercise was entirely left to the investors. These investors are given additional security - people in armed uniform - who aid in the evictions. If the people of Amuru can be compensated, why can’t the people of Kiryandongo also be compensated? All these people are sugar investors and the people they are displacing are Ugandans who are bona fide occupants. These people are still protected by Bamugemereire’s commission.

That is the clarification I would like to seek from the minister. All these companies belong to sugar investors. They are displacing Ugandans who are bona fide occupants. Why only consider the people of Amuru in terms of compensation and resettlement and ignore the people of Kiryandongo District whom I speak for? I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

8.54
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we talk about marginalised areas, I look at islands in totality. Islands in Uganda are places that are not considered at all by the Ministry of Works. Maybe if they are considered, it is to a less percentage.

You talked about ferries. Those are even further disregarded. I have not heard anything concerning a ferry from last financial year to date. At least let us hear about a ferry being provided for one place and then we get to know that next financial year, another place will get a ferry. Ferries are not equipment or machines that are bought every year. We proposed a ferry for Buvuma from Kikongo to Mayuge to connect us to Busoga and other areas but we have not heard anything in response.

I have a challenge in Buvuma that I think others also have. When I came to Parliament, I found the terminology “road fund”. This was a misplaced phrase because the road fund money is given specifically for roads and not water transport. I have eight subcounties in Buvuma and you cannot construct a road there unless we have a ferry. When they send that small money to those eight subcounties that are not connected to a ferry and do not have a road, the subcounty chiefs say that they are not mandated to use the money for anything else. Therefore, they gamble with that money and maybe crush some stones to show that they have done some work in respect to roads.

Madam Speaker, I would like to propose that for these sub-counties that do not have roads and even do not connect to ferries, let them be given water buses like Kenya is doing. This is just some small technology. Provide water buses that can pick people from different destinations at different islands – (Member timed out.)

8.57
MR TONY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson and the committee for this report. 

Madam Speaker, I would like the issue of the disparity in the distribution of tarmac roads in the country to be tabled here and discussed. I would like the minister to come here and present an analysis on the distribution of tarmac roads by kilometres, region by region and cost, so that we get to know what is happening. 

Madam Speaker, can the minister tell us which region in this country is not productive so that they do not deserve tarmac roads? Is it because we are producing sugarcane or cassava, and the roads are going to milk, cattle, matooke or oil producing areas? If this is not done, then we are going to continue doing a disservice to the country. This must come - 

Sometimes you find a company like Dott Services being given Mbale-Soroti Road and they work on the same road for five years and yet other companies are working on a road for only two years and more roads are given to them. I think it is time for us to deal with this.

Secondly, I would like to ask the minister what has happened to the Masindi Port-Rwekunye-Apac-Lira Road. The Islamic Development Bank had said that they had withdrawn the loan. What is the status of this road because this is an example of what is causing disparity?

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, I would like to disagree with the report of the committee on the single African air transport market. We say that we are not discussing the single African air transport market yet at the same time we are saying we go slow with reviving our national carrier, Uganda Airlines, and other partner states are taking on that. It is good Uganda has not yet assented to that protocol. However, why don’t we then move fast to develop out national carrier so that by the time all the countries within Africa have assented to that protocol we will also have developed capacity? When we –(Member timed out.)

8.59
MR EDWARD SSEMBATYA (NRM, Katikamu County South, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I thank the committee for the report. 

I would like some clarification from the minister; there are a number of presidential pledges regarding upgrading and construction of certain roads within the country, which are long overdue. An example is the road from Bombo to Semuto via Ndejje University, which was pledged 12 years ago but up to now nothing has been done.

I do not know whether it is the Ministry for the Presidency or Ministry of Works and Transport to take the necessary action. Up to now, nothing has been done. Every year, the answer is, “To be considered the following year.” Twelve years have come to pass and now they have become “previous years”. What should we do? I just need clarification. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, our neighbours - the project affected persons on Katosi Road - are still demanding for Shs 5 million but there is no sign that it is coming.

9.01
MS JUDITH NABAKOOBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for work well done, especially concerning the recommendation on DUCA roads, community access roads and also the low-cost tarmac roads. I believe that with these recommendations, some of us will be able to benefit. 

Madam Speaker, Mityana Municipality for the past 20 years has never been considered - It has been neglected by UNRA and Uganda Road Fund. As we speak now, the traders and community in Mityana Municipality day and night are facing problems with dust and water ponds when it rains. Therefore, I pray that in this coming financial year, the Ministry of Works considers tarmacking at least some kilometres in Mityana Municipality. 

Another issue I would like to talk about is the road from Namukozi to Banda; this is a standing presidential pledge. The President pledged that the Namukozi-Maanyi-Banda Road that goes up to Gomba will be tarmacked. However, up to now whenever we ask the ministry about the progress of the works on that road, they usually tell us that the designs are being made - every year. Therefore, I would request the honourable minister to give us a brief on that road.

You all know very well that we got road equipment but I wonder whether they have budgeted for the maintenance, training of the operators and mechanics. (Member timed out)

9.03
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to commend the committee for the wonderful work they have done on the reports. 

It is either an issue of us being disorganised in Government or it is negligence of duty; the Ministry Of Lands, Housing and Urban Development does the work of the Ministry of Works and Transport. There are roads they are in charge of. The Ministry of Local Government also has its roads. However, when it comes to implementation, there is no supervision. 

When you look at the work being done on Main Street in Jinja, you ask yourself, “Is this the work of a contractor?” First of all, they cannot manage the process of procurement, and this is true in most municipalities. When it comes to supervising these roads, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development lacks technical capacity. When you go to the Ministry of Works and Transport, they will say, “That is not our road”. When you go to UNRA, they say, “That is not our road”. When you go to the Ministry of Lands, they say, “That is a project called USMID.” 

Now, how are we going to work as a Government if we start projects that we cannot monitor and supervise? I call upon us, Members of Parliament, to put all the roads under one ministry and remove roads from various ministries such that there is clear accountability and supervision. 

Some municipalities cannot absorb billions of shillings and at the end of the day we get nothing. We have now come back for a review here and to petition Parliament to review the entire process of the roads in various municipalities. Therefore, the minister should be able to respond to us and tell us - (Interruption)

MR MUGOYA: Madam Speaker, I had the benefit of interacting with H Young who initially worked on the Kampala-Jinja-Iganga Road around 2002 to 2007. They went to Kenya and when I was meeting my cousin, Mugoya Isabirye, in Nairobi I met this group. They said that they left Uganda because before one spends money on the contract they have been offered, one has been asked to give almost 60 per cent to the authority awarding the contract. Therefore, before you think of working you must think of where to get money to use for the contract. For that reason, they were unable to perform.

That is why Uganda is experiencing all the bad roads because of the unfettered corruption within the sector. That is the information I got and I thought it was very useful for the good of this country. 

THE SPEAKER: Is anyone listening? 

MR BALYEKU: Madam Speaker, I would like the minister to give Parliament a plan - (Member timed out.)

9.07
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to talk about the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA). We have an unfunded priority, which is the upgrading of Gulu, Kasese and Arua airfields - I do not know whether they will be called “airports”. If we want to promote domestic flights, we should not leave this area completely unfunded. 

There is no plan to upgrade these airfields to international level, to allow them function very well. Gulu Municipality is looking forward to becoming a city and we feel that it is very important to upgrade that airfield. About five years ago, when people went to Pakwach to view the solar eclipse, the President went to Gulu to re-commission the Rift Valley Railways. I would like to know from the honourable minister what happened. During that time, he assured the people of Gulu that we were going to use the railway to travel to Pakwach.

According to this report, railway rehabilitation is earmarked for Tororo to Gulu; how about from Gulu to Pakwach? The two towns used to conduct a lot of business because of the railway.  Right now, we only hear about the standard gauge railway; what has become of that Rift Valley Railways?

I wish to inform the minister that these machines that you people gave to the districts - (Member timed out.)

9.10
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and I wish to make comments. 

In the report, I have seen the programme for the construction of the Tororo-Gulu railway and that pushed me to recall that we also had the Kampala-Kasese line. At that time, there was production of copper, but even now Kilembe Mines is being revamped. Could I therefore know from the minister the programme the Government has for the Kampala-Kasese railway?

Madam Speaker, my next comment goes to the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. I had written to the minister but I feel I have to go on record in the House. Karusandara Subcounty in my constituency was partly part of Mubuku Prisons land. It was carved out into a subcounty with a population of over 10,000 people. However, the people in that subcounty cannot access land titles. I wonder why the Uganda Land Commission has denied them the right to obtain land titles. 

Finally, I would like to comment on the issue of allocation of the land fund, which every Member has alluded to. I can give an example from my own district but I would not like to throw away food when I am still hungry, because the comparison comes from the same district and I am a beneficiary and stakeholder. Kabatoro Town Council receives over Shs 50 million from the road fund quarterly and Kasese District, which has around 34 entities, receives Shs 150 million - (Member timed out.)

9.12
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to inquire from the minister whether the £12 million is part of the budget which Government committed itself to in signing an agreement with the European Commission for the construction of Atiak-Laropi Road. If not, how are you going to get this money and when is construction commencing? We are tired of lamenting yet we are part of this country and Government. 

Madam Speaker, I support the recommendation on page 19 that money be reallocated from UNRA to support the local government roads because of the nature of the roads that we have; we can testify to that. 

Madam Speaker, I request to know from the minister whether he has ever done some investigations on the Shs 900 million given by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for the construction of Iraji Bridge in Adjumani District under the support to refugee-hosting communities. There is no bridge but the money was spent.

I request that the ministry reviews the issue of the crossing of the Nile using a ferry because we only cross four times and this causes a lot of jam - (Member timed out.)

9.15
MR WAMAKUYU MUDIMI (NRM, Elgon County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to refer to the distribution of tarmac roads in the country. Much as we are saying that other areas are being marginalised, I would like to say that this is a constitutional matter. How should we resolve it? If you look at the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy in the Constitution, No. XII (ii) says, 

“Balanced and Equitable Development 

(ii) 	The State shall take necessary measures to bring about balanced development of the different areas of Uganda and between the rural and urban areas.”

It is indicated here and the honourable minister brought it up to the Committee on Budget. 

To make matters worse, Parliament in 2013 approved a loan to upgrade Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road. We are now told that the loan has been cancelled by Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) - (Interjection) I got it from the Executive Director of UNRA – 

THE SPEAKER: Cancelling the loan or the road project?

MR WAMAKUYU: The financiers have withdrawn –(Interjection)– Yes, the members of the committee are here. Therefore, we should stay the appropriation to this vote until we resolve this matter. Honourable minister, I hope you understand what I am saying. I beg that we stay the appropriation to UNRA until we resolve this matter because the loan has been cancelled –(Interjection)– by the Islamic Development Bank. That is what he said. 

Secondly, we have talked about the cost of the road. The other day I heard the minister – (Member timed.) 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR WAMAKUYU: The minister was telling the people of Wakiso to come in big numbers to receive a gift. You are receiving a gift of Shs 33 billion per kilometre, which is equivalent to $9 million - that is the Entebbe Express Highway. Is that a gift or is it robbery? We need to be serious. The highway is one of the most expensive roads in the whole world. 

There is the issue of the 10 per cent levy. We passed the road fund and its financing – hon. Bahati, listen to this - and part of the financing of the road fund is from the road users’ charge. However, the Ministry of Finance has refused to give money to the Uganda Road Fund. How are you going to implement this Shs 100 levy on the road fund?

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development first; I think you have fewer issues so we shall start with you. We shall then come to the Minister of Works and Transport.

9.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me also thank the chairperson of the committee –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you update us on the Uganda Land Commission Bill? Do you remember that when we were vetting you we made it a priority? (Laughter)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me start with that one. There are a number of Bills which we are processing in the ministry. They include the Uganda Land Commission Bill, which has been completed and is scheduled to be discussed and considered by Cabinet. We hope that by the end of this financial year, we shall table it in this House. From our side as the ministry, it is complete but we just wait for consideration and approval by Cabinet and then we shall bring it to the House as well as other Bills, which we have already processed. So we are ready. 

There are a number of issues which were specific to our ministry that I will respond to quickly. Hon. David Abala talked about the absence of a national physical development plan but I would like to assure the House that we are in the process of completing the national physical development plan. We have also scheduled that before we complete it, we shall have a meeting with the Members of Parliament to get their input. So the process is on. Right now, there are regional consultation meetings in the various parts of the country to feed into this national physical development plan. 

Hon. Robert Migadde raised a query that the urban areas, that is, town councils and municipal councils, are developing physical plans but they are not enforcing implementation, which is partly true. You recall that in 2010, we passed a National Physical Planning Act, which was replacing the Town and Country Planning Act. This requires that we should do physical planning in the whole country, particularly in the urban areas. 

Urban areas are required to produce these physical plans and they are doing them. However, what we have found as one of the weaknesses in the law is that we have a National Physical Planning Board, which is centred in our ministry, but because of the way the law was structured, it does not have a clear relationship with the physical planning committees in municipalities, districts and also town councils. Soon, we are bringing an amendment to that law to strengthen the National Physical Planning Board so that it is able to superintend and supervise the lower level physical planning units. Once we do that, then they should be able to police all these units in the municipalities and town councils to enforce the physical plans which are being developed. 

The other challenge has been lack of resources. However, in the budget which we are considering, there has been a considerable increment in the allocation to physical planning. We hope that once they get the money, they should be able to enforce the physical plans which are being developed in the urban areas. 

Hon. Nathan Itungo raised an issue of UNRA and land titles for the land which was carved off Mbarara-Ibanda. I will liaise with the Minister of Works and Transport on this. If it has already been brought to the Ministry of Lands then we shall expedite the processing of the titles, but I do not have details as to whether it is still with UNRA or it is now with the Ministry of Lands. I will cross-check and if it is within our ministry then we shall expedite the processing of the titles so that the beneficiaries should be able to get justice. 

Hon. Helen Kahunde from Kiryandongo said there is a sugar investor in Kiryandongo who is evicting the bona fide occupants from the land and they are not being compensated. That is unfortunate. In the case of Amuru District, Government is compensating the beneficiaries because Government is acquiring shares in that investment. In the case of Kiryandongo, the arrangement is that the investor should compensate these bona fide occupants or help them to get relocated.

Therefore, if the investor is mismanaging his role, I will undertake to follow up with the relevant officers. We shall also call the investor to the ministry and make sure that the people are compensated because the law is very clear that before you acquire land, the occupants or owners should be adequately compensated prior to acquisition. Therefore, if the investor is not doing his part, I will link up with hon. Kahunde and the leadership of Kiryandongo to call the investor to order, to do what he is supposed to be doing before he invests in sugarcane. 

Hon. Moses Balyeku raised an issue about the roads in Jinja Municipality, particularly Jinja Main Street. He said that there was shoddy work done. We have a project in our ministry, which was approved by this Parliament, called Uganda Support Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID) Project, which has worked on the infrastructure in most of the municipalities - Mbale, Soroti, Gulu, Lira, Arua, Fort Portal, Mbarara, Masaka, Kabale, Entebbe, Jinja. On the whole, it has been a very successful project. I am sure most of you who have moved in these towns, have seen that the infrastructure has greatly improved. 

In this project, we use local contractors; we do not use external contractors. What hon. Balyeku raises are some of the challenges we meet as we try to build capacity of our local contractors. We have had challenges in some few towns; I think Jinja was one, and also Mbale and Fort Portal where there were capacity issues with local contractors that we even had to change contractors in order for them to complete the work. However, on the whole, the project has been successful and we shall be coming back to this House to request for support for the second phase of that project where we are going to add other municipalities.

The reason why this project is in our ministry is because we are the ministry responsible for lands, housing and urban development. “Urban” means towns, including Jinja. This was a loan from the World Bank approved by this House. The money passes through our ministry and we convey it to the municipal councils. The way, for instance, the road fund sends money to districts to maintain roads is the same way we also send this money to support municipalities to build their capacity. They are supervised by engineers in the district and municipalities and by engineers at the centre. At the centre, we have a programme technical committee, which is comprised of our ministry, the Ministry of Works, Ministry of Local Government and the other related ministries and they supervise. 

The project manager of this project, who is housed in our ministry, has a PhD in engineering. Therefore, you cannot say that we do not have capacity to supervise. The challenge was just the capacity of the contractors who we got on board. However, I hope we shall have extensive discussions when we come for funding of the second phase of this project to this House - (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you. Madam Speaker, the front bench, according to our Rules of Procedure, is reserved for ministers. Is it in order for hon. Benny Namugwanya to sit behind there, sharing stories with hon. Nabakooba, instead of sitting in front here? Many of us actually want to sit in front but we are not given the opportunity. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Benny Namugwanya, please come and take up a seat at the front bench where you belong. Hon. Baryomunsi please conclude.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The USMID project has been successful and the small errors by contractors, like in Jinja for that particular street, are being rectified. 

That also goes to the issue brought up by hon. Arinda, who said the USMID road in Mbarara cost Shs 1.5 billion per kilometre whereas the one in Ishaka-Bushenyi Municipality cost Shs 300 million. I am not an engineer but it depends on the quality of the roads. The roads being done by USMID in these municipalities are very different from the roads we do in town councils - the quality, the layers. I am sure hon. Katumba Wamala will add to that. Therefore, that also explains why you can have a tarmac road at Shs 50 million and then one at Shs 1 billion. The quality differs from road to road. Therefore, the roads under this USMID project are of a higher quality than what they are doing for the town councils and other towns.

Finally, there was a question from my brother, hon. Mbaju, about land, which was carved out of Mubuku Prison’s land - part of Karusandara Subcounty - and people were not being enabled to get titles. I will just need to get details from the Uganda Land Commission and our offices. However, if a decision had already been made to carve this land out of the prison’s land, I do not see the reason as to why people should not be able to get titles.

I undertake to crosscheck in the ministry and get the facts and then I will work closely with the Member of Parliament to assist his people get land titles. Because if you own land, we encourage you to have it surveyed and then you get a title so that you protect your security on that land. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me once again thank the honourable members for the questions and comments they have made about our sector. We shall look at recommendations of the committee and make sure that they are implemented.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of Finance, there were some issues on money.

9.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, it is true that some of the loans that we had approved here under the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), including Muyembe-Nakapiripirit, were cancelled because of some of the delays that we were experiencing. However, we had an engagement with the bank last month and they agreed to reinstate them on condition that the things that are delaying the process, including procurement - 

On the Nakapiripirit road, for example, we are waiting for the finalisation of the procurement. Once the contract is signed, then the bank accepted that we reinstate the full amount of the loan. We have discussed this with the Minister of Works and Transport, to ensure that we fast-track these processes including all the approval processes. Therefore, we have re-engaged the bank and it is now ready to reinstate the loan. 

The final issue was on the road fund. We have proposed a measure of Shs 100 on fuel and we specifically want to ring-fence this money for road maintenance. If you look at our estimates, we provided an extra Shs 200 billion under the road fund because the Shs 100 will generate approximately Shs 192 billion. Therefore, because of that, we have ring-fenced it under the Uganda Road Fund. Therefore, this is how we are going to appropriate it and ring-fence it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Works, if you could use seven minutes.

9.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Gen. Katumba Wamala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will endeavour to respond to some of the issues raised. However, I would like to first thank the committee because from our interaction, most of what we discussed has been included in the report.

There was the issue about maintenance of roads connecting districts and those that are neither here nor there. I think that issue was well appreciated by the committee and that is why you find that in their recommendations, they have recommended funds for the interconnectivity. That will answer that problem.

Road equipment for the municipalities: Under this programme, the municipalities and town councils were not included. They were not part of the beneficiaries of this set of equipment, which we are giving out to the districts. What we were actually able to do was to accommodate the new districts in the distribution. However, we are now doing a countrywide survey to study and understand how the Chinese equipment, which is still there, is behaving. We are going to bring it back and what can be salvaged shall be salvaged. We shall then repair it and hand it to municipalities, especially those which are relatively big. Because the municipality roads are not so heavy, we think that equipment will be able to handle them.

On the low-cost sealing, this is well accepted. We are actually doing a study on three low-cost technologies: probase technology, the cobblestone and; low-dust technology from Israel. We are already going to do a trial stretch in Nansana on the probase technology so that we can see how much such technology can alleviate the problem of our roads. We would like to try cobblestone in Mbale because that is where we have identified a difficult terrain which we think can benefit from this. However, we have also realised that there are a lot of stones which have been generated as a result of the construction of Karuma Dam; possibly, we could also consider using those stones that are not being used for anything and we use them to see whether we can do cobblestone work. 

Hon. Franca Akello asked about the road fund and she was appreciating the increment. Yes, as already alluded to by the minister in charge of finance, there was a good reason for that. It was not making sense for us to give that good equipment to the districts yet would not have the fuel and money to run them. Therefore, the increment to the road fund came in very timely because there was no district which could utilise that equipment 70 per cent. Once that is done, we think they will be able to do that. 

On monitoring and oversight, yes we keep our Committee on Physical Infrastructure in the loop. For many of the projects we do, they are kept abreast and many times, they come to the field to see what goes on. I think they are doing a good oversight job.

Hon. Fred Baseke asked about the compensation levels. I do not think we can have a uniform level because the parameters are different from area to area, and they are determined by the Chief Government Valuer. He knows what he uses for the different roads.

Hon. Ongiertho asked whether for somebody to work with the Standard Gauge Railway Project they must join the army. I hope it is not because a General is in the Ministry of Works. (Laughter) No, you do not need to go to the army to join SGR but I think they encourage people to join. Therefore, it is not a must. It is just a qualification which you need to have.

I will talk about the SGR together with the issue of the Tororo-Gulu-Pakwach rail line. We are going to rehabilitate the Tororo-Gulu-Pakwach metre gauge railway for a number of reasons. First, you know about the trade hub which is going to be in Gulu; so, definitely we shall need that line. Secondly, there will be need to move some of the equipment for the oil industry. Eventually, the line will reach Pakwach. That project will start this coming financial year and the European Union is funding the project. Studies have already been done concerning the project-affected persons and the compensations will be done. That is now under the Uganda Railways Corporation. 

About the Rift Valley Railways (RVR), as a ministry, we have nothing to do with RVR. The marriage did not last and we broke up with RVR. If there will be need for negotiations, possibly the Attorney-General would know. However, as far as we are concerned, URC is back in charge fully. As I speak now, they have finished rehabilitating 95 per cent of the Port Bell-Kampala line and we are about to open that route to Mwanza. Therefore, URC is very much in control of that and they are also now going to rehabilitate the main line, which is the Tororo-Kampala line, to ensure that we can move our cargo faster from the other side.

Someone commented on the Yumbe-Moyo-Laropi Road. There was actually the issue of distribution of tarmacked roads. While there was a map, which I think many people are referring to, showing overconcentration of red lines in the lower belts, I think that map will soon change when these roads are done. 

We are doing Olwiyo-Gulu and the contractor is Zhong Mei. It is about 85 per cent completed. Gulu-Acholibur to Musingo is already about 85 per cent completed. As for the Rwenkunyu-Apac-Lira-Puranga Road, as you have heard the Islamic Development Bank is going to give us the money and Government of Uganda is going to do the Puranga-Acholibur Road to connect Acholibur to Musingo. As for Musita-Lumino in Busia, the China team is already back and I understand they are doing a good job. Rehabilitation of Tirinyi-Mbale is ongoing. We have Pallisa-Kumi-Kamonkoli route where the contractor is already on site. We also have Mbale-Lwakhakha up to the border which is also being done. Sironko to Muyembe is already done. 

As for the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road, you have heard what has happened, and hon. David Bahati is very truthful. The reason for cancelling as he said – maybe just to reemphasise – was because of the delays. I think the bank thought we were taking very long because of our procurement process. However, that has now been settled and we have agreed that we are going to fast-track the procurement process for the contractor. The Soroti-Moroto Road is also another tarmac road. There is also a very magnificent structure – the Nile Bridge. These are all in the east. Once these are done, the map will possibly balance -(Interjections)- Also under USMID - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is coming to 10 o’clock. We need to end. We need to allow the Hansard team to go so that they can also go to sleep.

GEN. KATUMBA: Madam Speaker, on the local content, as you all know, the Local Content Policy has already been passed. However, our local contractors are still facing challenges; one of them being the security bond, which is usually very expensive, and also the issue of equipment. As a ministry, we are trying to work around the clock to see how the local contractors can be helped. 

The President also alluded to that, that we should help the local contractors. We have encouraged them to get together and form bigger companies so that they are able to work together. When they work as individuals, many of them have very few machines. We have some who have got the capacity to do tarmacked roads like Abubaker and they are being encouraged and given contracts so that they can build their capacity.

On the issue of loans not being absorbed, some of this was because of counterpart funding delays, which has now been solved by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Most of counterpart funding was for compensation but now the ministry has agreed that compensation will always have a separate budget line, which will make it easier. 

On cost per unit of roads, of course this is a big concern even in the ministry. We are highly concerned about this. There are many parameters sometimes which make the cost of roads different. There is a team which is conducting a study within the Common Market for Eastern and Southern African (COMESA) countries to see why one road, for example in Kenya, costs so much in variance with one in Uganda or Zambia? 

One of the other things which make our roads very expensive is the issue of compensations. There are also other parameters like constructing roads in swampy areas and mountains or if you are doing a road in Pallisa, for example. There are other parameters which come into play in terms of even vehicle volume - how much that road is going to take in terms of vehicles and also what the vehicle capacities will be on that road? All those are parameters which are considered when you are doing a road, but at least there should be an indicative range of the unit cost per kilometre and we think this report will be able to do that.

Accidents by boda bodas mainly concerned the honourable member from Lyantonde. These are concerns mainly within the town councils and municipalities. There are efforts to address this matter. There is a committee which was actually set up by Cabinet to address the decongestion of Kampala, which should address the issue of boda bodas and also taxis. A study had already been done on the bus transport facility but we are also examining the light railway transport system.  With those, we think we should be able to achieve some level of decongestion of the cities. 

On the question of reducing the cost for the riding permits, I may not be able to say “Yes” or “No” but I will follow this up with the Transport Licensing Board. In some cases, I think it is a question of being firm. Recently, there is a new group called “Safe Boda”. When they ride, they really observe the traffic rules. They do not run red lights and they do not carry more than two people. I think it is a question of discipline that is required.

Timely compensations: Yes, we will examine this and see to it that people are not disenfranchised. Those that give their land will be compensated.

Humps on the roads: This is a debate in which some people are complaining that we are putting too many humps on the roads. Members from Kamuli, for example, have been complaining that you cannot “run” on Jinja-Kamuli Road because of the number of humps.  We will have to balance and see whether we need to put humps everywhere. People are asking why we should put humps on highways. Some of these are because of our indiscipline on the road.

Hon. Mutebi inquired about accessibility to landing sites.  There is a programme under the African Development Bank on Lake Victoria improvement, which also addresses access roads to landing sites. We are yet to see how much will come out of that before we can spend money where there is already a commitment. Even this week our team is going to Kisumu to look at that. 

Transport on the lake: For Buvuma, your ferry is under rehabilitation. The two new engines are already here and it is in the dry dock. Uganda National Roads Authority has given us some assurance that within the next six months, the ferry, which is larger than what you have now, will be out there doing its work. Of course, I feel for you because I am also from the islands. There is also a bigger study about transportation on the lake in the mid-term plan, where we intend to address most of those issues concerning transport on the lake.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, what about BKK, Sigulu, Bunyonyi, Koome?

GEN. WAMALA: When you look at our ministerial policy statement, those details are there.  The BKK ferry is one of those which is in line. Bunyonyi is coming in the second study, which involves all the other lakes.

THE SPEAKER: How about the Sigulu ferry?

GEN. WAMALA: Sigulu is in. I actually discussed with the Member of Parliament and he was very happy to see that it was captured.

Isingiro-Rakai Road: I cannot confirm. I do not think this road is catered for within the budget for the coming financial year, but as we progress – Of course, we would have loved to have every road everywhere budgeted for, but again the resource envelope has to be put into consideration. We also do not need to overstretch because we may be so strained that we make no impact. 

As we discussed, Malaba is under Trademark. Actually, late last week we had a meeting with Trademark. They have confirmed the availability of the money and they have confirmed that that stretch is going to be done. That should give you some comfort about the Malaba access.

Compensation on the SGR stretch: This is a big challenge because if we were to compensate the whole 273 kilometres of Tororo- Kampala, we would need about Shs 520 billion and yet the maximum we can get annually is about Shs 72 billion, which is very little. Of course, we feel the pain of those people whose property we have already marked for compensation. Many of them are coming and saying, “When you mark my property, it means that I lose business; nobody will rent it and yet I cannot destroy it until you have paid me.” It is a matter of concern but again the resource envelope may not allow us solve it fully. 

As to whether the SGR project is still on, yes the project is still on definitely. It is a matter of time before we go into its execution. 

The Kasese line is under study. As you know, the whole of that line was destroyed. It has been vandalized and there is practically nothing left. At least on the Tororo-Gulu-Pakwach route you can see an element of a line, but Kampala–Kasese there is nothing. All the slippers and rails were taken. However, it is under study and it may most likely come under the SGR project because that is a big project to take the line to Kasese and then from Bihanga, we go down to connect to Rwanda. Therefore, it is not in the immediate future; I would not want to lie. 

There was the issue of the Ndejje lot; this is a small stretch and it is very difficult to take a contractor to a small stretch. What UNRA was trying to do is to create a lot with Kira-Kasangati-Matugga and join it to Ndejje so that when you put a contractor there, at least there is some sizeable work, other than having to mobilise a contractor for only five kilometres. It would not make a lot of economic sense. So plans for the road are still on. We know it is a presidential pledge and we will do it.

I had already discussed with the honourable member for Mityana about the issue she raised. In the next year’s budget, we have Shs 3 billion to at least do the Mityana Town Council roads - 1.7 kilometres of Kampala Road and also Station Road. Hon. Nabakooba is aware because we had discussed this already, but maybe she wanted me to get an assurance and commitment from here on the Floor. 

I do not see the presidential pledge happening in the near future. I do not think we need to take on any other projects other than the oil roads. We may not need to take on new projects until we have finished the projects we are running, otherwise we shall over stretch and then this will cause problems.

I would like to thank the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development for the intervention in the town councils and the municipalities. I wish you could stretch it further although under the new Road Safety Bill the Ministry of Works and Transport wants to take back this mandate and this has been recommended by the committee. The funds may come through the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development but it should be the Ministry of Works and Transport to supervise the construction of those roads because all roads should be under the Ministry of Works and Transport. The Bill will soon come to the Floor and I hope it will receive support in that direction. 

Gulu, Arua and Kasese aerodromes: There are studies being done on Arua, Gulu and Kasese to see how much can be developed. They have to study the traffic volumes in terms of how many aeroplanes are accessing there and see what levels to develop them to. You do not need to develop a structure that will be a white elephant. You need to develop a structure which will fit with the kind of volume of aircrafts that it is likely to take. The studies are being done. We may not develop all of them at a go but I can assure that they are already on the radar for development – (Interjection) - The Atiak-Laropi road?–

THE SPEAKER: Isn’t that what you started with?

GEN. KATUMBA: No, this is from Atiak through Adjumani to Laropi Bridge. For that one, I will respond when I get the details. I do not have them off cuff. I make a commitment to bring the details next week.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I was proposing that you come back tomorrow around lunch time and have lunch with the Members who have issues that have not been covered today. (Laughter) Therefore, you should come to the canteen and sit with the Members. (Laughter)

GEN. KATUMBA: I appreciate it. Thank you very much.

On compensation for project affected persons, I request that I get the details because I have been on the compensation for the Gulu-Acholibur section and I thought we had actually sorted the matter. However, if there are any parts which have not yet been addressed, let me have the list and I make a follow-up with the relevant authorities.

For the future, we are looking at roads such as Kayunga-Galilaya – the chairperson of Budget Committee has been on my case. (Laughter) However, that will not be this financial year but possibly next financial year. The other ones are Kawongo-Bangala Ferry and Budali-Kyamatende Ferry. I hope the Members of Parliament will be patient so that this year we finish what we have committed to do and next year we will be able to do the rest. I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Committee chairperson, do you have any closing comment? Use one minute.

MR KUMAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and Members who have persisted up to this time. I must thank you very much for your time. It has not been easy but we are here for a reason.

Madam Speaker, I want to emphasise that that this Committee on Physical Infrastructure is an oversight committee on two ministries – Ministry of Works and Transport as well as the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. It is mandated to manage and monitor Shs 4.705 trillion, which is about 21 per cent of our national budget. 

This committee has found a bit of constraints in its operations, which I would imagine that we should really consider. This committee is not a desk committee but a field committee. We are supposed to reach out where our money is supposed to go. Therefore, we request, in the most humble manner, that it gets facilitation as it is supposed to be. It will help us a great deal to monitor these projects, which are very dear to all of us as a country.

Honourable members, I must thank you for considering our recommendations and approving them. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I really want to thank the honourable members for staying. We have done quite a bit of work and I am hopeful that by Thursday we shall have concluded consideration of these reports so that the Budget Committee can complete its responsibilities. 

Let me thank the Clerk and her team, and of course the Hansard team, which is still down there, for making this possible. Thank you very much. House adjourned to 2 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 10.00 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 16 May 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 