

Wednesday, 10 May 2017

Parliament met at 2.05 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting and I wish to thank you for the work you are doing, trying to help us meet the deadline for the budget. Can I request the committees to speed up because time is truly running out.

We should pass the budget by the 31st May, which is not a sitting day of this House. Therefore, we have to bring it forward and pass it days before that. We have lost two or three days on the days that are already very few. Let us fasten the process and have this matter finalised before the time that is provided in the law. 

Honourable members, on a sad note, I have learnt with sorrow the death of Mzee Yohana Mukwana; father-in-law to hon. Winnie Kiiza, the Leader of the Opposition and father to former MP, hon. Yokasi Bwambale Bihande who was representing that part of the country in the last Parliament.

Mzee Mukwana passed away yesterday and will be laid to rest tomorrow in Kiburara, Kisinga in Kasese District. Transport has been arranged to depart from the South Wing Parking at 6 a.m. tomorrow Thursday, 11th May. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

Honourable members, let us observe a moment of silence.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have three tax Bills today, which we should finish. We also have the Prime Minister’s Question Time at 3 o’clock; so, let us start business now. Are there urgent matters to be raised? 

2.08
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the state of operations of Rift Valley Railways. Government issued a notice of intention to terminate the concession agreement, which was signed by the two countries of Kenya and Uganda. 

As a result, it has caused a state of fear to customers, suppliers and staff. Currently, customers have diverted their cargo to roads and also, the suppliers have gone to court. One of the suppliers, Multiplex Engineering, has secured a court order and has frozen the accounts of Rift Valley Railways.

As of today, the staff have not yet been paid their salaries and are worried. They do not know the owner of the company because even the shareholders have been invisible. 

My prayer to Government is to give us a statement on the issue of the state of operations of Rift Valley Railways and the plan of how they are going to return Rift Valley Railways to Government according to the notice of intention. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have something on Rift Valley Railways and the workers?

2.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we take the concern of the honourable member and we will request the Minister of Works and Transport to make a statement to that effect tomorrow.

2.11
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a concern about the outbreak of cholera in our communities as a result of Government’s failure to provide clean drinking water and typhoid treatment services in our health facilities.

While we could have averted this issue, the project that was started to provide clean water in 2010 has unjustifiably stalled to date. For about five years there is no explanation to what could have stalled the project. Therefore, my prayer is that:  

    1. There must be mass testing and screening of our population for typhoid. 

    2. There must be urgent intervention in terms of drug provision to treat.

    3. I would like a report on the progress of the urban water project, which was initiated in 2010 but has stalled to date.
Thank you.

2.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)( Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, given the importance of the matter, we are going to request the Minister of Health to come and make a brief statement in the course of this sitting, if you will allow it.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Today? 

MR BAHATI: Yes, Mr Speaker.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REVIVAL OF UGANDA’S NATIONAL CARRIER AND POLISHING THE AVIATION INDUSTRY

2.13
MR PAUL MUSOKE (NRM, Buikwe County North, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Today I make my maiden speech -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are laying papers. (Laughter)

MR PAUL MUSOKE: I would like to take this opportunity to lay on the Table the book I have authored entitled, “Revival of the national carrier and polishing the aviation industry.” As you are aware, preparations are underway -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you beg to lay. 

MR PAUL MUSOKE: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It will be sent to a committee responsible for the sector to look at and advise the House on how to handle that matter. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

DISTRIBUTION OF VENDORS THAT OCCUPIED THE NAKIVUBO STADIUM PARKING TO OTHER MARKETS/LOCATIONS IN THE CITY

2.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a report on the distribution of vendors that occupied the Nakivubo Stadium parking to other markets/locations in the city. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It will be referred to the committee in charge of the presidency to look at it and see how it can help the House in taking a decision. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS - THE HIV AND AIDS PREVENTION AND CONTROL (HIV AND AIDS TRUST FUND) REGULATIONS, 2016

2.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay statutory instruments - The HIV and AIDS Prevention and Control (HIV and AIDS Trust Fund) Regulations, 2016.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: let the records capture that. That is for information of the Members. 
LAYING OF PAPERS

STATUTORY INSTRUMENT NOS 6 – 10
A) THE LOTTERIES AND GAMING (FEES) REGULATIONS, 2017
B) THE LOTTERIES AND GAMING (LICENSING) REGULATIONS, 2017
C) THE LOTTERIES AND GAMING (MINIMUM CAPITAL REQUIREMENTS) REGULATIONS, 2017
D) THE LOTTERIES AND GAMING (BETTING) REGULATIONS, 2017
E) THE LOTTERIES AND GAMING (GAMING AND BETTING MACHINES) REGULATIONS, 2017

2.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay statutory instruments Nos 6-10 in one booklet, regarding the fees, licensing, the minimum capital requirements, betting and machines.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is that just one set of regulations or are they several?

MR BAHATI: They are several but under one roof.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you are laying the instruments, the record has to capture them one by one so that we know what they are. They could be in the pages but you can go through them.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay regulations for:
a) 	The Lotteries and Gaming (Fees) Regulations, 2017
b) 	The Lotteries and Gaming (Licensing) Regulations, 2017
c)	The Lotteries and Gaming (Minimum Capital Requirements) Regulations, 2017
d)	The Lotteries and Gaming (Betting) Regulations, 2017
e)	The Lotteries and Gaming (Gaming and Betting Machines) Regulations, 2017.

These are statutory instruments Nos 6-10.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you mean there is no instrument on the Lotteries and Gaming Licensing Regulations, which is number (b) on the Order Paper? Let the record capture that. Honourable members, those are for your information.

Honourable minister, there are concerns. A Member wanted to bring a motion to debate some aspects of these issues of lotteries as well as gaming and things like that. He thinks there are huge gaps and a debate in this House could help. I said there is a Bill that is before the House and we could use that to bring these issues so that the House can have a discussion on the subject he is concerned about. It is a matter of big concern to the rest of the population of this country.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not yet time. Therefore, we proceed to the other things.

BILL’S
SECOND READING

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Has the motion been presented to the House? Is it a Bill for second reading or committee stage?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the Bill is for second reading.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

2.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2017” be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Members for Rubanda and Kapchorwa. I can also see the Member for Ngora and others. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much. The motion has been seconded overwhelmingly in the House. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, the Bill is to amend the Excise Duty Act, 2014, Act 11 of 2014 to revise the rates of certain duties specified in Schedule 2 to the Act; to provide for the removal of excise duty on sugar confectionaries and locally manufactured furniture and to provide for related matters in line with our policy to support local content. 

The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been studying this and are ready to report to the House for debate. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is true that when this Bill was read for the first time, we referred it to our committee on 4 April 2017. This shows the committee has worked really hard to have it ready by this time. The chairman would like to report and we will see how to debate the principles of the Bill.

2.21
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you stated, the Bill was referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 4 April 2017 and the committee is ready to report back to the House.

Mr Speaker, our report is structured, on among others, introduction, objects of the Bill and methodology. I beg the indulgence of the House that in the interest of time, I straight away go to observations and recommendations of the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker – (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairperson of the committee. Wouldn’t it be procedurally okay for the chairman to first lay the minutes on the Table before he reads the report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He can do it now or after his presentation. The time doesn’t matter. He might want to refer to them before he lays them. Proceed.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. The committee considered the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty Bill, 2017” and made the following observations.

The Bill seeks to introduce specific rates alongside ad valorem rates in the excise duty tax regime. Using ad valorem rate regime, the producers are able to manipulate declarations in order to pay less tax, leading to revenue loss. Consequently, they locate factories outside Uganda and import finished products thereby discouraging local production and job creation. This will be solved by introducing specific rates alongside ad valorem rates as proposed in the Bill.

Excise duty on non-alcoholic beverages, not including fruit juices or vegetable juice, will be charged at a rate of 13 per cent or Shs 240 per litre, whichever is higher. The Shs 240 specific rate proposal is an increase from the current 13 per cent as this presents a shift of between one to five per cent, depending on the manufacturer’s ex-factory price. 

The current rate of excise duty at 13 per cent is the highest in the region, with Kenya charging seven per cent while Tanzania is at five per cent. This, in effect, affects Uganda’s competitive advantage from the growth and investment point of view. 

The Government should reduce the rates from 13 to 10 per cent to help the sector attract investments and promote growth. This should eventually be reduced to seven per cent, to make the sector competitive in the region.

Excise duty on soft cap cigarettes is proposed to increase from the current Shs 50,000 per 1,000 sticks, to Shs 55,000 per 1,000 sticks. The increase in excise duty increases smuggling from the region, which have lower tax rates on cigarettes. This has an impact on the locally manufactured cigarettes and affects the attraction of investment into the sector and, therefore, its growth. Uganda currently has the highest excise duty rates on locally manufactured cigarettes in the region. 

The committee recommends that in accordance with the neighbours in the region, excise duty on locally manufactured cigarettes should not be the same rate with imported cigarettes. This will promote growth and encourage more companies to invest in the country and provide market for tobacco farmers. 

Uganda is currently producing ethanol and ENA, for locally produced molasses. This has helped to boost taxes to Government as companies involved in making spirits no longer have to import. However, the proposed rate of 60 per cent, on spirits from locally produced raw material or Shs 5,000 per litre, whichever is higher, will make locally produced spirits more expensive than imported spirits. The rate of Shs 5,000 is actually much higher than the equivalent of 60 per cent. The specific rates should be Shs 1,836 per litre.

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill 2017, be passed into law, subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to report.

Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table, a copy of the original report duly signed by the minimum required members of the committee. Also attached in this file is the copy of the minutes that captured the proceedings that took place in the committee, together with other relevant material that the committee used in the process of scrutinising the Bill. I beg to lay on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is on the principles of this Bill. I now propose the question for your debate.

Honourable members, the motion is that the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2017, be read for the second time. That is the motion that is before you to discuss the principles of the Bill. 

However, these are part of the financial Bills that are supposed to facilitate the revenue side of our budget. The principles are clear. Do we want to discuss the principle of the Bill or do we want to go straight to the text of the Bill and see how we can improve on the actual text of the Bill? If that is agreeable, I will put the question to the motion for second reading of the Bill. 

I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2017,” be read the second time.

(Question put and greed to.)

BILL’S
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

2.31
Clause 2
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 2, as follows:

    1. By substituting for item 1(a), the following:
	“(a)Soft cap 
    (i) Locally manufactured: Shs 55,000 per 1,000 sticks.
    (ii) Imported: Shs 60,000 per 1,000 sticks.”

(b) 	By substituting for item 1(b), the following:
	“(b) Hinge lid -
(i) 	Locally manufactured: Shs 80,000 per 1,000 sticks.
(ii) 	Imported: Shs 85,000 per 1,000 sticks.”

Mr Chairperson, the justification is that Uganda currently has the highest excise duty rate on locally manufactured cigarettes in the region. The committee recommends that in accordance with its neighbours in the region, excise duty on locally manufactured cigarettes should not be the same rate with the imported cigarettes. This will promote growth and encourage more companies to invest in the country and provide market for tobacco farmers. 

2. We proposed to replace paragraph (c), item 3, on spirits with the following: -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, can I process those ones first because this is a lengthy one? You have read (a) and (b). Can I put the question to the amendment proposed in paragraph 2(a) -

MR OGUZU: Mr Chairman, I come from a tobacco producing area. The reason that tax was proposed was because it would deter consumption of tobacco by making its products very expensive. The committee is proposing that this tax must be aligned to what other regional countries have. 

I fear we may expose our people to consuming tobacco and the end result would be our Government spending more on tobacco related diseases. I, therefore, would like to implore the honourable members to oppose that proposal so that the tax stays the way it has been.   

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Of course this is a good move. I have no big problem with soft cap but hinge lid. You are charging Shs 80,000 on locally manufactured cigarettes and Shs 85,000 on the imported ones. That means the difference is only Shs 5,000. 

If we are moving in the same way like soft cap, the tax on locally manufactured cigarettes should be Shs 60,000 per 1,000 sticks and the tax on imported ones should be Shs 85,000 per 1,000 sticks. The difference should be wide. Otherwise, people would go for imported cigarettes instead of the local ones. 

BAT are my friends but they decided to shift the company from here to Kenya and we lost jobs to Kenya. We should make it very hard for them to export to Uganda. Therefore, my proposal is that the locally manufactured cigarettes should be taxed Shs 60,000 per 1,000 sticks and the imported ones Shs 90,000 per 1,000 sticks so that we promote the local cigarettes and deter imported ones.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if we are going to contribute, we will limit ourselves to what has been proposed by the committee and hon. Nandala-Mafabi because beyond that, it would be difficult to process the amendment. If you are contributing on this particular amendment, you can speak now.

MS NAKAYENZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to agree with what hon. Nandala-Mafabi has said. If we are to promote our own products, we should give them more friendly rates than the imported ones. People may even opt for the imported goods because Ugandans have a culture of preferring foreign goods to locally made ones. If you make the difference as small as Shs 5,000, it will not matter. The goods that are manufactured here will be ignored and people will opt for the foreign ones. 

Like he has said, the total increase on the tax will cut down the intake by our local people because of the related problems that we have. I would like to thank you.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Whereas I agree that the tax should be bigger on imported products, I don’t agree with the insinuation that the tax on the locally manufactured products should be lower than Shs 80,000 per 1,000 sticks. 

One of the reasons we are putting these taxes is to generate revenue but also to discourage some groups of people, especially the young people: students in school and pupils, from smoking. Also, to make sure that we help our people against some diseases caused by tobacco consumption.

Therefore, my proposal would be that we leave Shs 80,000 per 1,000 sticks for locally manufactured cigarettes and then put Shs 90,000 per 1,000 sticks for the imported ones. When we lower the tax on the locally manufactured ones, it means we are making it affordable even to the poorest of the poor including our school-going children. 

Mr Chairman, it was in this House where we received information that many school-going children smoke because the cigarettes are very affordable. Therefore, I propose that we leave the tax for locally manufactured cigarettes at Shs 80,000 then increase to Shs 90,000 for the imported ones. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, are we going to debate this? There are amendments that have been proposed. Can we deal with the amendments first? We agreed these are tax Bills and there are no huge debates, but to deal with the percentages proposed and we finish it.

MR NDEEZI: Mr Chairperson, I agree with you. We don’t need prompt debates on a matter of this nature but tax Bills are about money, income, revenue and trading. Therefore, what comes to my mind is that if you have any amendment to a law of this nature, you must mention how much money we shall get in revenue. You must also mention how much money we gain or lose as a result of your amendment. 

Honourable chairperson, I humbly refuse. Please, explain to us how much money we shall lose or gain in revenue. We need to know the figures because what we call future amendment can result to loss of billions of shillings in your tax law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are on paragraph (a) of clause 2. Honourable chairperson, would you like to respond to the two proposed amendments before I ask the minister?

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. We have to move slowly because I have to give an explanation so that we arrive at the right decision. 

Mr Chairman, we have two classes of cigarettes: one is called soft cap and another one is hinge lid. In these two classes, we have got those that are manufactured here in Uganda and those that are imported. There is a general argument that Uganda needs to support its local manufacturers in all sectors across the board. 

Last year, in the soft cap class of cigarettes, there was a tax rate of Shs 50,000 per a thousand sticks. That is the status quo now. There is now a proposal from Government to increase the tax by Shs 5,000 to Shs 55,000 which the committee agrees with. 

The committee is then proposing that in order to protect our sons and daughters of the soil, in this case the local manufacturers, we need to differentiate the tax rates. The committee is proposing Shs 60,000 but from the mood in the House, it appears hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s proposal is gaining ground. At some stage, as the chairperson of the committee, I do not see any problem with conceding to his proposal of –(Interruptions)

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Chairperson, I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for allowing me to seek clarification. In this country, there are items imported and those that are manufactured within the country. If they go for ornaments made in Uganda and those imported, the imported ones would take a lead over those made in Uganda although I do not support that. 

The clarification I seek from the chairperson is: what is your research about the cigarettes imported? How much have we been earning out of them and what are we earning from those locally manufactured? If we are getting profit from the imported cigarettes, it means people love them more than those locally manufactured –(Interjection)– I am seeking clarification; just bear with me. Therefore, do you have that kind of information about the performance between the two? Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the Bill has proposed only one amendment. It has proposed an increase of Shs 5,000 in paragraph (a). The committee is proposing that they split that into four different aspects. They accept what has been proposed by the Bill of Shs 55,000 per stick but only for locally manufactured cigarettes; that is the soft cap and then they breakdown the imported and then go to the hinge lid.

Therefore, it is in one clause and one paragraph. Now the committee is proposing an extension to make this coverage differentiation between a locally manufactured and imported and the difference between soft cap and hinge lid. That is the only difference here. 

Therefore, are we going by what the committee has proposed or are we improving on what hon. Nandala-Mafabi has proposed? However, let us process these amendments. Let us hear from the minister and see if we can finish with these sets of figures and see how to move.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, to answer two questions; one was how much are we getting as revenue from the tobacco industry. Currently, we are getting Shs 19 billion on this particular tax excise duty. 

The second issue is that we passed here why we were moving - the previous year we were at Shs 45,000 and we move to Shs 50,000 and now at Shs 55,000. Why we are not differentiating between imported and locally manufactured here – one, we passed here a law, “The Tobacco Control Act” which suggested that we should not differentiate between cigarettes because a cigarette is a cigarette whether imported or not. 

However, we have discussed this issue in the committee and for purposes of progress, we would like to suggest as follows: On the proposal by the chairperson of the committee on the soft cap, we agree with the committee that for locally manufactured cigarettes, we can maintain Shs 55,000 and we balance it with a proposal by hon. Nandala-Mafabi that imported can be put at Shs 75,000 as a middle ground between hon. Nandala-Mafabi and the chairperson of the committee.

Secondly, on the hinge lid, the locally manufactured we wanted to suggest that 80 - if the argument is that you want to support the local manufacturers, then if you put it too high, you defeat the purpose for which you are doing it. Therefore, we are suggesting that it could be Shs 60,000 and the other one at Shs 85,000 so that there is a balance.

However, I must also supply this information that increment in tax specifically on these products has not necessarily brought any significant change. Actually, it has increased smuggling but we think that the middle ground of this nature can help balance the locally manufactured and then the imported cigarettes. Those are our proposals. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, the minister has moved from his original position and the chairman has also moved. Therefore, we now have a new position completely away from what was proposed in the Bill. What was proposed in the Bill is only aspect but has been enlarged now. Can I process this? Hon. Kakooza would you like to say something on this? Are you a member of the committee?

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: I would like to supplement the information.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Information? Then you will state the purpose for which you rise.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: No, I am not withdrawing but for hinge lid, it was proposed by the committee to be Shs 85,000 and locally manufactured at Shs 80,000 - that is the difference or the chronology that the committee followed to how it is. It was Shs 80,000.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If that was Shs 80,000 then we have to adjust on the imported. Hon. Bahati, was it Shs 80,000? If it is Shs 80,000, then we should add Shs 25,000 so that it becomes Shs 105,000.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: It is like that because when we were in the committee - hon. Nandala-Mafabi has reminded me.  What British American Tobacco (BAT) is doing, tobacco leaf from Uganda is exported to Kenya free of charge – there are no taxes. They then manufacture it from Kenya and then bring it back here.

Secondly, it becomes a cost to Government to hassle with the smugglers because it will be sold cheaply at the market. Therefore, the best way is to balance and say, since we have agreed with the increase on the soft cap - even the same way, the lesser you put at hinge lid; it should be the same because these are all figures. Therefore, I propose that we go with the amendment of hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Then soft cap should be-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are at committee stage. They are capturing what we will take. Now if it is your proposal, what is the figure?

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: On hinge lid, it is Shs 105,000 of 1,000 sticks. That is imported; then locally, it should be Shs 80,000.

MR GUMA: Mr Chairperson, I can see a level of confusion, which I cannot comprehend. A tax is an economic instrument for economic objectives. You either use a tax for revenue collection or to discourage or encourage consumption of a commodity. What therefore is the objective here? I would like to hear from hon. Bahati and the chairman because we are adjusting figures haphazardly - Shs 85,000, Shs 80,000 - as if we have no purpose. What is the purpose here? 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA:  Mr Chairperson, if you heard the speech of the chairperson of the committee, the local manufacturing companies seek protection through a tax measure and when they are generating revenue. You know when you put a protection and generating revenue, you cannot be at the same level-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, please this is not debate, they are figures. I am going to put the question so that we can move forward; okay? There are now proposals to this effect. The structure proposed by the committee is apparently agreed upon the four aspects of taxation that has been proposed by the committee. That is soft cap two aspects and hinge lid two aspects.

On soft cap, the proposal is that it stays at Shs 55,000 per 1,000 sticks for locally manufactured and imported: Shs 75,000 per 1,000 sticks. Hinge lid, locally manufactured - are you reducing it to Shs 60,000? It has been Shs 80,000, now do you want to reduce it? What is the current tax on this? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Shs 80,000.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Why is the minister proposing a reduction? Let us process this. Should we leave it at Shs 80,000 for locally manufactured and then for imported?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Shs 105,000. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, the proposal is Shs 105,000?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, I think we need to balance the purpose for imposing this tax, which is to collect revenue and at the same time balance it with the fact that if you put it high, you would not be in position to collect that revenue. You will instead encourage underground movement and you would defeat the purpose. 

Therefore, I would like to suggest that we adopt the Chairperson’s suggestion of Shs 85,000 instead of Shs 105,000.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, there is a difference of Shs 10,000 between locally manufactured – okay, then why don’t you transfer the same formula to the next lot, which is more scientific. 

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, I have a suggestion, which I believe can help us move forward. Since we are in agreement that in the top class, we have a difference there of Shs 20,000, our view is that in principle, the same difference should apply even in the bracket of the hinge lid. Therefore, by implication, this comes to Shs 80,000 and Shs 100,000.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, I have stated my position and I hate to repeat it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposals, which I now put the question to in the first category proposed by the chair of the committee is – I do not have to put the question on the Shs 55,000 because that is what is in the Bill. That for imported, it should be Shs 75,000. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: On hinge lid, the proposal is that we maintain what is in the books - Shs 80,000 for locally manufactured. However, for the imported, the proposal is that we put it at Shs 100,000 per 1,000 sticks. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, in sub clause (3), we propose to replace – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, the chairman is talking about the spirits but we have left beer.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: He has no amendments in beer.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, before we go to spirits, I would like to talk about beer. For example, Uganda Breweries Limited is a member of the East African Breweries. It has a plant in Kisumu and here. They import beer from Kenya and if they would like to pay little tax, they will make the cost in Kenya lower and they pay lower tax. My proposal here is not to differentiate again beer between locally manufactured and imported. However, from locally manufactured, we must also differentiate from those which use imported materials and those which use local materials like sorghum.

Therefore, the proposal I would like to move is that for imported beer, it should be maintained at 60 per cent and Shs 1,860, I have no problem. However, for locally manufactured beer from imported materials, it should be 50 per cent and at the same rate at Shs 1,500. From that which is made locally from sorghum, it should be 20 per cent and Shs 300 per litre. The justification is to promote sorghum for production so that people can grow more sorghum and also to promote employment in Uganda.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it clear, Chair?

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Whereas hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s proposal is getting to my attention in this House and also taking into account that there is a growing need to support local investment, I propose that we open it to debate and I will contribute after Members have given their input.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it is 3.00 p.m., we will pause it here and proceed later.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
 
3.01 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2017” and passed Clause 1 and 2(a). I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report from the committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules state that on every Wednesday from 3.00 p.m., we have the Prime Minister’s Question Time and this is the time for those questions. We had agreed that we deal with the broader policy questions than specific factual things that happen in different places, which might not be within the knowledge of the Prime Minister. 

Therefore, to use this time properly, let us deal with policy issues.

3.02
MR PAUL MUSOKE (NRM, Buikwe County North, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to seek some clarification from the Prime Minister. Over and again, the President has pledged the revival of the cooperatives as the only way we can curb the unemployment situation; this is the only way we can extend services to the grassroots. Our minister was appointed specifically for the same project but as we speak now, the ministry is silent. Therefore, we would like to know the status of the revival of the cooperatives and how far are you intending to facilitate the crippled cooperatives that were affected during the war?

3.03
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, an important question has been raised. Colleagues know that the history of the cooperative movement in our country has been characterised by ups and downs. Some cooperatives have done very well while others have had problems. While that was the case, the wars that we have gone through caused big problems to the cooperative movement. Rebel groups and Government took some of the properties of the cooperative movements and this paralysed many of them.  

After this low end of the cooperatives, Government has now set up machinery to ensure that the cooperative movement can stand up on strong grounds. The minister responsible for cooperatives has been doing a lot of ground work and sensitisation. I must also welcome efforts that have been made by different individuals and groups to strengthen the cooperative movement.
 
In a nutshell, Government supports the cooperative movements. It has a minister responsible for cooperatives and he is making arrangements to ensure that the revival of the cooperative movement is on sound and sustainable ground. Thank you. 

3.06
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that Kween District is bordered by two national parks; Elgon to the South and Pian Upe to the North. 

Mr Speaker, there are buffalos that have killed very many of my people in Pian Upe Game Reserve that is located in the North. Last week, it killed a one Malinga. Last year, we buried another person, Martin Chepkwony; again, another woman also died and so many others have been injured. Two of them are in hospital and many have scars. 
Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that the Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) law - my concern is only about the animals because when a person kills an animal, he has to pay a large sum of money or he is arrested but the same law does not protect people when the animals kill them. 

Therefore, I would like to seek your guidance as the Leader of Government Business because these are questions that I have been asked. Even the other time, when I attended a burial, I was asked what Government thinks about the people. Should they continue killing these animals? Does Government value animals more than human beings? These are the questions I have been asked and I would like the Prime Minister to give me a response that I can take back to my people. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Government definitely deeply values human beings but the same Government also values animals. What Government wants is peaceful co-existence for mutual benefit -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, would you like to explain how a buffalo or a lion can peacefully co-exist with a human being? (Laughter) 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, when a contingent of tourists comes from different countries to come and look at the lions or buffalos in Uganda, they leave substantial amounts of resources in our country, which are put to the benefit and welfare of the people of Uganda. Therefore, the animals in that respect are making a significant contribution to our well-being; so they are helping us. 

It is true that there have been some icy relationships, especially around the boundaries of the parks. I think what we need is more sensitisation, more collaboration and cooperation between the local communities and Uganda Wildlife Authority personnel. 

However, I think it is critical, in the interest of Uganda, for both human beings and animals to live together as peacefully as possible. By the way, if we were to find out who has caused more havoc than the other, there is no doubt that human beings have inflicted untold damage to these animals. Therefore, let us try and live side by side for the benefit of human beings and animals. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, these issues keep coming up; the issue of the law not looking at the compensation in cases where it is obvious that the people were not at fault.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true and you have put it right that this is a serious matter. It is true innocent human beings have lost their lives and their crime has just been that they are neighbouring the national parks. 

There have even been some proposals through the responsible ministry of providing boundaries that are properly fenced off but I do not have those details. I will ask the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to come and respond to the genuine concerns of the “wananchi” and their representatives in this House, especially the security of the population. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

3.12
MS MARGARET MBEIZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Prime Minister is here to answer on behalf of the President. While the President is campaigning, he promises a lot of things. I was here in the Eighth Parliament and nothing has been done. I missed the Ninth Parliament and I am back in the Tenth Parliament; he promised us a hospital in Bumanya. The health centre of Bumanya is in a very awkward state; people are dying and the doctors are few because we do not have anything to offer. There is also a health centre that he promised would become a health centre IV in Nawaikoke but it is not done. 

We appreciate him for Saka Road but it is not enough because now north and eastern Uganda are using it to trade through Kaliro, Iganga and Kampala. It is a very busy road. We would request the President to fulfil such promises immediately for the benefit of the people of Kaliro. I thank you.
 
DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate the honourable member’s input for recognising the fact that Government has constructed a good road that is serving the “wananchi” in Kaliro and the neighbourhood. 

It is true that the issue of health centres, which you have talked about may not have been done but fulfilling presidential pledges or campaigning pledges takes time. It requires mobilisation of resources. I would say that if you link up with the Minister of Health, he will give you more detailed arrangements on the plans of fulfilling Government promises of a health centre IV in constituencies, health centre III in a “Gombolola” and other related services. Therefore, the Minister of Health will be able to give you those details. Thank you.

3.14
MR JOSEPH GONZAGA SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Moroto Regional Referral Hospital is an established hospital. It serves the districts of Nakapiripirit, Katakwi, Amudat, Abim, Kotido, Napak, Kaabong and Moroto. However, for the last two months, patients have been unable to access scanning services as the only scanner they have has broken down and there is no technician to repair it. This has affected delivery of services.

This is not an isolated case as many types of equipment in hospitals and health centres remain out of use sometimes as a result of simple repairs. My question to the Prime Minister is, why is it that Government hospitals breakdown and non-repair of equipment has become a common occurrence in this term, which you can define yourself by the party you are in as “Kisanja Hakuna Mchezo”

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am glad that my brother has raised the issue of medical equipment. It is legitimate point. It is true that the standard of performance of medical equipment is not as good as we want it to be. Government through the Ministry of Health is making arrangements to do two things: one, to repair the equipment and two, to procure new equipment. When those two programmes are implemented, I am sure that the problem you are talking about will be part of our history.

It is the desire and determination of Government to ensure that our hospitals and health centres are indeed in good shape and our people get decent medical services, medical investigation and medical treatment.

3.17
MR ONESMAS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi County East, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Government of Uganda was able to extend a power line to my Constituency, 18 months back. But up to now, this power line has never been energised. The locals have started connecting themselves to the national grid illegally. This may cause some serious loss of lives and property.

I have been trying to contact the honourable Minister of Energy and Mineral Development but I have received no response. This power line was constructed and brought well and is ready to be launched and energised but the Government is quiet about this. What is your answer to this, Mr Prime Minister?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am glad that hon. Twinamasiko is complaining about a power line that is not either launched or connected but is safely in the constituency. You are, therefore, doing well in that respect that power is just next to the population and what is remaining is connection. By the way, that is a simple matter to do. I will direct the minister responsible to ensure that the people are connected to the power, which is already in their constituency. (Laughter) 

3.19
MS CHRISTINE TUBO (Independent, Woman Representative, Kaabong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is a simple question. I would like, first of all, to thank the Prime Minister for promising that the Minister for Tourism will come to make a statement in this House over the issue of problem animals. I have a list of the farmers for Kaabong that lost all their crops to the problem animals. Over the weekend, they requested to come and ask Government whether they will go to their field to do garden work this month or not; they totally have nothing to sow. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA:  Mr Speaker, my sister has just expanded the scope of the statement that will be made by the minister responsible for wildlife and I thank you for that. (Laughter)

3.20
MR OKIN P. OJARA (Independent, Chua County West, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is similar to the previous question. As a matter of emphasis, we would like to understand the policy of rural electrification; the extent to which it is now being implemented. This distribution of the power line and poles that have been distributed in the sub-counties; they are just there lying idle and some of them are causing motor accidents. 

It would be very important for you to elaborate on to what extent the policy on rural electrification is being implemented. Some of these poles have stayed for over one and a half years in their location without being connected to power. What is the rural electrification policy as we speak now? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the point that is being raised is significant. Obviously, electric poles are supposed to be followed by the necessary wiring so that the population can benefit. If there has been undue delay of say, one year and beyond, it means that there must be some problem.

Actually, we noticed that in some areas of rural electrification, there was no adequate counterpart funding of some of the projects and this could explain the point you are talking about. Cabinet has decided that all those projects must have counterpart funding before they are embarked on. Therefore, I expect this problem that you are raising to be cured because the idea of taking poles and wires is to ensure that the population benefits from the power connections. I will follow it up with the minister responsible for energy.  

3.22
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have a number of institutions in Uganda that are still housed in buildings that have asbestos roofs. Three weeks ago, in our Committee on Education and Sports, we had an engagement with Kyambogo University and the management was telling us that they are staff that are saying that if they get cancer, they will sue Government. 

What I would like to find out is if the Government has a plan to make sure that these institutions – because there are police stations or barracks that still have such roofs. There are hospitals that still have them. Is there a plan to make sure that these institutions get rid of this asbestos and they use the iron roofs that are safer? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I fully share the concern of our colleague. It is true that asbestos is associated with significant medical problems. The thinking of Government and yours are the same. There was an inter-ministerial meeting, which I chaired on replacement of asbestos roof with other more acceptable roofs like iron sheets. Government is pursuing that programme to ensure that they are replaced.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, can we sharpen the questions? Let us not just ask a question for the sake of it. The last question should have been asbestos is dangerous; what is Government programme on reducing them? Instead of taking the whole five minutes. Let us sharpen the questions so that we use the time properly, please.

3.25 
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in Lugazi Municipality, almost on a monthly basis, I am called to contribute towards DNA testing services. DNA testing countrywide ranges between Shs 700,000 to Shs 800,000, which is very expensive. Are there plans by Government to bring down or to intervene so that it can come down to Shs 500,000 or Shs 100,000? Many people are interested in doing DNA paternity test but the cost is exorbitant. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as services improve and increase, to test for DNA on relationships, paternity and the like will bring down the cost. However, I agree with him that the costs are still high but as services increase and improve, the cost will come down.

3.26
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my question is on the monitoring and review of the externally funded programme in the country. Four years ago, as a member of PAC, we went with the committee to the regions of Acholi and Karamoja guided by the findings of the Auditor-General.  When we were there, we found out that there is poor performance as reported by the Auditor-General and when we came back here, we were expecting that that matter would be handled. 

However, up to now, nothing has been done. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what strategies do you have to ensure that these programmes are properly monitored and then evaluation done in order for us to see the targets as initially meant?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I might have missed a bit of what the honourable member wanted but it is possible the question was not sharp enough - (Laughter) However, the key point is that if there are problems in rural areas in local districts, it is a responsibility of Government to ensure that those problems, be it accounting or corruption, are followed decisively. In addition, this august House is one of the institutions that have been doing exactly that. Therefore, I would be interested if you got a little more details of the issues and then we can deal with them decisively. Thank you.

3.29
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my concern is about the food relief you promised to give to schools. We thank you that you did this to the local communities though it was not enough. However, the schools have closed without seeing this being done. Should we expect something as the term opens?

DR RUGAUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am not in the position to state categorically whether there would be relief available at that particular time. We will assess the situation and ensure that where there is urgent need and people are extremely vulnerable be it in schools or elsewhere, Government steps in to assist the people to cross the bridge.

3.30
MS OLIVER KATWESIGYE (Independent, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, following the mass sensitization of tree planting, Ugandans picked interest and planted trees all over Uganda. Last year in February, unknown insects attacked these trees. We have reported to the National Forest Authority (NFA) and the ministry responsible but we have not seen any response.

I believe the Government is aware because our research tells us that even around other countries around Uganda have faced the same challenge. However, in Rwanda, all trees were sprayed using choppers. What is Government of Uganda planning to do about the same problem?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker I was not aware of the wide spread disease against trees. What I am aware of is the menace of the army-worms and as you know, the Government has spent substantial amount of resources to acquire the necessary pesticides to assist the farmers to save their crops.

Therefore, Government is working with farmers to ensure that the crops especially maize crop is saved. About trees, then the ministry responsible for environment and forest will be able to give you some more technical support.

3.31
MR FRANCIS MUKULA (Independent, Agule County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when Government responds to a disaster, there should be some kind of monitoring and evaluation. Recently, Government tried to respond to hepatitis B problem. Is there a plan from Government to do some sort of monitoring and evaluation and see whether people are okay?

In my constituency, nobody was tested and they are struggling on their own; the issue of checking the viral load is expensive. Is there any plan to monitor and evaluate the Government previous response to Hepatitis B - because it is still a problem?

DR RUGUNDA: What are these testing for, Mr Speaker? There is a lot of testing going on for Hepatitis B, HIV and many other things. However, one of the areas where Government has been very active is testing for Hepatitis B and carrying out vaccination. In fact, UPDF in addition to the health sector has been very actively involved in this. Therefore, the programme of testing and vaccination is going on and we as political leaders should give it maximum support.

3.33
MR JAMES ACHIDRI (NRM, Maracha County East, Maracha):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as you may be aware, part of our regional foreign policy has been to either secure peace or promote peace by sending our troops to the different neighbouring countries.

However, all we have reaped out of some of these interventions is the influx of refugees into our country. It looks like this policy is failing. As a Government, what do you think we are going to do in order to ensure that we reduce this influx of refugees by addressing the problem in the neighbouring countries? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the policy of Government of a peaceful region and world has been a success. Where necessary, troops have gone to South Sudan and Somalia in order to have a contribution to bring peace; there has been overwhelming success, especially in Somalia.
 
With regard to refugees, the answer to stopping them from coming to Uganda is to ensure that countries where refugees are coming from are peaceful, stable and secure for the people to remain in their homes. 
When, however, there are problems in those countries, Uganda will definitely perform her pan-African responsibility of welcoming the brothers and sisters who may be in distress. Time will come when their countries are better off and stable and they will go back to their respective countries. 

3.36
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the Prime Minister when exactly we expect local council I elections since the earlier target communicated to the House of latest January did not take place. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as we had occasionally said, it is unfortunate that the LC I elections have delayed but it is anticipated that they will be conducted before the end of this year. 

3.37
MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Omoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to know the Government’s plan regarding nodding syndrome in Northern Uganda. In 2012/2013, the Government of Uganda developed a response to the condition of nodding syndrome; a policy guideline was initiated to guide every intervention under the leadership of the Office of the Prime Minister to do the coordination. I am wondering whether Government is still following the terms and conditions in this guideline. 

In the district of Omoro and the other six in northern Uganda, Government is not fulfilling its role of funding the interventions against the nodding syndrome. The last time funds were sent to the districts was in January 2016; almost one and a half years down the road there is no funding for nodding syndrome. Should we still expect funds from Government to facilitate the activities against nodding syndrome in the districts?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, nodding syndrome is a very important subject. It is true that the Ministry of Health has been spearheading the struggle against nodding syndrome by working with the local leaders in the districts affected.

My sister says that there are some problems with implementation of the guidelines. I am very interested in this matter; we will be calling a review meeting next week to see the progress being made in that sector. The Members of Parliament from the affected districts will be invited to attend that review meeting on nodding syndrome.
 
3.39
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, may we know when a comprehensive strategic plan about food insecurity will come? I remember that the Prime Minister promised a strategic plan of ministries coming together. When is Government bringing that strategic plan so that we handle this issue comprehensively? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member has a good point. It is true that Government could have handled this matter better. The Minister of Agriculture has given his version, Minister for Relief has done the same, and occasionally the Prime Minister has also made his comments. However, there is a mechanism of various ministries concerned working closely; we have held several meetings and we ourselves are anxious to inform this august House about the strategic plan that Government has to ensure food security. 

Mr Speaker, a comprehensive statement can come in this House within the next two weeks and the fragmented approach can then be abandoned so that we handle it as one voice in Government. 

3.41
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. What progress has been realised in the tractor hire service that was rolled out to all the sub counties in regard to NDP II 2015/2019 to encourage mechanisation of agriculture?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Government is committed to modernisation and mechanisation of agriculture. (Laughter) It is necessary to emphasise this point. The Minister of Agriculture is responsible and is in-charge of this programme. I will ask him to come and put the programme before this august House so that Members of Parliament can seize that information and be able to deliver it to the wananchi to own it indeed as their own programme.

3.43
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Kenyan Government has got a robust youth empowerment policy called National Youth Service - where youth who dropped out of school from all levels are deliberately empowered with various skills to make them more competitive. 

After full implementation of the Common Market Protocol and free movement of labour, don’t you think that our youth will be edged out of employment? What plan does Government have to ensure that our youth become more competitive in this wake of liberalisation?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as colleagues know, there are several skilling, re-skilling and training programmes for the youth. In fact, at the moment, Government is in advanced stages of ensuring that these programmes converge into one big national programme of skilling and re-skilling the youth. Again, Government will be coming to this House to brief colleagues on the progress in that direction. Therefore, I do not have fears about Uganda’s competitiveness. We are ensuring that the youth are indeed properly skilled. 

It is true we have tended to put a lot of emphasis on paper or degree qualifications. Government is fully aware that there must be a shift and focus should be made on vocationalisation of training the youth and also on ensuring that hands-on training is availed to these young people so that they can earn a living for themselves and help develop the country.

3.46
MS ROSETTE MUTAMBI (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, sometime last year, we discussed extensively the issue of Hepatitis B. We were informed as a House that priority would be put on key populations that are at risk of exposure. In Mbarara, medical students of Mbarara University of Science and Technology have up to now not been vaccinated against Hepatitis B and they are wondering whether they are not in that category. Many of them are on private sponsorship scheme and are struggling because it is expensive. In addition, there are other institutions in Mbarara which teach, for example, nursing. Why haven’t they been vaccinated against Hepatitis B?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Health has been spearheading this exercise on the vaccination against Hepatitis B. It is also true that prioritisation has focused on the heavily affected areas, especially in eastern and northern Uganda. I will ask the Minister of Health to come and update this House on the programme of vaccination and testing for Hepatitis B so that my friend from Mbarara and friends from other areas can know what is in programme for them.

3.48
MR PETER OCEN (Independent, Kole South County, Kole): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when you were the Minister of Health, you upgraded two health facilities in Kole District. The facilities are Omoladyang Health Centre III and Aboke Health Centre III. As we talk now, these health facilities, especially Omoladyang, are non-operational. Aboke is still operating as a health centre II. I would like to know when these facilities are going to be operational.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, all health centres are supposed to be fully operational. If there is a cause that led to these two not being functional, you should give the details to us so that the Ministry of Health can operationalise them as quickly as possible.

3.49
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in 2015/2016, this Parliament resolved that the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) Act should be reviewed so that instead of only breeding seeds, they should do seed multiplication, commercialisation and distribution. I would like you to update us on the progress the Government has made on this.

DR RUGUNDA: I do not have specific information on the matter. I will ask the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to inform the House about that programme.

3.50
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you know mental illness is a fact. About seven years ago in Namugongo, there was one person who had come from Gulu. Instead of helping, I found police beating him seriously. I said “You people, can’t you even gauge that this one is mentally ill?” Just two weeks ago, I went to Wandegeya Police Station and I found that somebody who is mentally ill and a student of Makerere was being kept in the facility. I asked them whether they knew the condition of the person and they told me that it is them to explain to me that he was a regular person with them there. 

However, a day after he was taken to the Law Development Centre (LDC) Court and later to Luzira. Tomorrow, he is going to be produced in the LDC Court. This makes me ask that instead of being supportive to these sickly people, we decide to put more pain on them. Is there any policy to help sensitise and make people see how best to support mentally ill people? Do we have it at all in the country if the police do not even have it? They know somebody is mentally ill, but still take him to court. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my sister is raising a very serious point. It is true that some forms of mental illness are not easily recognised by us and we, therefore, in our communities may make mistakes. Police and other institutions may make mistakes. I share the view that there should be greater sensitisation about mental illness, both to the security forces and also our communities. This is because if people know in their villages that somebody has a mental problem, that person can be handled much faster and chances of getting better – if handled faster – are very high. So you have raised a valid point.

3.53
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, these days the Government does selective payment of salaries – maybe it is a new policy. As we talk, half of the civil servants in Kampala, Moroto, Nakapiripirit and Mubende have not received their salaries for last month. Last month we also experienced the same scenario when people in Buikwe and Mbarara did not get their salaries in time. May we know what is happening? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I agree with the honourable member that salaries should be paid – actually as Prof. Apolo Nsibambi said, it should be paid by the 28th of every month. This is too much of a delay; I will follow up straightaway and find out why there is this delay and ensure that there is immediate correction.

3.54
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, science, technology, innovation and research are the key drivers of any country’s economic development. Why has Government delayed to establish a research and innovation fund to facilitate, manage and control research activities in the country? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, if there is any area where Government has put special attention, it is in the area of science, technology, research and innovation. That is why recently, President Museveni started a new Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. Again, as you very well know, for quite some time, there has been the innovation fund, specifically, to help young Ugandans into innovation. This is being extended to specifically, ICT innovation. Therefore, Government fully supports science, technology, innovation and research as a tool to help the transformation of our country, and our continent.
 
3.55
MR OTHIENO OKOTH (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. May I know from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, why my citizenship of this country, which is exposed by the national identity card which was given to me, is limited to only a period of 10 years? What happens after that period? Do I cease to be a citizen of this country? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as all of us grow in age, our features change. It is appropriate that if we are to avoid forgery and catch criminals, the issue of age should be taken into account. Hence, the need for the period for validity of the national identity card so that when your features change, a new identity card will be available such that in case you commit a crime,  the police will have no problems in getting hold of you. 

3.57
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister: We are aware that the Government of Uganda has the responsibility of protecting the citizens and their properties. And we are also aware that it was the presidential pledge to give Buvuma District a new ferry. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, two weeks ago, about 100 people were going to die and 14 vehicles were going to get drowned. Therefore, may I know when a new ferry is going to be brought to Buvuma or are we just waiting to mourn? I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Government cannot wait for people to mourn. Government is endeavouring to ensure that the promised ferry and other facilities are in place. For details, the Minister of Works and Transport will be able to give you information as to when the ferry to and from Buvuma will be available.

3.58
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman representative, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister whether there is a deliberate policy of the Government to protect the loaders and off-loaders especially, of produce and other items from industrial areas, given the fact that businessmen overload the bags up to 170 kilogrammes, and yet the off-loaders are expected to carry 100 kilogrammes. Mr Speaker, many have died and many have sustained injuries. What effort is Government putting in place to help them? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA:  Mr Speaker, what the honourable member is raising is an issue of violating the fundamental human rights of workers. So, the labour officers and political authorities in Mbale and other areas should be vigilant to ensure that workers are not being exploited.

4.00
MR VINCENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question I would like to raise to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is about the indiscriminative killings that are occasioned to Ugandans who are plying their trade in South Sudan. In today’s Daily Monitor newspaper, it has been reported that one businessman by the names Kibirige Moses, was gunned down by some assailants in South Sudan. What is the Government of Uganda doing in this respect?  	
DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, we deeply regret the loss of our compatriot who has passed on in South Sudan. Uganda, as we very well know, has devoted a lot of resources, blood and time to support its brothers and sisters in South Sudan so that they put their country in order and make it secure for both the Sudanese and her neighbours. Uganda will continue to do whatever is possible to support the people of South Sudan to establish their country as quickly as possible, for the benefit of the people of South Sudan, the people of Uganda and the region at large. 

4.01
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to emphasise on the two questions that were asked by honourable members. One is on the issue of the LC I and LC II elections. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can you tell the country the position of Government on this issue?

Mr Speaker, I am on the Committee of Local Government and Public Service. We were recalled from the Christmas season holiday to come and work on the Local Government (Amendment) Bill and indeed we did it as a committee. We were told by Government then that we were going to have LC I elections on 17 January 2017. However, the Government has been changing the dates. Therefore, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can you tell us the exact time? You are telling us by the end of this year; it seems you are not sure and yet you are the Leader of Government Business. Can you tell us the stand of Government? Otherwise, we have been moving up and down convincing our people – I would like to assure you that many people at that level are up to now campaigning. They are just waiting.

Secondly, I would like to raise the issue of salaries. I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Rwabushaija. What is the policy now in Government - because some districts have been paid while others have not been paid? Do you follow the alphabetical order? What criteria are you using for paying salaries in different districts? Can you tell us exactly what is happening so that we go back and inform our civil servants?

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my next question is about the security situation in this country. I understand that even the Vice-President with all that security has been warned by a certain group. He is actually scared. What about me who has nothing. Can you assure this country of the security situation? Mr Speaker, in Bushenyi recently, one of the businessmen was picked from town at around 5.30 p.m. The investigation shows that some security people were also involved, but we wait to see what happens. You remember what happened recently in Mbale; they brought sniffer dogs to investigate and they took the people concerned to the police barracks. We would like to know whether we are secure.

The last question I would like to raise to the Prime Minister is about the means of transport for prison authorities in this country. In January 2017, four prisoners died in an accident on the way while walking from court in Bushenyi. The prisoners in Nebbi walk 32 kilometres to access court. Which interventions have been undertaken to ensure safe transportation of inmates to court and to compensate families that have lost their loved ones in such accidents? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, on the question of LC I elections, I already said we are all waiting for the LC I and LC II elections. I agree it is a gross inconvenience to all the people who have been campaigning. That is why Government wants the elections to be held as early as possible. However, because of budgetary constraints, it was not possible to have elections as soon as we had wanted. We have agreed in Government that elections will be held this year. The exact details are still to be worked out and announced by the responsible elections body. 

Secondly, I have already made a point on the question of salary. The delay in salary is phenomenal and must be removed quickly. After Parliament, this would be one of the assignments my comrades and I will take up. 

The issue of security is an important point. The President and other people in Government have had occasions to talk about this. It is true documents have been thrown in different parts of the country. It is also true there have been press reports of some police being involved. However, for us, the critical thing is criminality. Whoever is involved in any criminal activity will be dealt with in accordance with the law. 

Our view is that we should not leave it to the police, the intelligence and the leaders in their respective capacity. Let us mobilise the population to be vigilant so that they take charge of their own security in their own villages and identify bad elements. Through this process of popular participation in improving our security, I am sure these bad elements will be uprooted. The security organs are doing whatever they can to ensure that the country is secure.

The last point is on transportation of prisoners. We are going to look at the matter where prisoners walk very many miles to access courts not only in Nebbi but also Bushenyi where there was an accident. This is to ensure that our brothers and sisters who are prisoners are transported as humanely as possible. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. This Prime Minister’s “Question Time” is still a challenge. What I have decided to do is to take note of those Members who do not ask their questions sharply. When I am presiding, I will not pick them. If I pick you and instead of asking a question, you start elaborating for five minutes, I will not pick you another time. You will deny all the other Members who have sharp questions the opportunity to ask the Prime Minister and then, they will blame me. If you take five minutes, what will the others do? We need to share this time properly. Therefore, if you are going to ask questions, frame it sharply so that the answers come in a way that is helpful. However, if you speak for five minutes, it becomes difficult to cover many Members.

MR JAMES KABERUKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rose on a point of procedure. When you look at the pending business of this Parliament since June, you will find that the Prime Minister has been saying “Minister so-and-so is going to present a report to Parliament.” And some of those issues are matters of public importance. Since they are urgent, we would at least solve them at that particular time. 

Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right to have matters of urgent public importance delayed without timely response for the people of Uganda? For example, Government has extended power to different areas and I have raised a question here about the variation in connection fee. The Prime Minister promised that the minister responsible would present a report to inform the public on the cause of variation and the remedy. Up to now, nothing has happened. Is this procedurally right? How can we solve that delay? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is not procedurally right. However, that is what I always endeavour to advise you. Today, two members came to raise matters of urgent public importance and I told them they should ask the Prime Minister. 

Honourable members, we have a problem; Members will insist that their matters are urgent and sometimes they are not. Sometimes they could be handled within other procedures of the rules. The trend that is developing is very bad; when you come here and raise that matter, then it would require the minister to make a statement. If it is to come as a statement from the minister, the matter ceases to be urgent. We have those that have been referred to the ministers and in six months, they have never been responded to. If they have been here for six months and they have not yet been responded to, are they still urgent? It defeats the purpose. 

Urgent matters must be really urgent matters; they are matters like disease outbreaks or earthquakes. They are things that have just happened that cannot be contained in other procedures within the rules. Those are urgent and you come to the Speaker to report it because there is need for information and urgent action on the issue. Now, somebody comes and says in 2010, something happened. It is not urgent anymore. (Laughter) If it happened in 2010, then it is not urgent anymore. 

The frontbench has failed to deal with questions for oral answers and that is why we are using this backhand method. If questions were being framed for the Executive to answer, these issues would be solved. I should be able to frame my questions today and in two weeks, as it is in the framework of the rules, I get answers on the Floor. I should also be able to add my supplementary question. All these issues of urgent public importance would actually be reduced to urgent matters. 
Therefore, personally, I am going to insist on all other issues so that we start using questions for oral answer time to be able to solve many of these things.

When you write your question to the minister and it is for oral answer, the minister will submit to you a copy of the response which you can use in the constituency or anywhere else. He will give you a response in writing and then come to the House and state that response on the record. But now, urgent matters - minister will make a statement - a statement on eucalyptus is here, statement on payment of tobacco farmers is here, statement on Hima cement price discrimination is here, and they were all urgent but have never been responded to.

Honourable members, I argue you - because these were never contemplated by the rules because they do not work. “Urgent matters” are urgent matters. Therefore, let us resist the temptation of making all matters urgent including the ones of 2010. (Laughter) 

MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for you wise guidance. The most important thing here is getting the Rules of Procedure so that we amend them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, these are in the rules, as I speak now.

MR SSEWUNGU: You are right, Mr Speaker, and I remember even in the Ninth Parliament, the issue of Prime Minister’s “Question Time” was - you gave very good guidance on it. As we talk now, I asked a question here to the Prime Minister. And maybe, I was there two months ago and maybe something has been done but he had to give an answer. I know Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda is a very diligent person but I cannot imagine him answering all the questions here today with all the answers he has given. He has only deferred two. Therefore, the procedural matter I am raising, if we get the Rules of Procedure, we can amend the way the Prime Minister can answer during “Prime Minister’s Question Time”.

That is why you had to ask us to sharpen and indeed many failed to sharpen their questions. Sometimes we teachers, who have done some bit of summary writing, can sharpen very fast but others might fail. Therefore, the procedural matter I am asking is: Is it procedurally okay that we get the Rules of Procedure here and amend this “Prime Minister’s Question Time” so that we get results and evaluation after? The questions have been asked; otherwise, there is no evaluation on this. Everybody asks and we go away very happy but evaluation is zero. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had proposed that the general areas of engagement during Prime Minister’s Question Time could be supplied in advance. They meet on Wednesday as Cabinet. So when the Prime Minister comes to the House at 3 o’clock, he is sufficiently resourced given the background and nature of questions that are likely to come. That way we have an informed one hour of information that is completely processed but we have resisted. We might have to go back to that.

This is because if you go to the House of Commons, Prime Minister’s Question Time - today we have asked 22 questions in one hour. It can be arranged if it is agreed that this is the way we are going to proceed: The leaders on this side can say, we gather and put the ideas together and then they transmit to the Prime Minister so that I know that general questions are going to be in this area; the Prime Minister is aware so that when the question is asked, he even has reference so that the Hansard becomes a source of information.

Now, most of the times, we are relying on the wits of the Prime Minister. We do not want to wit here; we want information that is for actual things. You are saying the Prime Minister is very smart, yes, he is. So he has a way of using the one hour –(Laughter)– So please let us make it more useful in terms of delivering on the issues that really affect us. To me that is what I have believed and that is what I think works; I have seen it work elsewhere and it can work here.

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils and students from Budimo Child Development Centre in Busia District. They are represented by hon. Godfrey Macho and hon. Nabulindo Kwoba. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House; please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome –(Applause)– can we go back to the business?

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I hope we have been able to use the Prime Minister’s Question Time to resolve some of the issues which were outstanding so that we are able to move quickly now.

Clause 2

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. We were on the proposal brought by hon. Mafabi on clause 2(b) and harmonised position is that in (b), we amend as follows: “30 per cent or Shs 650 per litre whichever is higher.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Amend which one?

ME MUSASIZI: We amend (b); in (b), we amend - instead of Shs 700, we reduce to Shs 650.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Therefore that is under clause 2(b)- 

MR MUSASIZI: Exactly. So that when they are capturing, it is easier for them to know what we have done.

Mr Chairperson, under clause 2(b), we propose to amend as follows: “Beer whose local raw material content excluding water is at least 75 per cent by weight of its constituents; 30 per cent or 650 per litre, whichever is higher.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So that is the only amendment in (b), I put the question to that amendment?

(Question put and greed to.)

Clause 2(b), as amended, agreed to.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, in (c), we propose to amend as follows: “3(a), made from locally produced raw materials, 60 per cent” and we propose to delete “or Shs 5,000 per litre, whichever is higher.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In other words only leaving the 60 per cent?

MR MUSASIZI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to that amendment in clause 2(c).

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2(c), as amended, agreed to.

MR MUSASIZI: In clause 2(d), Mr Chairperson, we propose to delete “or Shs 6,000 per litre whichever is higher.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the proposal.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, I know my chairman is overworked. Indeed, it is because we wanted to take care of wines like church wine among others; already it is taken care of. Otherwise, you will bring it in a different form. Therefore, we propose sub clause (d) be delete because it is already covered in the old law and that was the agreed position.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, yes if we delete “or Shs 6,000” then the whole clause goes because it was already catered for.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The proposal is that whatever is in sub clause (d) now be deleted. I put the question for deletion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, under paragraph (e) item 5(a) on the non-alcoholic beverages not including fruit or vegetable juices, we propose to replace “13 per cent” with “10 per cent” and “Shs 240” with “Shs 157”. Our justification is that the current rates on Excise Duty at 13 per cent are the highest in the region with Kenya charging seven per cent while Tanzania is at five per cent. 

This affects Uganda’s competitive advantage from the growth and investment point of view in order to enable the sector attract investment and promote growth, the rate should be reduced from 13 to 10 per cent or from Shs 240 to Shs 157.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, the chairman of the committee is proposing a reduction of Shs 32 billion by effecting this amendment. Therefore, as a ministry we would like to propose that we be allowed and study this issue and comeback next financial year instead of a sudden reduction of Shs32 billion in the middle of the discussion like this. Therefore, I am opposing the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Should we, therefore, delete the clause?

MR BAHATI: I am opposing the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, but you are saying that we handle that in the next financial year and in essence you are saying you would like to delete what you have proposed in the Bill?

MR BAHATI: No, I have not proposed a reduction of 13 per cent –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you now proposing that we delete paragraph (e)?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, I am proposing to amend the proposal of the chair of the committee.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, the reason as to why there is a lot of smuggling of soda is because Kenya charges seven per cent and Tanzania is at five per cent. If you bring it under customs – because they were under East African customs, they have harmonized the rest of all items manufactured within the region and it is at a lower rate.

Therefore, Mr Chairperson, I would like to concur with the chairman of reducing it to 10 per cent and this is basically to reduce on smuggling and the moment you reduce on smuggling, you will even collect more than Shs32 billion due to the following:

    1.  The soda which will be consumed from Kenya or Tanzania, nobody will be interested to smuggle; we would rather buy the soda from Uganda. 
    2. In addition, Mr Chairperson, there is a multiple effect when we consume our sodas here there is even Value Added Tax on the sodas. If we are to produce more sodas, we will definitely need more workers to work and this is one of the ways to reduce on unemployment. 

In fact, you will not only consider tax as the ultimate end but also make tax collections and create employment opportunities and further tax employees on pay as you earn. Therefore, the multiple taxes are very high. The matter which the minister is talking about that we will lose Shs32 billion is making a huge –(Interjection)

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, I would like to request the former Leader of the Opposition to produce to this House evidence that because of this tax there is a lot of smuggling of soda in Uganda?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, I would like to give evidence; the issue of the ministry saying that they will study this started in 2012. From 2012, you have been saying you will study and up to date you have not studied. 

I recall there was a former Member of Parliament from Busia called - I am not sure of the name, but he said there was a lot of smuggling of soda from Kenya because soda in Kenya is cheaper than in Uganda and this was a member from the border. Therefore, what other evidence would you like to have, if people from the border are substantiating that? I am from Mbale and nearer the border and I see more of the Kenyan sodas in the country than Ugandan sodas. This is because Coca Cola bottles are the same with those of Kenya and Uganda and you may not differentiate unless you put trademark in every soda to identify where they are being manufactured. 

Otherwise failure to do that, Kenyan sodas will be purchased highly. Mr Chairperson, this was proposed sometime back, they have not studied and I think that this is the best way to go.

MS OPENDI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. I am not in favour of reducing that tax from 13 per cent to 10 per cent. I come from a border district and I know exactly how the bottles of soda from Kenya look like because I travel to Kenya quite often. Therefore, it is not true that there is smuggling of soda into Uganda because of the lower taxes in Kenya.

Mr Chairperson, I know that there have been attempts by the manufacturers, recall even last year when we were discussing the budget, they said that we should reduce the tax so that we support the health sector and provide equipment; that proposal was there and we rejected it. 

However, they have now come up to say due to smuggling we should reduce and be at par, even if you put it at 10 per cent you are saying it is at seven per cent in Kenya and so there is still a disparity. Therefore, I do not support that; we should maintain the tax as proposed.  We have so many unfunded priorities and you are aware in the next financial year we have challenges in the health sector and we cannot afford to again reduce our revenues by all that amount of money which is Shs42 billion.

Therefore, Mr Chairperson, I think that we should maintain the 13 per cent as opposed to the 10 per cent. Thank you very much.

MS ACENG: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I am here to look at the health aspect. What we are talking about are sugary drinks; just a month ago, I was here on the Floor of this House talking about non communicable diseases and I highlighted the burden of these diseases that is growing in Uganda. One of the causes is consumption of the sugary drinks.

Therefore, reducing the taxes will make people consume more of these sugary drinks. We cannot afford to continue causing ourselves injury rather than looking at making ourselves more healthy. Sodas and juices among others that are bottled and packed are all very unhealthy foods. 

Mr Chairperson, yourself have been emphasising that we need to make Ugandans healthier by going back to prevention. Therefore, I would like to propose that instead you increase the taxes. I thank you.   


THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we need to close this session. 

MS MUGENI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The clarification I would like to seek from the chairman of the committee is; how is he going to split the issue of the local drinks, especially the sachet alcohol? I do not know whether he is treating it under those made from the raw materials- 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We are now discussing non-alcoholic drinks. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, I am moving from the resource side of the budget- 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you rise on information or you want to debate? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: I am giving information from the resource side of the budget because we are dealing with a highly constrained budget. As it is today, out of the Shs 28.5 trillion, our discretionary resource available is only about Shs 12 trillion so we are struggling to find resources to finance our expenditure needs.  I do not think this is the time to give away Shs 32 billion because much of our resources are used to pay debt so we are in a crisis. 

Even the Parliamentary Commission itself has a deficit in its budget and so many votes have deficits. How are we going to address these problems if we continue to reduce the available resources? I am therefore not in support of the idea of reducing the tax on beverages.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, these issues are annual. It is not like if we passed it today, it will stay for 20 years. Next year we will review it. Is it possible for us to base on what has been stated and have it as it is in the Bill? Thereafter, we can leave it for scrutiny; look at it again as it progresses this time as we study it properly. Then when the Bill comes back and they are making other proposals then we shall make the necessary changes. 

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, I would like to note that this is not the first, second or even third time that this proposal is coming before this House. Last year, the minister himself made a commitment that this issue would be addressed this financial year. It is important that we resolve this matter now and forever. Therefore- 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It can never be forever. It is an annual thing. 

MR MUSASIZI: Therefore, Mr Chairman, looking at the mood in the House and also considering the views that the Minister of Health has put forward, we concede. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, there is now no amendment. Is there any in (f) or (g)? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Minister of Health, the next one is about sugar confectionaries so what are you saying about them? Should they be exempted because here we are saying that chewing gum, sweets and chocolates should not be taxed? That is the law now –(Interjection)- unfortunately you did not come with the Bill because it says chewing gum, sweets and chocolates need - how do you see this now? 

MS ACENG: Mr Chairman, to speak realistically, I think Uganda needs to go back to the olden days when these things were a luxury. Those sweets and chocolates that you are talking about are what is causing us huge bills for dentistry. Many of your children are spending lots of your money to visit the dentist, including yourself. Not only do you end with the dentist, but you also end up obese and with all the attendant diseases that go with obesity.

Mr Chairman, in other countries now what they do is that they have what they call a health week where people walk and run and it is led by their President. They have a full week to do their exercises so that they burn the extra sugars that they have in the body. 

I will be coming back very soon with the result of the screening that I carried out here and that is only for honourable members. My answer to his question therefore is that there should be taxation on these items so that less of it is eaten. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, given the moving speech by the Minister of Health, I wanted to propose that we delete (f) so that we maintain it where it was at 10 per cent and 20 per cent respectively. 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Chairman, I think the minister has forgotten because last year in April, there was an argument here and I remember the Speaker, Rt Hon. Kadaga, was in the Chair. This issue came up while we were debating the same Bill and she ordered the Minister of Finance to go and study because partner states do not charge on excise duty.

She ordered the Minister of Finance to go to the National Council of Ministers in Arusha to find out whether other partner states do not charge. It was proved Kenya, Rwanda and Burundi do not have this tax on sugar and confectionary. It was therefore recommended and that is why I think the Bill was brought to us here after the study. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the information I would like to give my brother hon. James Kakooza is that in a few minutes, we have said Kenya charges seven, Tanzania five while we are charging 13. Therefore this excise duty is on things which are manufactured internally.

In Singapore, chewing gum is not allowed because it makes the roads dirty. If last year it was ten, I want to move an amendment here that since the minister has said it was 10 and the Minister of Health has said it is dangerous, this one should be charged 20 per cent. 

The justification is to curb the medical bills, to make us healthy and to ensure that we are in line with the law because if a soda is 13 per cent, chewing gum, which is worse, should be at a higher rate.

THE DEPUTY CHAIPERSON: Honourable members, this is taxation. There has to be a study by the time it is being done. At least for the 10 per cent, we have experienced it; the nil is the new thing that is being introduced, but the 20 has not been there. Can we take it from the Floor? 

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, would it be a proper way for this House to proceed that from now on, we just say that it is 20 per cent? I do not think that it would be the right way to proceed. Let us go with what the minister has proposed. Can we take the position proposed by the minster, that we leave the law as it is until we can – The implication will be that we delete what is in (f); would that be okay? Honourable members, I put the question for the deletion of (f) from the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

The Title

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You have left (g) out before you to title. You have done (f) but there is (g). We have not pronounced ourselves on (g).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is no amendment on (g). We put the question on clause 2 as amended. I now put the question that the title of the Bill remains the title to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairperson and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House to report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2017 and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF WHOLE HOUSE

4.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

4.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill 2017” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2017 be read the third time and do pass. I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2017”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable members. (Applause)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

4.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2017” be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Tororo District, Rubanda and Ngora County. Would you like to speak to your motion, honourable minister? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the proposed amendment to this Act is to exempt aid-funded projects; provide for the operations under which Value Added Tax (VAT) is deemed to have been paid in respect of petroleum operations and aid-funded projects; to provide for the disqualification of a taxable for input tax credit; to provide for the due date for payment of tax; to provide for capping of interest on unpaid tax; to provide for VAT on wheat grain; to provide for VAT on crop extension services, animal feeds, deep cycle batteries, composite lanterns, irrigation works, sprinklers and ready-to-use drip lines, tourist arrangement services, access to tourist sites, tour guides and game driving services; and to provide for other related matters in the Bill. Mr Chairperson, it was forwarded to the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and they are ready to report to this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the second reading of the Bill. I propose the question for your debate. The motion is that the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2017 be read the second time. The Bill was referred to the committee; can they report and then we debate. 

4.51
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development considered the Bill entitled “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2017” and made the following observations:

1. 	The Bill deems VAT to be paid where a taxable supply is made to a Government ministry, department or agency by a contractor executing an aid-funded project. This will relieve Government ministries, departments and agencies from incurring VAT arising in respect of aid-funded projects. 

	The VAT is budgeted for as counterpart funding. However, in most cases, Government does not release money to meet counterpart funding due to budgetary constraints. This causes delays in project implementation and creates a backlog of tax liability to Uganda Revenue Authority (URA).

2. 	Clause 4 provides that a taxpayer will not get a tax credit on a taxable supply for which an input tax is paid or payable in cash and is at least 5000 currency points, excluding tax. However, VAT mechanisms require that all transactions in the chain must be tracked, short of which there will be revenue leakages as a result of fraudulent refunds and gross misstatements. 

	The laws of Uganda do not prohibit buying items in cash. The essence of tax credits is that the VAT was suffered by the taxpayer. The proposed amendment in clause 4 defeats logic, specifically where a proper tax invoice has been issued and VAT properly accounted for. 

	It is also notable that denial of input tax credit on the basis of a cash purchase is intended to criminalise cash payments. It is not legitimate to force all taxpayers to use banks even when cash payments are legal. 

3. 	Clause 5 introduces section 30A to provide for a due date for payment of tax. Clause 5(3) introduces section 30A (3) which is to the effect that the tax payable is due and recoverable in spite of the filing of a notice of appeal and may be recovered notwithstanding that objection or appeal. This provision is not justifiable and equitable. 

	The Tax Appeals Tribunal Act provides for 30 per cent of the tax due to be paid before filing an objection or appeal. This provision is sufficient, fair and equitable and therefore should be enforced instead of proposing another provision under the VAT Act.

4. 	Value added tax is being exempted on the supply of tourist arrangement services, access to tourist sites, tour guide and game driving services under the second schedule of the principal Act. However, the tourism sector, which is one of the major foreign exchange earners for the country, requires Government support in terms of infrastructure, roads, airports and security among others. The sector is already benefiting from VAT exemption on hotel facilities. This exemption should therefore not be granted so that the tourism sector can contribute to the services it requires from Government.

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2017 be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments.

Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table a copy of the original report by the committee, duly signed by the required number of members who are supposed to sign the report. We have also attached the minutes of the proceedings during the consideration of the Bill together with other relevant documentation that the committee scrutinised. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils and students from Maanga Child Development Centre, Busia District. They are represented by hon. Maganda and hon. Jane Nabulindo. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Honourable member, the same principles apply; the justification for this Bill, which constitutes its principles, is that it is one of the revenue Bills that is supposed to facilitate the budget. I will propose the question for debate but I would propose that we go and deal with the actual provision of the Bill instead of debating the principles, which are already obvious, given what we are doing now with the budget. Therefore, can I put the question that we deal with the specifics of the provisions? I put the question to the motion that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2017” be read the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 stand part of Bill

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, under clause 2 we propose to insert a new subclause (8) immediately after subclause (7) to read as follows: 

“(8) Under subsection (7), ‘aid-funded project’ means-
(i) 	a project financed under a grant agreement between a foreign government, its agency or any other donor and the Government of Uganda; or
(ii) 	a project financed by a loan agreement between an external financier and the Government of Uganda.”

Justification: To clearly define “aid-funded project” to avoid ambiguity as to what constitutes an aid-funded project under subsection (7).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. It is clear.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, what they are trying to do here is to ensure that there is no budget for VAT on projects, which are donor funded. However, what is Government? Government is the one that levies tax and the one that collects. However, Government cannot pay tax to itself. 

This is one of the reasons why contracts have got problems. I will give a simple example. A contractor does a road and bills Government Shs 10 billion and VAT on it is Shs 1.8 billion. When that contractor files a return to URA, the law says he must remit Shs 1.8 billion and yet Government has not paid that contractor. Uganda Revenue Authority will come and slap interest on the contractor and because of the interest, the contractor will maybe go to the bank to borrow some money. When Government eventually pays the contractor after one or two years, they will never pay the VAT with that interest and yet the person has borrowed from the bank.

Therefore, what we want to cure here, which will help Government, is that all Government contracts should be zero-rated. The justification is that we want to avoid contractors being pressed to go and borrow to fund Government when Government is supposed to do its own activities. This will help because the contractor will claim their VAT and they will be no stress from URA; URA will not put interest and whatever other charges on these contractors.

Many of the contractors have collapsed because of that. Therefore, I would like to move a further amendment so that instead of looking at only donor or Government funded projects, it should be all Government contracts. Instead of saying “exempt”, they are saying that they will be deemed to have paid. In short, they have not paid and in good tax English that would be zero-rated. Therefore, we could say, “All contracts of Government shall be zero-rated”.   

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, I am looking at the objects of the Bill and one of them is to exempt aid-funded projects. The second one is to provide for operations under which VAT is deemed to have been paid in respect of petroleum operations and aid-funded projects.

Whereas the proposal by hon. Nandala-Mafabi is correct, my view is that it should apply where it has been stated that VAT is deemed to have been paid. My view is that we replace “deemed to have been paid” with “zero rated” because they are the same. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, that is a very good step; deemed to have been paid when they have not paid is zero rated. For the other one that we are requesting, I want to give an example. If I am a contractor for the road from Kabale to Kisoro and Government of Uganda is funding it, it means that I must pay VAT; whereas for Kakooza, who has been given the contract for a road to Kabula and it is funded by a World Bank loan, it is zero rated. Why? It is the same Government. 

When I pay the 18 per cent, in effect the Government must pay me that 18 per cent. However, the problem is that it will take long for me to be paid but for hon. Kakooza, who has been given a donor-funded project, he does not need to bother or go to the bank; for him, it is taken as zero-rated. This is unfair. 

What we are trying to say is that let us make it equitable; whether it is from donors or local funds, as long as it is Government funding, it should be zero-rated. What you are doing is pulling money from this pocket and putting it in the other. There is no difference. Government does not pay taxes; it is just a book entry. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are going to engage in a debate. However, if the provision that is proposed in subclause (7) is framed, “for purposes of this section, the tax payable”, then you cannot come and say it is zero rated. If it is tax payable, you cannot say it is zero rated. From the way it is framed in this clause, it had better be left as it is, unless it is going to be changed completely.

The tax is already payable. The exemption is in deeming that it is already paid. Therefore, the way it is framed in subclause (7) is okay, unless you would like to introduce something new. If you want to use the language of zero-rating, it means you have to redraft the whole section and still achieve the same thing. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, whereas I may want to support his proposal, there is a very big risk of revenue loss, which we need to study. According to a quick calculation, we are likely to lose over Shs 2 trillion. This is not something that we can accommodate so easily. 

I propose that we leave it as proposed and hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s proposal could be subjected to further study and scrutiny. For now, it is difficult to accommodate. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, there is no way you will lose tax with what I am suggesting. You are saying that Government must budget for Shs 2 trillion to pay for VAT for their goods. We are saying that you do not need to budget for that money now because it is just a book entry; there is no loss. Hon. Lugoloobi, I thought you were an economist and you understand this.

When a contractor does a road for Government, he will bill it with VAT inclusive and if he is going to pay VAT, Government will be the one to pay it. That VAT, which will be paid by Ministry of Works or UNRA, has been budgeted as VAT to be paid. It is a contra entry. Here you budget it as income and there you budget it as expenditure. Negative plus positive is equal to zero. 

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I will concur with hon. Nandala-Mafabi because the money we are paying contractors is the same we are going to collect. We are not even sure whether when we pay 100 per cent we shall collect 100 per cent. However, the problem is that most of our engineers’ estimates will remain high. 

It is like the taxi services; when the price of fuel goes high, the taxi fares go high but when the price reduces, they will never reduce the fare. It should be the concern of the contractors and the ministers responsible. However, on the issue of paying people and then collecting, I think it should be zero tax. Thank you. 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Under the VAT law, we have three categories; we have the standard rate, which is 18 per cent; we have the zero rate, where the tax payable is at the rate of zero; and we have exempt. Eventually, after passing this law, the application will translate into schedules. We have got a schedule for zero rating, which is schedule 3; schedule 2 for exempt; and then we have the standard supplies. 

Mr Chairman, it is important that before we take a decision, we get further clarification from the ministry. We need to know if they are in disagreement with hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s proposal and where in the three schedules this proposal will fit. Unless you want to exempt, but if you say that it is deemed to have been paid, automatically you will make an amendment on zero rating in the third schedule. We need to understand-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The whole question is: why you don’t just amend the third schedule? If that is what is meant to be achieved, why don’t you just amend the third schedule instead of amending the provision of the law?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, what the chairman of the committee has raised is very vital. In here I proposed “zero-rated” and that is what is meant in schedule. Where there is an exemption, they will say, “exempt”. In some of the sections, it clearly says “exempt”. 

Here we could not get the exact name and that is why I proposed zero-rated. However, ideally, they say, “means zero rated”. The contractor should be able to claim VAT on his inputs to avoid the contract being too expensive. That is what they are trying to aim at.

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We have always engaged with hon. Nandala-Mafabi as a senior legislator and he knows the problems of moving a serious amendment on the Floor of the House without any consultation. We have been here and we have been caucusing together in the corridors. We thought we had agreed on all the issues but he is now bringing in an amendment that is very problematic. Friends, you cannot think about an amendment of this nature on the Floor of the House. 

Mr Chairman, we will have a problem if you say that we zero rate the VAT. What will happen to the taxpayers’ VAT input? They will claim all of it? Therefore, I would like to suggest that we move to other amendments and then we allow hon. Nandala-Mafabi to interact with us so that we come up with a harmonised position. 

This is very dangerous for us. As the chairperson of budget has said-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what is wrong with subsection (7) which is an amendment to section 24 of the Act?  What is wrong with the drafting in the Bill?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am sure that Government is saying that it is because of VAT that contractors who come in to do contracts in Uganda get problems. They want to focus on those projects where Government is supposed to pay, which Government has been paying anyway. However, because Government delays to pay, to avoid that problem they want to now say that they will be deemed to have paid, so that these contractors can claim their VAT on inputs. This will make the contracts cheaper. That is what they are trying to achieve. 

In short, they want a road to be done at a cheaper price because VAT makes the roads expensive and at the same time, they delay to pay. The argument we are making now is that we should not only look at donor projects. Now, the committee has gone further to say even those with loan agreements, such as the loans we pass in Parliament, should fall under that. 

I said that in this one, we are being selective. Those who will use money from the budget of Uganda, doing the same work, will suffer while those who are using money from out will not suffer. They will suffer twice; Government delays to pay them and yet they go to the bank and borrow to pay for VAT.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, one of the problems, which we actually discussed here yesterday, was the issue of counterpart funding. You said we go and borrow and we do not have money to do counterpart funding. Because of this, loans have not been performing. 

This has been the situation: let us say a contract will take Shs 500 million and if you add VAT, it comes close to Shs 560 million. If you go out to borrow, a lender or donor will say, we are not going to be responsible for the Shs 60 million of VAT; we are going to give you the Shs 500 million. Therefore, you must budget for what we call counterpart funding for that extra Shs 60 million. 

What we are saying is, let us assume that it has been paid; it is deemed that we have paid and exempt it. That is why we are particularly talking about donor-funded projects. However, if you want to open it up for all Government projects, it is a discussion that cannot be concluded in five minutes here.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the minister has become clear. He is saying that because money for donor-funded projects is borrowed, they must not pay VAT but Government is deemed to have paid. However, for a local one, we also come and appropriate. There is no difference in this money by the way. The other one is coming from out and it is borrowed with interest, and we are collecting this one from the taxpayers but we are going to do the same things - road A and road B. It is the same principle. 

The reason why you delay to pay on donor projects is the same reason you will delay to pay on locally-funded contracts. The VAT you are talking about, you are pulling from this pocket and taking it to another pocket. There is nothing you will lose. You are an accountant and you know what I am saying.

MR AOGON: When we talk about the donor projects being exempted, the person who is doing the contract will not be able to claim for VAT and that will be a problem. That is why we are saying, this should be zero-rated so that somebody can be able to claim VAT on the inputs that someone is buying locally from the Ugandan market. 

If you are buying something from the Ugandan market, for instance, you have to pay VAT. If we say exempt because of donor funding, the contractor cannot claim for the VAT and that will be a problem. Therefore, I think this one needs some time so that we can discuss it first and come up with a proper answer. Otherwise, we shall do it in a wrong way. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let me do this; let us look at what the committee has proposed as a definition and what this would mean. Once we finish with that, we will come to this other amendment. There is an amendment proposed by the committee to define “aid-funded project”. Is that okay? Can we take a decision on that, so that it is explained and is clear and you do not begin bringing anything and saying it is also aid-funded? 

We have skills in making things apply to everything. For the avoidance of doubt, the committee is proposing that a new subclause (8) be introduced to provide specifically for a definition; is that okay?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, that is not okay for me. The reason we are saying –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, what you are saying is okay. However, here we are only defining what we mean by “donor-aided project”. It is not about whether it should be exempted or not. What we are saying is, what we are calling “donor-aided project” should have a clear definition. Whether you are going to apply it to other contractors is another matter. All that is required now is whether there is need to define the word “aid-funded project”. If it is there, let us take that decision and come back to this instead of leaving everything hanging. If there is a need, is this definition sufficient?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would like to seek clarification. First of all, we pay back all money which comes in. In most cases, we pay back the money. One such example is money from the World Bank. We borrow money to construct a road and if it has interest, we shall pay. In short, it is the people of Uganda who are paying through taxes but they have deferred the payment for a period of time. That is not different from the one you have collected this year and spent on the same project, which is in a different locality. 

The reason I am raising this is because many companies are going under. Unless we come up with a law to protect the local ones –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the point I was making was very simple: Is there some animal called “aid-funded project” and does that animal require a definition? That is all I am asking for now. If it requires a definition, is this definition sufficient? The member for Agago District is saying it is not.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think it is very important to clearly define that particular provision because when we make a law and most Members do not understand it well, it becomes a lacuna. Therefore, it is important that we explain what we mean by “donor-aided project” clearly in respect to the provision that we want to put here. When we say “zero-rating”, it might be a blanket statement –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, have you read the proposed amendment made as a definition? It is here in the report. Have you read it? 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: I was following you -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I have not read it aloud; therefore, if you are relying on what I have said then you have not yet read it. Can you read it first and then see if it needs improvement?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would like to make a proposal. If the minister would like these ones to be deemed to have paid, then the local ones should be on cash basis. What I mean is that, if I have a contract from Government, I will account for VAT when you have paid me. It is on cash basis. That would be the best way to do it because you want an exit and you do not want to lose anything. This will avoid taxpayers from being penalised for VAT, which is not theirs.

Mr Speaker, I would like to agree with the committee’s amendment on (a) with the loans outside. I would like to propose that we create (b) to read: “All Government contracts shall be accounted for VAT purposes on cash basis.” The justification is: to prevent taxpayers from borrowing money to pay taxes, which is not theirs, or to pay interest on what is supposed to be paid by the Government. 

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is aware of this. Many contractors have complained to the ministry and they have raised these issues. The ministry has even written letters saying, “We are responsible for that VAT; leave it, we shall pay” but you have not told them about the interest that has accrued. We would like to make a law that will protect our local people or the contractors here and to make contracts in Uganda relatively cheap.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, I would like to beg hon. Nandala- Mafabi, who is a member of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, to agree with the amendment of the committee to avoid mixing issues. You are mixing issues of late payment and delayed payment with tax procedures. Those can be sorted out later. 

What we are saying is that we have been having a problem of counterpart funding and the reason is how we have been budgeting for these contracts where we are going to borrow money. We say the contract will take Shs 1 million but there is money for VAT, which makes it Shs 1,180,000. All we are saying is that since this is a condition to get this money and we do not have it and it has been a problem, why don’t we exempt it? That is what we are saying. Why should we continue suffering with counterpart funding? That is why we are saying that this is specific. However, the Government money, which we have already budgeted for, should take care of this tax and costs.

Mr Chairperson, on the issue of paying on time, I would like to request that we handle it separately. That is the issue of accounting officers who are indisciplined; they get money but they do not pay on time. That is a different issue. Can you answer the issue of counterpart funding?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. Honourable minister, Ministry of Works and Transport pays VAT to Uganda Revenue Authority and this comes back to the Consolidated Fund. You have picked Shs 1.8 billion from the Consolidated Fund, taken it to URA and again asked URA to return the Shs 1.8 billion to the Consolidated Fund. That is the simple thing I am saying.

Kindly listen and do not panic. The projects are saying VAT will be paid by Government of Uganda. What I am explaining is that we do not have to put that money in the budget because it will be cash in, cash out; that is still the same pocket. Now, you telling Parliament that for purposes of those contactors, they can go and do the work because the tax will be deemed to have been paid. It is that simple.

Mr Chairperson, what I am rising is –(Interruption)

MS RWAKIMARI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Is it procedurally right for members of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come on the Floor of the House and start arguing as if they have not been attending the committee meetings and confusing everyone in this august House? They should go back to the committee, harmonise their position and report back and present their issues so that we can understand what they are talking about. 

Right now, we are not following. All the people who have been talking - hon. Lugoloobi, hon. Akello Franca, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, hon. James Kakooza - are members of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Therefore, Mr Chairperson, is it procedurally right for these members to come here and confuse everyone on matters of taxation? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the rationale for saying that members of a particular committee who have been part of the process of bringing the matter back to Parliament should not debate was to avoid this kind of situation. By the time they come here, they should have agreed. If they did not agree, they should file the reasons for their disagreements so that they can come and argue their position and say, “yes, the committee said this but we did not agree with the majority of the committee and that is why we are saying this”. This is so that both positions can be looked at by the whole House.
	
However, to be in a committee where there is unanimity and you begin arguing as if the committee was on the other side and you were on a different side makes it a bit difficult for us to process at this stage. The views you are bringing now - This House is not structured in a way that it could have understood the details the way the committee would have. The minister would have been there, all those technical people like URA, who are not here now, would have been there, and the contractors would have been there but they are not here. That is what complicates this kind of situation.

However, that is not to say that if a new matter should arise that was not within the knowledge of the committee or could not have been looked at by the committee it should not be brought at this stage. This is hardly one of those things that could not have been seen by the committee. Honourable members, I think we need to move. If we make a mistake today, we will correct it in the next financial year. We need to move. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you have spoken sufficiently on this subject.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, first of all, you cleared me to travel. When I came back, the Shadow Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and I raised some of these issues and wrote a minority report. It was agreed that we come and harmonise our positions here. We even spoke to the chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the minister is aware about this. 

Mr Chairperson, I went personally to the Speaker and she said, “We have understood and this matter will be raised”. I know these rules very well because I have been here longer than most of the people here. This business of saying –(Interjection)– Hon. Rwakimari, you came in, jumped out a bit and came back. 

What I am bringing here is to help but we had talked with the chairperson of the committee and the minister and that is why the minister has changed against me. I have confirmed that hon. Bahati cannot keep his word from today –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, please; if you had talked to the minister, you would have proposed an amendment in writing. The fact that you have not even proposed an amendment, which the rules allow you to do, and now you are proposing it orally, we have not got the opportunity to examine it. 

As the presiding officer, I like things that have been processed and interrogated properly but this one is not one of those. We can make mistakes. 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Mr Chairperson, I would like to convince Parliament to take the route you have guided, that we go step by step to avoid mistakes. If there is need, we should define “aid-funded project” and after agreeing with that decision, we can look at the drafting and the intention or the object of the Bill. I think that will give us headway.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is the definition of aid-funded project sufficient? I put the question to that amendment to introduce a new clause 8. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, clause 3 should be deleted because it is already in the VAT Act of 2015. There is no need for this clause here. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do we have a text of the amendment of 2015? Please, let us be helped. I only have the original Act.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have it here; I can lend it to you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You would have been a very good resource to the committee. These matters were so important and you should not have asked for leave to travel. (Laughter) Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, what is in the Bill goes beyond what was done in 2015.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, if you read further, you will discover that what is there is what would have been clause 4. If you go to section 25, clause 4 is taken care of in the schedule. You see, paragraphs (a), (b), (c) are in the law; the only one you are not seeing is clause 4, which is about the formula where they are saying, “…it is deemed to have paid”. It is covered.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, does it cause any harm or inconsistency? If it does not, we should adopt it because it will reinforce what is there. If it creates an inconsistency then that is where the problem is.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, what we are proposing in this amendment reinforces what is already in the law. That is why it is an amendment. If you read carefully, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, it is different from what is there. There is no way we could have brought a clause, which is already in the law.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, for clarity, the minister can bring in clause 4 and delete paragraphs (a) and (b) and in paragraph (c) he can say, “Insert immediately after subsection (3) the following for contract …” That one is okay. If you read further, the text of paragraphs (a) and (b) are there. The only text you can bring in is that of paragraph (c).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, paragraph (b) in the Bill is not in the text of that law. Subclause (3) is about a licensee and paragraph (b) is “For a supplier, component X…” Therefore, if it does not introduce any contradiction in the law, we will adopt it and then the implementation will not have a problem.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairperson, I do not think any contradiction will be introduced here. Certain provisions are repeated for purposes of emphasis. If it does not cause any contradiction, hon. Nandala-Mafabi should allow us to proceed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 3 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, agreed to

Clause 4

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, we propose to delete the entire clause. Our justification is that the provision defeats logic, specifically where a proper tax invoice has been issued and VAT properly accounted for. It is also notable that denial of input tax credit on the basis of a cash purchase is intended to criminalise cash payments. It is not legitimate to force all taxpayers to use banks even when cash payments are legal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, you are defeating logic. Please, come and state why you would like to defeat logic.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, the amendment was logical but in the interest of progress, we concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion from the committee is for deletion of clause 4 in the Bill. I put the question that clause 4 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, we propose to delete the entire clause. Our justification is that section 15 of the Tax Appeals Tribunal Act provides for 30 per cent of the tax due to be paid before filing an objection or appeal. Section 15 of the Act is therefore sufficient, fair and equitable and should therefore be enforced instead of proposing another provision under the VAT Act.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I would like to convince the chairperson of the committee that clause 5 is very important because we erroneously deleted this provision in the enactment of the Tax Procedures Code Act last financial year. Without it, there is no other provision that will require the taxpayer to declare and pay. It is a correction that we are making.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then you should have taken it back to the law where you took it out from.

MR MUSASIZI: Exactly, that is my argument. Mr Chairperson, the Tax Procedures Code Bill is next. I would like to persuade the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to reintroduce this section when we get to that Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, since we took it out of the Tax Procedures Code Act -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, even in the Tax Procedures Code Bill, you cannot make a law where we already have a law like the Tax Appeals Tribunal law, which says 30 per cent. If you look at this, it is being brought in bad faith. 

Look at subsection (3): “Where an objection to or a notice of appeal against an assessment has been lodged, the tax payable under the assessment is due and payable, and may be recovered, notwithstanding that objection or appeal.” It means that if they assess you at Shs 1 billion, even though you appeal, they will come and collect the tax. When you go to court, they say the status quo must stay until the court determines. 

Now, if you come and enforce the law and take my property and then I win the case tomorrow, what will happen? That is why it was deleted last year and it should be deleted again. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, last year when we were amending the Tax Procedures Code Act, we erroneously deleted this clause from the VAT Act. Therefore, what we are doing now is to reinstate it. 

Mr Chairperson, you can see that I have provided you with the volumes as a lawyer to guide us on how to proceed, but we erroneously deleted it and we are reinstating it. 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: I am a member of the committee and our argument stands that whenever you give me an assessment, if I am a taxpayer, there are avenues where I can appeal. When I appeal before the verdict is made, you cannot force me to pay because URA has all the ways and means to seize goods. However, at the moment you say you are seizing my goods without hearing me. That is what we are saying; if I have appealed, please wait and once the verdict says that I should pay, I will pay. That is the essence of what we are saying.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are these the same reasons they used the other time to delete it from the Act?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, they were not the reasons.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Because you are saying Parliament erroneously deleted. This House does not act in error. (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Due to the respect we have for the House, that is why we are bringing it back so that we put the -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, they had a reason. Now you need to restate so that the House is persuaded that it can be reintroduced because this House had deleted it.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, can I suggest that we -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Have we lived without it for a while? 

MR BAHATI: Yes, we stand over this and then -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, we are not going to stand over anything. Have we lived without this for a while? What have been the implications of staying without it? If it has not had any implication, delete and we move on. We do not have time for –

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Mr Chairperson, I would like to convince the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in all fairness. 

Mr Chairperson, you know the law says that somebody must be heard or given a fair hearing. This is why in Constitution provides for the Tax Appeals Tribunal. Therefore, if there is a Tax Appeals Tribunal and you have given me an assessment and I have appealed against what you have assessed, please, when the verdict comes I will pay but do not force me to pay before.

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. We have this hand-out that was given to us today by the minister. The implication of that particular provision is that we have over Shs 800 billion, which is in court because of delays. I thought that is one reason why the minister was justifying the reintroduction.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, the proposal in the Bill is to introduce section 30A and subsection (3) of that section reads, “Where an objection to or a notice of appeal against an assessment has been lodged, the tax payable under the assessment is due and payable, and may be recovered, notwithstanding that objection or appeal.” 

Mr Chairperson, the Tax Appeals Tribunal Act provides that when an appeal is lodged, the taxpayer only pays 30 per cent. If an appeal is Shs 1 billion, you are required to pay Shs 300 million and then Shs 700 million is pending the determination of the appeal. This is what the minister’s proposal is trying to defeat. This is why the committee is insisting that the status quo, as it is in the Tax Appeals Tribunal Act, stays.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, would it be proper if in subsection (3), instead of making it the way it is, you cross-reference that provision in the Tax Appeals Tribunal Act, so that when this situation arises, that is what applies. We could do that so that we do not have two regimes where one law is saying 30 per cent and the other is saying the whole thing is payable.

By cross-reference you could say, “Where an objection to or a notice of appeal against an assessment has been lodged, the tax payable shall be handled under the provision of the Tax Appeals Tribunal law”, if it is there. You can lift the whole provision but then in subsection (3), reference the provision in the tax appeals law to apply so that you do not have two regimes - one saying 30 per cent and the other saying the whole thing. You can consult on that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, if you read the proposed section 30A(1)(a), it says, “In the case of a taxable supply by a taxable person in respect of a tax period, on the date the return for the tax period must be lodged.” What does this mean? If I lodged in my returns in 2010 and URA assesses me now and I have paid my tax, if they get an additional tax of Shs 1 million, it will mean that that tax should have been paid in 2010 and they will compute it with interest. That is what it means if you pass it in this way. 

This thing looks silent but it is very dangerous. If URA -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which provision is this?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Read 30A (1) - due date of payment. Subsection (1)(a) is indirectly talking about the tax period.

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairperson, I think the problem is the issue of the 30 per cent according to my understanding. Possibly, we need to remove the 30 per cent but keep the issue of the due date for paying the tax. The 30 per cent should be removed - if that can help - and we leave the issue of the due date.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: The objection is on the assessment you have given me. I have a tax liability and I have gone to the tax tribunal and the notice is lodged; the case is not yet heard but you are forcing me to pay before my hearing. That is why the Tax Appeals Tribunal Act is saying, even if I have a tax liability, I pay 30 per cent first. However, if you say I pay it all, suppose a verdict comes - Therefore, I must be heard if I am appealing against the assessment you have given me. That is the bottom line.

MR OKUPA: Hon. Kakooza, I think we are on the same page because we shall have the 30 per cent under the Tax Appeals Tribunal Act, which has no contention. However, I am saying that we should not introduce it in this one. We should only be able to leave the due date because the due date for paying the tax, for example for VAT, is 15th.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, here they are referring to the due date for payment of tax, and they say, “(1) Tax payable under this Act is due and payable…” I would like you to take note of that. “(a) in the case of a taxable supply by a taxable person in respect of a tax period, on the date the return for the tax period must be lodged.” Do you get me?

Now, maybe you would have lodged your tax return on 30 December 2010 and then URA comes and raises an additional assessment. That is why you see they are running down to bring subsection (3) because when they raise the additional assessment, they will say that tax is due on 30 December 2010. Now if they have assessed you today, they will compute all the interest from that day to date. 

This implies that URA can sit on your returns, even for 10 years, and later assess you with interest anytime they come up. We would, therefore, like to protect the taxpayers. What should have been recommended here is that when you lodge in your return, you must pay tax based on the due date. If there is an additional assessment, it must be paid when you raise the additional assessment. 

However, what the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development wants to do is to amend this so that when they raise it today, they can say that you were supposed to have paid it in 2010. If you look at, it looks silent but it is very dangerous. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you are talking about section 30(A)(1)(a) and the last phrase in that sentence says, “…on the date the return for the tax period must be lodged.” If you do not lodge it by that day, you have already violated the law. You would have taken away the protection of the law from yourself. Therefore, you are not protected by the law because you have already violated it. Why then are you saying the assessment should not take that period when you should have lodged? Is there any justification for that? 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Mr Chairperson, that is why we are saying that there is the Tax Appeals Tribunal Act, which states that the moment they give me an assessment, I can appeal. We can be consistent with that instead of saying, in subsection (3), “Where an objection to or a notice of appeal against an assessment has been lodged, the tax payable under the assessment is due and payable, and may be recovered, notwithstanding that objection or appeal.” 

That is why we are saying that if the Tax Appeals Tribunal Act states that if you assessed me I pay 30 per cent and the assessment you have given me has gone to the tax tribunal, let me pay that. I then wait for the verdict on the assessment I am appealing against from the tax tribunal to be consistent -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying is different from that. It is in (a) and he is saying you should not be paid interest if, for example, you were supposed to have filed your returns today by law but you did not and you are now being assessed five years later.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, I would like to make a correction concerning that. In the assessment schedule, the assessment under VAT is section 32. It clearly shows when you are supposed to file the return and the due date. It further states that when you fail to file, you will be penalized. 

Assume in this case that I have filed a return and that is why they have brought the objections. I have filed the return on the due date and I have paid the taxes and I am up to date, according to my understanding. Uganda Revenue Authority comes after seven years and says that there is an additional assessment of Shs 1 million. This additional assessment is in respect to the return of 2010 and now the due date is the date when the return was lodged. Therefore, my Shs 1 million, which I should have paid now, is being assessed with interest. 

Mr Chairman, section 32 covers returns. What they are bringing here indirectly is now to justify why they should charge somebody interest from 2010. That is basically what they are doing. However, the lodging is here; the date of return is clear and if you do not file, you will have a problem. If you file a wrong return, there are penalties that you will face. There is also a provision for amendments. All these are included in here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There are two issues being raised; one is in subsection (3) about the whole thing being payable. Maybe the minister can speak on that and then we can deal with this new issue. One is in subsection (3) and another in (1)(a).

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, if you read the first one, it continues to paragraph (b): “in the case of an assessment issued under this Act, on the date specified in the notice of assessment.” The notice of assessment now comes in. They will issue an assessment saying that the notice of assessment shows that the tax is due on 20 December 2010. It goes on to state in (c), “in any other case, on the date the taxable transaction occurs as determined under this Act.”

Therefore, what they are trying to say is that URA can take its time without assessing you and then they come tomorrow and say, “You have got an additional assessment and you must pay it with interest”. When you raise an appeal, they say in (3) that you must pay it whether you have an appeal or objection. That is the reason why –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, if the due date is already in the law, why are we bringing it here in subsection (3)?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, I do not understand which law hon. Nandala-Mafabi is referring to but –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The VAT law.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: I have the VAT law here and under section 32 we have assessments. I will read it verbatim: 
“(1) Where- (a) a person fails to lodge a return under section 31…” Section 31 says, “A taxable person shall lodge a tax return with the Commissioner-General for each tax period within 15 days after the end of the period.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The law says 15 days; it does not matter what it says.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: That means the date you file your return is known within the law.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, first we wanted to deal with the issue of the amendment by the chairperson of the committee. The chairman of the committee stated that he wants to delete this clause because the Tax Appeals Tribunal Act covers it. What the Tax Appeals Tribunal Act covers is that when a person has a dispute, the law requires you to deposit 30 per cent of the value of the dispute that you have. It is a different issue that we are talking about and we should clear this.

Concerning the issue of subsection (3), which has become problematic - The rest of section 30A shows you the due date when you should be paying the tax and it is nowhere in the law that we have crosschecked. However, Mr Chairperson, we agree that we can delete subsection (3) and move on.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In clause 5, there is that proposal to introduce section 30A and it has subsections (1),(2),(3),(4) and (5). He is now proposing to delete subsection (3) which says, “…the tax payable under the assessment is due and payable, and may be recovered, notwithstanding that objection or appeal.” That is what the minister is proposing to be deleted.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, that is the reason as to why we are bringing it back. Last year, the Tax Procedures Code Act repealed section 32 of the VAT and that is why we are bringing it back. We said that the House, in its wisdom, deleted it and we are saying let us reinstate it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you saying that section 32 was deleted? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, that is why I said we could probably first crosscheck. I had even brought the volumes near you, but we could be given five minutes so that we first crosscheck- 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But section 32 on assessments is here. 

MR BAHATI: The Tax Procedures Code Act. 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, I do not know whether the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has done his homework. Our argument is that the moment I am given a fair hearing, I will pay when I want. If I am not given a fair hearing, I will not pay. In most cases, businessmen who have invested money need to be heard after the enforcement of assessment of the appeal.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, hon. Kakooza’s argument is that this is already covered in the law. However, we are telling you that last year, while we were legislating on the Tax Procedures Code Act, we deleted it. We are just reinstating it, so there is no contradiction.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have been around, although some people do not want to hear this. We have assessments here and of course this has been amended in the law, but under section 32 (7), it is clearly stated - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, it is that section 32, which has been entirely deleted. It was deleted by the tax procedures code law last financial year. I have it here and it reads as follows: “The following provisions of the Value Added Tax Act are repealed:
(a) Part VIII sections 31, 32 and 33; 
(b) Sections 33A to 40; 
(c) Sections 46 to 64…” 

Is this true? Those sections were deleted but the question then is: why don’t you reinstate it in the terms it was in the law? 

MR AOGON: Mr Chairperson, I have a suggestion. What is critical for us is to look at the spirit behind what we are talking about. If somebody is appealing against a tax, there should be a charge so that not everybody should just run and claim that the tax was not fair to them. We shall find a problem handling that issue. Therefore, the best thing is for us to maintain the 30 per cent charge, which we are talking about. 

Let us also look at its implications. If the Tax Appeals Tribunal Act refers to 30 per cent but here we have 100 per cent; don’t they contradict? What is the implication of the two? Let us study the two thoroughly and understand them so that we can come up with the right thing. Thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if he says that this section was deleted, why have we been filing returns on 15th? What law have you been using? 

Two, if you think we deleted section 32 wrongly, why don’t we reinstate it because it clearly shows everything, including the appeal procedures, the tax time period and fraud? Why don’t we reinstate that section rather than bringing in a new provision? Did you delete it so that you can bring in new things? The previous one worked from 1996 up to 2016, - you say it was deleted last year - so that was 10 or 20 years. Whose problem is that now? 

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we have listened to the arguments by Members and our prayer is that if the objective is to reinstate what was deleted in the previous financial year – However, I doubt whether it is true that we deleted this section. If it is true that we deleted it, why do we still follow the same procedures when we are filing returns? I really doubt. 

However, if the objective is to reinstate the original position, then we should go back to the original position as it was before without introducing further amendments. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Chairman, I rise on a procedural matter. I am very concerned about the way the debate is going on. Many of us are not members of the finance committee. We, therefore, trust members of the finance committee to digest some of the issues, which are very technical and cannot be debated in the House, and then come to us with a version that we can all understand. However, I now see that the chairman of the committee does not seem to be in agreement with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Even within themselves, the committee does not seem to be in harmony. 

Therefore, Mr Chairperson, procedurally, I would plead that you give permission to the committee to sort itself out and come up with a harmonised position. They should also try to give us a harmonised version with the minister so that when they come back here, they only come to explain and persuade us to agree with them. Otherwise, right now the more they debate, the more we are getting confused and we do not know whether to agree with the committee or the minister. 

Mr Chairman, as the presiding officer, can you save some of us who are not members of this committee? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairman, should clause 5 be deleted? Is that your proposal? 

MR MUSASIZI: Yes, Mr Chairman. I must state categorically that as a committee, we are harmonised and we stand by our proposal to delete the entire clause. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the deletion of the entire clause 5. Can I put the question? Honourable minister, I am putting the question and I expect you to vote. I put the question that clause 5 be deleted from the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, clause 6 is about interest. I think that many taxpayers do not pay taxes because of interest. Here they are saying we should waive interest up to a certain portion. However, my proposal here is that in section 65A (2), we waive all the interest and ask taxpayers to pay the principal. 

We did it in 2007 and 2009, and the reason many people have a problem is only interest. It would therefore, be better for us to waive the interest so that people can pay the principal tax. The justification can be that we should not just waive the principal but also recognise that interest is too much and is causing businesses to collapse.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, while we have been defeated on the previous one - (Laughter) - on this one it is important that if hon. Nandala-Mafabi really wants to move an amendment, because we are at committee stage, he can move the amendment but give justification. This will help the House make a knowledgeable decision.

It will not help if we are going to debate and then move amendments by debating; that is what we do at the second reading. Now, given the fact that he was absent, and we do not know where he was, and then he comes with these amendments, should we really take them like this? What are the amendments that you are proposing so that –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, first of all, 65A (1) is okay and we have agreed on it with the minister. However, in subsection (2), we are saying that interest due as at 30 June 2017 be waived for taxpayers. 

The justification is that we would like to allow taxpayers pay their principal amounts so that they can start afresh. We have done this before; we did it in 2007 and in 2009 and for a long time we have not done it. You also see that the economic situation is so bad. Many people’s houses are appearing in newspapers for sale because they must sell them and pay the interest. That is what we are saying. 

For the other one, we agreed that from now on, the interest to be computed should not exceed the principal sum and the penal tax. That one applies from now. However, we request that the interest be waived and we tell them that they must pay this tax by 30 June 2017 and they will get all the money.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, subsection (2) says, “For the avoidance of doubt, where the interest due and payable as at 30 June 2017 exceeds the aggregate referred to in subsection (1), the interest in excess of the aggregate shall be waived.” So, where is the problem?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put the question? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the amendment specifically refers to interest in excess. This means that if one is supposed to pay Shs 1,000,000 but they have been assessed and interest is Shs 1,500,000, such a person will only pay Shs 1,000,000. The Shs 500,000 is waived. We are objecting to that and arguing that for the purposes of the taxpayers, there is need to waive the entire Shs 1,500,000. 

This is what the law is saying here. However, we are saying that for avoidance of doubt, where interest is due and payable as at 30 June 2017, it is hereby waived. That is the amendment I am proposing, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the justification for that? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The justification is that we have ever waived even the principal tax in the law of 2009. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIPERSON: Are we going to do it just because of that or there is a better reason?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, I am going to give a better explanation. In 2007, there was waiving of interest. Here, we are not waiving the tax because it is due but what we are saying is that hard times are here. Even as we speak, we are in hard situations. That is why we are saying the taxpayers should be allowed to pay the principal but the interest be waived. Even banks are waiving interest now.

The justification is: to give relief to the taxpayers so that they can use this money to make more money for us to tax.

MS NANTUME EGUNYU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I think that the law cannot work retrospectively. If we begin now, it means that we are moving forward and not backwards. This may put Government into a situation that may not be understandable. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Should I put the question? There is an amendment that has proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi to delete subsection (2) - 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am not moving to delete subsection (2), Mr Chairperson. Subsection (1) says, “The interest due and payable on unpaid tax shall not exceed the aggregate of the principal and penal tax.”  That is okay, and we are saying that from now onwards, if one is supposed to pay Shs 1,000,000 as tax and the interest computed is Shs 1,5000,000, they will waive the Shs 500,000 so that the taxpayer pays only Shs 1,000,000, which will come to Shs 2,000,000 with the required interest. That is subsection (1). 

In subsection (2), they would not be waiving the excess of the Shs 1,000,000 now. What I am saying is that for avoidance of doubt, the interest due and payable on 30 June 2017 should be waived. I have already explained the justification. However, the principal tax must be paid by 30 June 2017 and if you do not pay by June, we reinstate.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can I put the question to that amendment? I now put the question on the amendment proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. 

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 7

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend clause 7 as follows: under paragraph (sc), replace the entire paragraph with the following: “(ac) the supply of deep cycle batteries, composite lanterns and raw materials for the manufacture of deep cycle batteries and composite lanterns.” The justification is: to promote the renewable energy sector. 

Under paragraph (c), delete subparagraph (sd). The justification is that the tourism sector, which is one of the major foreign exchange earners for the country, requires Government support in terms of good infrastructure, roads, airports, tourist roads and security, among others. The sector is already benefitting from VAT exemption on hotel facilities. This exemption should, therefore, not be granted so that the tourism sector can contribute to the services it requires from Government. 

We further propose to insert a new paragraph (sf) to read as follows: “(sf) the supply of agriculture insurance premium or policy.” The justification is: to support the agricultural sector.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, chairperson. Just to be sure, did I put the question on clause 6? Did we take a decision on clause 6? I now put the question that clause 6 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In clause 7, the amendments have been proposed by the chairperson of the committee. Can I now hear from the minister?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, the spirit of this amendment is to promote tourism in our country. We think that the more tourists come to the country, the more revenue we will earn. 

From research that we did, we found out that in the region, they have removed VAT on such services. We are saying that if a tourist comes to our country just to access the tourist sites, remove the 18 per cent, get more tourists and earn more revenue. That is the logic of this proposal. It has been proved to work in Tanzania, Kenya, Mauritius and everywhere. 

Therefore, Mr Chairman, we do not agree with the argument of the committee chairperson that this will reduce our revenue; to the contrary, it will increase our revenue by attracting more tourists into the country. This is backed by research. The committee’s suggestion needs to be rejected by the House.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, this idea of hiding behind what our neighbours are doing in order to mislead the House is not a good practice. When we amended the VAT Act to provide for an exemption on hotel facilities, we were deceived that our neighbours were not charging this VAT. 

After the amendment, I personally travelled to Arusha and went to a national park called Ngorongoro National Park. I asked whether their bill included VAT and I established that whereas the argument here was that in the region there is no VAT, it was misleading and actually, these hotels were charging VAT. Therefore, Mr Chairman, as we debate this matter, I would like to invite the House to put that explanation into context.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, contrary to what the committee chairperson is saying, we have actually seen - and this information was supplied to the committee - that when we removed VAT on accommodation, there was a sharp rise in the number of tourists, from 250 to 350. By the way, we are not only talking about foreigners but also local people coming to places like Bwindi Impenetrable Forest to see gorillas; they should not pay tax. 

As many people go to these places, there are other fees that we will be charging, which will get us more revenue. This is from scientific research and not just hearsay. We should put this into consideration.

MS AOL: Mr Chairperson, I think the scientific research by the honourable minister now agrees with what he opposed for soft drinks –(Interjection)– Yes, that is the principle. For soft drinks, he said it is not alright to reduce the tax and that if that is done we would actually lose some billions, from 13 to 10 yet. However, on this one, he is now saying the contrary. You need to be consistent.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: On the other one, he did not have scientific research. (Laughter)

MS AOL: Right now, I would like to agree with him since we are still going slowly in trying to promote tourism. It is okay not to tax those people very much but even us, when we go to tour, we should not be taxed that much. Therefore, I agree with the minister. 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Mr Chairperson, I would like to convince Parliament. Some of us have been in these hotels like Mweya -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, please give information.

MR KAKOZA: The information I would like to give is that Government’s contribution to infrastructure development is so huge that somebody coming from a foreign country cannot fail to pay for a guide. It is as simple as that. 

You cannot say that somebody wants to get access to infrastructure, which Government has put up, and then they do not want to pay for it. Go to the USA, if you sleep in a hotel, you must pay for the services provided by Government.

Therefore, a tourist coming from the USA and going to Mweya cannot fail to pay for the services of a guide when Government has provided roads, electricity and so on. Where will Government get money to do that? It defeats the purpose. That is why as a committee, we sat and agreed that if somebody wants a service, they must contribute to it. Can you go to the park without money?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, the minister fronted an argument that when we terminated the 18 per cent VAT, so many tourists came to Uganda. I would like to ask him to provide evidence to the House on whether the hotel accommodation charges reduced because they were exempted; they instead increased their charges. Therefore, it is not true that taxation alone can promote tourism. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairperson, there are many measures that have to be in place for us to attract tourists to this country. In my observation, the Government has not yet done enough on the most critical issues, as compared to our neighbours. 

I will give you an example. A person coming to see gorillas in Bwindi spends a minimum of three days to get there. In Rwanda, they have already constructed an aerodrome very near where the mountain gorillas are and so it takes only a day for a tourist going to Rwanda to see the gorillas. They go and get back that same day. In Uganda, it has to be three days. 

In other words, the minimum requirements that we need to address have not been addressed before we begin talking about taxes. I do not think this exemption is going to cause miracles until we have addressed those minimum requirements. Therefore, the timing is wrong. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, yesterday the Speaker said that where she visited, that Government appointed a minister for happiness and positivity. I have been seeing a spirit of happiness and positivity in this House and I do not want to be the one to disturb it. I would like to therefore concede and we move forward. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the committee has proposed amendments to clause 7 of the Bill. I put the question to those amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, The Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2017” and passed it with amendments. 
	
MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF 
THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

6.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2017” be read the third time and do pass. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2017” be read the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2017”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister and honourable members. It has been a tough one but we have pulled it through. Let the ministry look at all those things that need to be looked at again, do proper research and come back to the House. 

BIILS
SECOND READING

THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we take it up to committee stage so that tomorrow we just deal with the clauses? Let us just receive it; it will not take long. Please, Members, we have come this far and we can do a little more, for five minutes. 

6.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2017” be read the second time.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it has been seconded by the members for Kitgum and Tororo districts and the member for Kaberamaido. Would you like to speak to your motion briefly?

6.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, in brief, the amendment is to provide for provisional tax estimates to be furnished after every three months; to provide for due dates for filing returns under the Lotteries and Gaming Act; to provide for a penal tax for failure to provide documents in respect to transfer pricing; and to provide for tax stamps and other related matters. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion, which I propose for your debate, is that the Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2017 be read the second time. That is the motion. This matter was referred to the committee and the committee can now report to kick off the debate, but briefly. 

6.38
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee considered the Bill entitled, “The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2017” and made the following observations:

1. 	The Bill requires persons dealing in goods, whether local or imported, to affix stamps. This will legalise tax stamps and put in place mechanisms to allow for their operation. The stamps will help minimise under declaration of goods by both importers and local dealers. 

	The Bill also gives the Commissioner-General powers to prescribe the manner in which these tax stamps shall be applied. The security features entailed in the tax stamps will allow for verification, monitoring and tracing of goods. 

2. 	Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to introduce a penal tax of Shs 50 million for failure to provide records requested for by the commissioner in respect to transfer pricing within 30 days of the request. 

This provision is redundant due to the fact that The Tax Procedures Code Act, 2014 already caters for this. Section 15 of the Tax Procedures Code Act requires taxpayers to have in place records required to determine the taxpayers’ liability under the tax law or enable the taxpayers’ liability to be readily ascertained. 


Section 49 imposes a penalty of double tax payable by a person who deliberately fails to maintain proper records. Section 55 of the Tax Procedures Code Act also makes it an offence for a person to fail to comply with the requirement to furnish information requested by the Uganda Revenue Authority in a notice, in writing; and on conviction such a person is liable to a fine not exceeding 25 currency points. 

The proposed amendment seeks to impose an additional requirement on taxpayers to maintain transfer pricing records, which are not defined in the proposed amendments. The committee recommends that clause 5 should be deleted.

Mr Speaker, the committee further recommends that the Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2017 be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. 

I beg to lay on the Table, a copy of the original report by the committee, duly signed by the minimum required members. I also beg to lay on the Table, the minutes of the committee capturing its proceedings while scrutinising the Bill together with the materials the committee used in processing this Bill. I beg to report, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairman. Honourable members, using the same procedure we have used for the two previous Bills, we shall focus on the principles of the Bill. Okay, you can say something.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the principles are good and this Bill is too short. As you pleaded with Members, I would like to beg for Members’ indulgence; there are only two clauses and it will take us two minutes to get done. This time we are in agreement, so why don’t we deal with it so that tomorrow we deal with another law. That is my proposal. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the proposal is that we see if we can deal with this because we have two more Bills remaining, with reports and there is no time. Can we see how far we can go with this?

Honourable members, in this spirit, I put the question to the motion that the Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2017 be read the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

Clause 1 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we propose to replace the entire clause with the following: “The Tax Procedures Code Act, 2014, in this Act referred to as the principal Act, is amended in section 16 (8) by substituting paragraph (c) with the following: “(c) a provisional taxpayer’s estimate shall be in the form prescribed by the commissioner and shall be furnished to the commissioner by the due date for the payment of the first instalment of provisional tax for the year of income.” The justification is: to allow the commissioner to prescribe the format for furnishing the taxpayer’s estimates.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I agree with the committee chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to that amendment proposed by the chairperson of the committee and agreed to by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, we propose to delete the entire clause 5. The justification is that this provision is redundant. The Tax Procedures Code Act, 2014 has provisions that provide for this: 
a) 	Section 15 of the Tax Procedures Code Act requires taxpayers to have in place records required to determine the taxpayer’s liability under the tax law or enable the taxpayer’s liability to be readily ascertained.

b) 	Section 49 imposes a penalty of double tax payable on a person who deliberately fails to maintain proper records.

c) 	Section 55 of The Tax Procedures Code Act also makes it an offence for a person who fails to comply with the requirements to furnish information requested by the Uganda Revenue Authority in a notice in writing and on conviction such a person is liable to a fine not exceeding 25 currency points.

The proposed amendment seeks to impose an additional requirement on taxpayers to maintain transfer pricing records, which are not defined in the proposed amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, the proposal is to delete and the reasons are clear.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, the reason we had included this was to cater for especially the multinationals that have different companies in different countries. We still believe that this provision can help us correct this difficulty that we have been having and catch these people who are not declaring in time. We discussed this issue with hon. Nandala-Mafabi and he knows the problems we are facing in this area. I would like to propose that we maintain this clause as part of the Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, there are no records which are different from other records in as far as transfer pricing is concerned. Transfer pricing means that you have a company in country A and maybe it produces goods at a certain value, and because you want to transfer taxes in that area, you overprice them so that in Uganda here you make a loss or undercut them so that you pay less taxes here on entry. That is the purpose, and these records exist.

Therefore, Mr Chairperson, there is no reason we should maintain this. We are making URA inefficient. They should do their work. They must carry out investigations if they suspect transfer pricing is taking place. We must train staff in transfer pricing if they do not have them. World over, there is always a department for transfer pricing. Therefore, this clause is quite redundant. The law says you must produce any record any time if it is demanded for by URA. Failure to do it, you are penalised. Why are you bringing in this? This should be deleted and I am now talking as an accountant.

MR BAHATI: If you read this provision, it says, “A person who, upon request by the commissioner, fails to provide records in respect of transfer pricing within 30 days after the request, is liable to a penal tax equivalent to Shs 50 million.” All we are saying is that if we request this information and you fail to submit it within 30 days, you should be punished somehow.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The information I would like to give the minister is that there is nobody who will differentiate between a record on transfer pricing and a record on accounts. It is the same record and information.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The justification from the committee is that it is provided for in section 49 in the same law. They are talking about a penalty of double tax payable on a person who deliberately fails to maintain proper records. 

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, unless the minister wants to defeat our justification, I see no reason why we should not proceed. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there are two principles here. The first one is where you fail to maintain records, and that is what is in section 49. What is being proposed is where, on request, you refuse. It says, “A person who, upon request by the commissioner, fails to provide records in respect of transfer pricing…”

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairman, just like hon. Nandala-Mafabi has stated, there are no separate records; it is the same records that we are using. Under the law, there are penalties for not keeping proper records. There are also penalties if you falsify records or decide to keep two or three sets of records in order to evade taxes. Therefore, I do not see the reason why the minister is saying we should have a separate clause yet we are using the same records. There are no separate records for transfer pricing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Supposing it reads this way: “A person who, upon request by the commissioner, fails to provide records within 30 days after the request, is liable to a penal tax equivalent to Shs 50 million”? This would remove “in respect of transfer pricing” and it would be on request and give a timeframe of 30 days; would it be reinforcing?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, transfer pricing is the whole purpose of this. I will give an example. Let us say MTN has its books of accounts here and they are also operating another branch somewhere else in Kenya or India. As the Commissioner-General of URA, they submit records to me and I look at them but I tell them that I want more records regarding Kenya or India. They are not kept here –(Interjection)- You cannot ask why because sometimes they have been giving us wrong information. That is the problem. 

We are saying, if we ask for that information – Friends, the clause is referring to a situation where the Commissioner-General of URA requests for records and you refuse to submit them in 30 days. If they are available, why would you not submit them?  What we are saying is that if you refuse or fail to submit in 30 days, you will be penalised. 

MR OKUPA: Honourable minister, don’t we have a law for failure to produce records to a revenue officer or the Commissioner-General? It is an offence. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what damage does this clause bring? What conflict is there that this is going to bring? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairperson, if this is going to help enhance tax administration, I think let us support it. I do not see us losing anything. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there any conflict?

MR LUGOLOOBI:  It is not in conflict. It only enhances and so, let us have it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, is it in conflict with any provision?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, it is. Who determines transfer pricing? It is not a taxpayer. I can be involved in an activity and all the information is available, but it is up to URA to say “No, this item is transfer pricing”. 

Let me give an example. I have companies in Kenya, Tanzania and Rwanda and maybe the company in Kenya manufactures and it invoices Tanzania; the company in Tanzania invoices Rwanda; and the one in Rwanda invoices the one Uganda. When it comes here, the goods are at a higher cost. In short, I have distributed my profits in those countries maybe because their tax rates are low. That is what we are looking at. 

What is the rationale? There is what we call HS codes for this international pricing. Let us assume the price of a Nokia phone in the market is US$ 100 but in Uganda it is costing US$ 120. You will question why and conclude that there must be a company where you are transferring the US$ 20 and that is the reason why you are doing that. 

It is URA that will determine this. How will you do it as URA? You will ask them for all their accounts, - the law says you must give them the accounts - all their invoices and all their suppliers and they will give them to you. It will then be up to you to crosscheck with other tax regimes in other countries to be able to find out if these people are declaring x, y.

Mr Chairperson, therefore, if you bring that law here, it will mean that if I delay to give the Commissioner-General returns, I must pay Shs 50 million. The law exists already and it covers anyone who does not furnish the Commissioner–General with documents. First of all, you will be penalised double the tax and secondly, they will compute interest from the time you were supposed to pay because it is fraud. The moment they find out that it is fraud, the tax charged will be 100 per cent and the penalties 100 per cent.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, is there a limitation on the kind of documents you can request for that this provision now seeks to introduce?

MR BAHATI: The limitation that is there is the records regarding transfer pricing. I think hon. Nandala-Mafabi has made it clear. He said that if the Commissioner-General says “I want records concerning this invoice” - that is what we are saying. I have requested you, you have declared this but I just want extra information on transfer pricing; give it to me and if you do not give it to me in 30 days –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Would you not be able to do that without this provision?

MR BAHATI: You cannot. In the existing law, we have failed and that is why we have brought this one.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, transfer pricing has been around for some time. It is not a new phenomenon that is beginning to arise in our tax administration. Therefore, it is not true that there are no current mechanisms in which information relating to transfer pricing can be got. 

Mr Chairperson, I am of the strong opinion that there are other mechanisms within the existing tax administration frameworks for accessing records on transfer pricing – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I want to put the question. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, I would like to request the House; we have been pleading here that we need to increase our revenue to GDP ratio and one of the reasons we have been failing to do so is because of tax administration. We are saying that this measure will enhance our tax administration and enable us collect more. 

I do not see why hon. Nandala-Mafabi and the chairperson of the committee can now say - We are saying this provision is not harmful to the current law; it only enhances the capacity and capability of URA to collect money. We lose nothing and we actually gain a lot.

MR OKUPA: I would like to give information but in the form of a question. Honourable minister, are you aware that in such circumstances, under the current law the Commissioner-General is given powers to estimate where a taxpayer fails to provide records? If a taxpayer fails to provide records, they estimate the tax and if they fail to disprove that, they must pay. 

I do not know whether the minister gets this. That is what is provided in the law. The law provides that if you fail to provide records, the Commissioner–General estimates the tax, and you will see the taxpayer running with documents. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, which law is he referring to?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, I would like to quote two laws where the Commissioner-General has the authority to estimate tax if you fail to furnish a return. Under the provision on furnishing of returns in section 92 of the Income Tax Act, there are due dates for furnishing a return. This goes up to section 94, where it assessments are provided for. It is clearly stated that where a taxpayer fails to file a return or provide the information, the Commissioner-General has the authority to –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are not reading well. Please, read it well.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, it reads, “…the commissioner shall include with the assessment a statement of reasons why the commissioner was not satisfied with the returns”. This is how it comes in. This is the law - (Interjection) - Why would I lay it on the Table?

Section 95 reads as follows: 
“(2) Where- 
(a)	 a taxpayer defaults in furnishing a return of income for a year of income; or 
(b) 	the commissioner is not satisfied with a return of income for a year of income furnished by a taxpayer, the commissioner may, according to the commissioner’s best judgment, make an assessment of the chargeable income of the taxpayer and the tax payable thereon for that year.

(3) 	Where the commissioner has made an assessment under subsection (2)(b), the commissioner shall include with the assessment a statement of reasons as to why the commissioner was not satisfied with the return…”

MR BAHATI: I would like to ask hon. Nandala-Mafabi which section of the law he is reading because there are sections we repealed last year.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, we may have changed the assessment, but this is according to the law which has not been appealed.  It is section 95 of the 2006 Act. If you would like to read them very well, then start from section 92-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which law is that? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is the Income Tax Act. Mr Chairman, the Tax Procedures Code is trying to tax people according to the laws - VAT, Income Tax Act, and the customs and or excise laws. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, we can check the repeal we made last year under the tax-

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairperson, I would like to ask the minister, if he says they were repealed, under what law does the commissioner operate under in dealing with those taxpayers who failed to produce the records?

MR BAHATI: That is why we are here, hon. Okupa.

MR OKUPA: No, you are talking of transfer-

MS RWAKOOJO: Mr Chairperson, permit me to seek clarification as to whether it applies to ordinary taxpayers or multinationals.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Mr Chairperson, there is a reason the amendment was made. What is the practice? If today you present an invoice to URA of goods you bought from a company and they are not satisfied with your values, they will not pass it. It is because they know the tariffs, codes and prices in the country where the goods are coming from. 

It is incumbent upon the investigating department in URA to tell you that the prices of the invoice you forwarded to them are wrong and they assess you. The practice is that not all values on the invoice presented by URA are accepted. They investigate them and give you the correct assessment.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, the former President of South Africa, Thabo Mbeki, was requested by the African Union to undertake a study in financial illicit flows. It was established that over a period of five years, Africa had lost a total of $7.8 trillion in illicit flows especially on account of multinationals. You are aware that even locally, we have been struggling to get information from telecommunication companies on phones that terminate in other jurisdictions. 

We have also been complaining about a problem of enhanced tax administration as a major source of raising our revenue and here we are. The URA is just saying that the current legal regime we have is not sufficient for them to enforce this requirement. I think it is a very polite request, and we are not losing anything, unless some of us have interests we have failed to declare. It is a very polite request. Why don’t we accept this request since it enhances the tax administration? I have been crying for this enhanced tax administration and we would also like to reduce these financial illicit flows- (Interruptions)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, hon. Lugoloobi, for giving way. Uganda Revenue Authority is authorised to audit anybody at any time. If they would like to audit a document, they will audit it. What bars URA in the law from getting the documents they want if they would like to audit an entity next week? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I think we need to do this. It is true that provisions of the Income Tax Act were repealed and it is also true that sections of the Value Added Tax Act were repealed. They were repealed for purposes of creating a procedure within one law and not because nobody wanted them. 
In this case, what was repealed in the Income Tax Act is now brought under section 18 of the Tax Procedures Code Act: 
“Power of the Commissioner to require tax returns in certain cases 
(1) 	This section applies if, during a tax period- 
(a) 	a taxpayer has died;
(b) 	a taxpayer has become bankrupt and wound up; 
(c)	a taxpayer is about to leave Uganda permanently; or 
(d)	the Commissioner otherwise considers it appropriate. 

(2) 	The Commissioner may, by notice in writing and at any time during the tax period, require- 
(a)	the taxpayer or taxpayer’s representative to furnish a tax return for the tax period by the date specified in the notice being a date that may be before the date that the return for the tax period would otherwise be due; and 
(b) 	the taxpayer or taxpayer’s representative to pay any tax due under the return. 

(3) 	Where a taxpayer is subject to more than one tax, this section applies to each tax separately.” 

Section 19 is on extension of time to furnish a tax return. From section 20 we have tax assessments - self-assessment, default assessment and advance assessment. 

I asked a question at the beginning, and I will ask it again, and we need to conclude this: Does the new provision being proposed bring any injustice to anybody? 

MS NANTUME EGUNYU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. You asked whether the new proposal offends anybody. The answer is yes; it does. It does so in two phases. The first one is: what criteria was used to establish the 25 currency points, which is Shs 50 million, as a penalty? On what amount of goods -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, that is a different discussion. The issue is the principle of this provision and not the penalty itself. The provision is: A person who, upon request by a commissioner, fails to provide records within 30 days, is liable to pay whatever is going to be paid. Is that principle wrong? If they request for a particular set of documents and you refuse or you fail to give them within 30 days, does it cause any problem? If the issue is the amount, then that can be another discussion.

MS EGUNYU: Mr Chairperson, I would suggest that it is wrong because if you give me 30 days to present my papers, I may not have those documents at that time. I assume that with this computerised system that we have in our country, no goods can pass any of our borders without the consent of URA. Therefore, I would think that you give me time to present those documents that you want other than just imposing a penalty on me.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, what you are saying is that the 30 days are too short? I am asking about the principle; where is it provided for? I have read the same thing and there is no direct provision like this.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, what new thing does this amendment try to bring? The amendment seeks to impose an additional requirement on taxpayers to maintain transfer pricing records, which are not defined in the proposed amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I asked a question: if you remove the term “transfer pricing”, would it change? The minister is saying it is the gist. Would you have to call it that name in order for it to be done or you have to provide for so that a particular person can now say, “I want a specific record on transfer pricing”. That would now be the content of the request; must it be in the law? 

If the Commissioner-General wants to ask a specific question about transfer pricing, then they would now ask for transfer pricing. Must we have it in the law?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, you stated that what hon. Nandala-Mafabi read is not anywhere in the law, as specific as this. How is this provision trying to help us? I would like to state that as Members of Parliament, it is also right that we listen to the people that we have given a duty to collect tax. They are telling us that they are finding difficulty in dealing with these multinationals and yet they contribute 80 per cent of our income tax. The multinationals are paying close to 80 per cent of the income tax that we are receiving as a nation. 

We are finding difficulties and we are saying, let us empower the commissioner with this provision to strengthen tax administration. This provision is not harmful. We are just requesting you; can you give us more information in 30 days? If you do not submit it, we can punish you as an incentive for people to have these records. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The question is: can you give me more information? Must that “more information” be called transfer pricing?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, you know, as a lawyer, how difficult these lawyers of multinationals can make it for us. If something is not in the law and we are requesting for it, it would be very difficult.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, if you make a request under this particular provision, which has nothing to do with transfer pricing, you will not make that request.

MR BAHATI: We want a request on transfer pricing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Can I put the question to this now? I am going to put the question to the proposal. You have heard the minister and the chairman of the committee. The chairman of the committee is proposing that clause 5 be deleted in its entirety. The minister has presented the case that this particular provision has come from practitioners because they have a challenge and they need to be assisted by this House to be able to deliver.

Therefore, I am now going to put the question to the committee’s proposal to delete because that is the amendment. The minister has not proposed an amendment. Therefore, I am going to put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee to delete clause 5. I put the question that clause 5 be deleted.

Honourable members, let us play fair. Let us vote at the same time and we take a decision. I put the question to the motion that clause 5 be deleted. 

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 5, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the committee of the whole House to report. I put the question to that motion?

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2017” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption for the report of the committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDEMENT) BILL, 2017

7.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2017”, be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion that the Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2017 be read the third time and do pass?

(Question Put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR ACT ENTITLED “THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2017”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister and the chairman; thank you very much. Congratulations, honourable members and thank you for staying up to this time. 

I have one announcement from the hon. Mubarak Munyagwa. With deep sorrow, he announces the death of his mother who has just been buried now. However, the information is for Members to know and find a way of supporting him. She is already buried. 

Okay honourable members, this House are adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 o’clock.

(The House rose at 7.25 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 11 May 2017 at 2.00 p.m.) 
