Tuesday, 19 May 2009

Parliament met at 2.37 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I seem to see in the gallery some distinguished members; these are the new Commissioners of the Uganda Human Rights Commission. They are headed by the Chairperson, Mr Kaggwa. And I also see members of the diplomatic corps. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

This week we shall be ending our third session of the Eighth Parliament but we have a lot, as you have seen on the Order Paper, that we need to accomplish between today and the 21st when we shall stand dissolved. 

I am quite aware of what is going on in the country on Thursday, the elections, and I think Members might be interested in that. So what we shall do is to try to accomplish as much as we can between today and maybe tomorrow. 

The major item we have is the Uganda Human Rights Commission reports, which have to be disposed of during this session. So today and tomorrow we shall be debating the Uganda Human Rights Commission but let us clear whatever we can that is before us today. Therefore, I will be curtailing your contributions so that we can cover as many items as possible.  

2.40
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Mr Speaker, I do appreciate that the Parliament has covered quite a journey over the last three years. I rise on a matter of concern about the various questions that have been asked by honourable members of Parliament to the Executive expecting oral answers. 

Many of these questions have become obsolete; a good number of them have been overtaken by events. I wonder whether there can be any measure put in place so that the Executive, as much as possible, acts upon questions that are demanded of them. Because I thought that would be one of the ways through which functional operations of Parliament should be seen to be in place. What is it that we will expect as we come to the close of the third session of the Eighth Parliament? Is it going to be the same status quo that Members ask questions and Members of the Executive continue to come here without even giving us an opportunity to get answers? I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think the Prime Minister will answer you but what I have personally indicated before to the Rules Committee is to put in our rules that as soon as the days given to a minister to answer questions expire, we shall put the question on the Order Paper so that whoever cannot answer will tell us in the plenary why he cannot do so. Those are changes we may have to effect to cause those responsible to answer the questions. The Prime Minister has something so say.  

2.42
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Put the questions on the Order Paper and we shall answer them at once. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we are going to do that. 

2.43
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of procedure. Yesterday I was directed by the august House to produce documents linking a certain UPDF officer to cases of human sacrifice and I am ready to present the documents now.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Present them and then we will see what to do with them.

MR LUKWAGO: I have made some copies for Members to follow. It is a heap of documents but I will briefly go through them as I lay them on the Table. 

The first document is a letter dated 10 May 2009. It is written by a one Dison Onyiggi for Assistant Inspector-General of Police/CID; addressed to the regional police commander, central region; reference 65. The subject is: “Suspected human sacrifice in Namusera village –

THE SPEAKER: I think what you should do is to just tell us the papers you are laying because we are going to subject them to investigation.

MR LUKWAGO: Most obliged. Mr Speaker, I just wanted to talk about the gist of this document. The Assistant Inspector-General of Police was directing the commander of police to assist the head of this herbalist association to carry out investigations and there is a suspect who is called Shaban Nwazalugaddo, who is alleged to have caused the disappearance of one Agaya Matovu in Namusera village. 

A search was carried out and when you look at the second document, the picture of that gentleman appears on that document, which is a certificate of membership. Now, the document is in the names of Dr Kasozi Shaban. 

In the third document, it is also a certificate in the names of Kasozi Shaban with the same photograph. 

The fourth document is an identity card of Shaban but this time using the name Nyonyintono. Still using the same photograph; he is a driver in the Ministry of Defence. The ID was issued on 19 September 2008. 

The fifth document is a letter from Ramadhan Kyamulesire (MP, Colonel, Chief of Legal Services). It is dated, 1 September 2008. And it is “To whom it may concern.” He says that Shaban Nyonyintono has been employed by the UPDF chief legal services to drive his official motor vehicle Reg. No. H4DF 976.

The sixth document is an NRM card. This time it is in the names of Sabbani Rubega. This card is signed by His Excellency the President. 

The seventh document is a movement order in the names of Shaban Nyonyintono, from the Chieftaincy of Legal Services UPDF, signed by Col Kyamulesire Ramadhan, Chief of Legal Services, authorising Shaban Nyonyintono to move to Arua via Hoima Road in motor vehicle No. H4DF 976 and the purpose is to collect a patient from Arua. The dates are indicated. 

The eighth document is in the names Shaban. The destination and purpose is not clear. The vehicle number is not there but it is signed by Col Kyamulesire. 

Mr Speaker, the ninth document is in the names of Nyonyintono. It is also a movement order dated, 1 November 2008. The vehicle No. is H4DF 976. Shaban Nyonyintono this time is moving to Mbombor via Gulu. The purpose of the journey is to collect a patient. 

The tenth document: Nyonyintono Shaban dated, 22 December 2008. It is also a movement order from the chieftaincy of legal services, UPDF. This time round, Nyonyintono is moving to Kimbonga via Kimbale. And the motor vehicle is H4DF 976. The reason for the journey is to collect a patient. 

I have another document here authorising Nyonyintono Shaban; it is a Movement order from the chieftaincy of legal services dated, 23 January 2009. The motor vehicle is the same H4DF 976. The reason of the journey this time is to collect property. The dates are indicated.

The twelfth document is blank. It is an open cheque to Nyonyintono. It is not even signed. It is also a Movement order.

The thirteenth document is the CV of Col Kyamulesire Ramadhan, Member of Parliament.

The last document is a document from this House about personal data of Col Ramadhan Kyamulesire.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table these set of documents, which I said are in reference to a one Nyonyintono or Rubega or Kasozi but the first name is the same, Shaban, who is a UPDF driver. He drives Col Kyamulesire but at the same time he owns a shrine. The shrine is in Namusera. 

The place was invaded and they found a human skull there. I have the pictures but they are still making copies for me – it was getting late. I have the pictures of the human skull that was found in the possession of Nyonyintono, who is the driver of Kyamulesire. 

I beg to lay on the Table these documents as proof of the statement I made yesterday that Col Kyamulesire, a high ranking UPDF officer, has a case to answer about this question of human sacrifice involving his personal driver who is using a UPDF vehicle as if it is an ambulance to collect patients from across the country; and you wonder how a witchdoctor could do that. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I think enough has been said. These documents have been received and police will be asked to investigate and report promptly. Next item!

2.51
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you. Mr Speaker, last week I raised the issue of the unfortunate events that happened in Kasilo where wind blew away the structures of three schools and I was appealing to the Prime Minister to come to our rescue and he gave a directive that we meet and discuss this matter, headed by Prof. Kabwegyere. I am getting worried that we are closing in the next 48 hours; the meeting has not been called; the statement which was asked to be presented here by the minister has not been presented.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, your directive has not been adhered to. We have been patiently waiting. I even communicated to you. What is the fate of those unfortunate people, not only in Kasilo because there were a number of places in the country that should have been addressed, for example, Sironko?
 
PROF. NSIBAMBI: Well, I wish you had contacted me because it is much better that way because I would have caused those people to take action. I am always in my office by 7.30 a.m. -(Interjections)- no, human beings err, including all of you. To err is human. So these people have erred and I have no hesitation in asking hon. Kabakumba to ensure that my directive is complied with. I thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.53
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Mr Speaker, I had come here earlier to give this statement but on your guidance, you said there was a committee handling it and that it would be better that information is given and yesterday when it came up, I thought I would now be able to give that statement on this important subject.

This is a statement to Parliament on an update on incidents related to suspected human sacrifice and trafficking in persons.

Hon. Members – 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe what I can say is that yesterday this House noted that using the word, “sacrifice” is not appropriate. It is “murder” and that is the consensus we developed yesterday. “Sacrifice” is something holy we give to God. (Laughter) But you can proceed.

MR KIVEJINJA: Thank you very much, for your guidance but as you will see from my statement, we have also categorized all those incidents and definitely some will be murder.

General Analysis

During the months of January, February and March 2009, that is when we had the highest incidents, incidents and reports of suspected human sacrifice and trafficking were registered in various parts of the country. 

These incidents and reports were registered as murders, selected reports of missing persons, kidnaps, abductions, selling children and causing harm/death or threat to harm/kill others through practicing witchcraft. The motive of such incidents is suspected to be related to human sacrifice. 

Death Cases

During those three months, a total of 11 deaths suspected to be linked to human sacrifice practices were registered. One incident was registered in January, seven in February, and three in March. There were four male adults and three male juveniles, two female adults and two female juvenile deaths.

The death incidents were registered in the districts of Kampala (3), Mityana (1), Kamuli (1), Soroti (1), Kaliro (1), Pader (1), Ntungamo (1), Bushenyi (1) and Kiboga (1).

Kidnaps, Abductions and Attempts

Meanwhile some kidnaps, abductions and attempts have been registered in the districts of Kampala (13), Kayunga (2), Mityana (1), Pallisa (1), Mbale (1), Mpigi (1), Kibale (1), Nakasongola (1), Kiboga (2), Mukono (1), Bugiri (1), Sembabule (1). 
Not all these reports are linked to human sacrifice.

Reports of Missing Persons

At the same time, the number of people reported missing in the various parts of the country for the three months had been as follows: Kampala (146), Wakiso(16),  Kayunga (9), Mityana (4), Luweero (3), Jinja (5), Mukono (4), Mpigi (5), Gulu (3), Masaka (2), Lyantonde (2), Kabale (2), Rakai (2), Kiboga (2) and one incident for each of the districts of Sironko, Iganga, Moroto, Mbale, Sembabule and Mityana.

The majority of these reports are not linked to human sacrifice.

Attempts to Sell

In addition there was one incident of an attempt to sell a child in Mubende and Mbarara districts while Kampala had two such incidents. The motive was to get money but the sellers did not mind whether the children were eventually sacrificed.

There were two reports of plan to sacrifice newly acquired wives under investigations in Pallisa District. 

Being in Possession of Witchcraft Material 

Incidents and reports of being in possession of witchcraft material were registered in the districts of Kamuli (1) and Kaliro (2). These materials were used to harm some victims. 

There has also been one incident of trespassing at burial grounds to remove the head of the dead for witchcraft purposes registered in Bugiri District.

Reports of Suspicious Conduct

Several spontaneous reports of suspicious behaviour by some individuals, including traditional doctors and some organisations suspected to be involved in human trafficking in some parts of the country, have been registered and are under investigation.

Rescues and Findings

During the period under review, the breakdown of the number of persons rescued or whose whereabouts have been established by relatives and the Police is as follows: Kampala (58), Kayunga (2), Mubende(1), Sironko (1), Pallisa (2), Bugiri (1), Mbale (3), Moroto (1), Mbarara (1), Jinja (1), Kabale (1), Kibaale (1), Mpigi and Nakasongola on each.

Arrests by the Police

Police have made some arrests in connection with incidents related to human sacrifice as follows: Kampala (22), Kaliro (12), Mubende (1), Pallisa (6), Kiboga (7), Mbale (3), Bugiri (3), Wakiso (1), Mubende (1), Mpigi (1) and Nakasongola (1).

The situation of those taken to court so far is as follows: Kampala (4), Kaliro (9), Soroti (4), Nakasongola (1) and Kiboga (10).

The statistical summary and highlights of some incidents are contained in the attached appendices, 1, 2, 3 and 4 at the end of my statement.

Factors which have perpetuated the human sacrifice/trafficking crime

1.	Increasing number of people who believe in witchcraft, funny traditional rituals and making easy money. Such people can easily be led into human sacrifice by some mischievous traditional doctors or herbalists.

2.	Emergence of a group of fraudulent traditional doctors/herbalists who demand for human parts in exchange for imaginary big wealth or good luck.

3.	Lack of personal security, consciousness and laxity by some individuals and those entrusted with taking care of the children at home and other learning institutions which make it easy for the kidnaps and abductions to take place.

4.	Poverty which has led some people to practise or be used in negative adventures.

Actions taken/strategy by the police

1.	The Inspector General of Police constituted an anti-human sacrifice/trafficking task force to monitor, coordinate, direct and boost police investigations, intelligence collection and public mobilisation/sensitisation against acts of human sacrifice and trafficking.

The membership of the team includes police officers and other officers from the Internal Security Organisation, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Immigration Directorate. The taskforce has a desk at the CID headquarters.

2.	Police investigations and intelligence gathering concerning incidents related to human sacrifice have been given reinforced due attention from the taskforce headquarters desk and this has led to a number of arrests and prosecutions.

3.	The Police have embarked on a vigorous sensitisation drive on safe security tips and good morals/attitudes to minimise the crime.

4.	Upon directives from the anti-human sacrifice taskforce headquarters, district anti-human sacrifice task committees have been formed in various districts all over the country to generate local criminal intelligence, to carry out investigations and mobilise the general public on effective security tips against the crime.

5.	The traditional doctors and herbalists are being mobilised by the Police all over the country in liaison with the local authorities for easy monitoring of their activities.

Achievements

1.	As a result of ongoing sensitisation by the Police and other partners, there is increased awareness of the problem of human sacrifice. Members of the general public have stepped up vigilance and are reporting any suspicious behaviours and incidents to the Police.

2.	Many human rights organisations, religious organisations, and government ministries/departments including Parliament have been provoked to join hands with the Police to fight the crime.

3.	The ministries of Health and Gender are working out a draft paper on guidelines for conduct of traditional doctors and herbalists.

4.	An objective communication link between the Police and traditional doctors/herbalists all over the country is slowly being built up in the fight against the crime.

Observations, Challenges and Way Forward

Intelligence information on the ground indicates that there are increasing numbers of people who believe and practice certain questionable traditional rituals some of which may be directly or indirectly contributing to this culture of human sacrifice. There is need for aggressive campaign to change people’s attitude. 

Police are investigating unconfirmed rumours that some religious groups which are said to be in devil and cult worship are also practicing acts of human sacrifice and witchcraft.

The absence of a national policy on the operations of traditional doctors and herbalists has made it difficult for the public and law enforcement organs to differentiate between the genuine and the fake traditional doctors/herbalists. The draft paper by the ministries of Health and Gender is in the offing.

Not all unique murders and missing persons are as a result of human sacrifice acts. Some of the murder cases initially reported, suspected or perceived as motivated by human sacrifice plans have been found to have been committed for other motives. It has also been noticed that some people do not report back to Police when they trace their missing persons.

Additional Measures Required

Government is determined to continue fighting these vices. There is a need however for all Members of parliament, government officials at all levels, private individuals, etcetera to join the crusade against acts of human sacrifice. The public should be mobilised to be security conscious and cooperate with the security personnel in fighting against these crimes. 

We all have to work together to change people’s attitudes so that they stop thinking in terms of witchcraft and instead respect human life. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We shall have debate just for 30 minutes and, therefore, I will give you four minutes each.

3.07
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, Minister, for this report. I want to observe two major things: 

One; in the minister’s report, he talks about the challenges and the way forward. I would urge the minister to put up a machinery to investigate the sale of human organs. It has been reported repeatedly and we have placed it before this Parliament that the practice is on and this is why the exercise is escalating from children to grown ups. 

Two, there is the idea which the minister has talked about which is very interesting and I would like to get more clarification from him although I must thank him for being exceedingly honest. This is on the issue of poverty. This is a government that has consistently denied the responsibility of employment. We are talking about private sector, we are talking about public-private partnership but what is our policy of employment, honourable minister? If we know that poverty has eaten the moral fibre of the society to the extent that people are willing to kill their own children and as a state you are aware that this is poverty, what are you going to do rather than simply mentioning that poverty is prevalent?

The third and my last item is about the appeals we are making either as Parliament or on your side as government to the members of the public that they should be vigilant. It is difficult for members of the public to act in a situation like the one in Uganda. There are very many para-military groups and these groups have very superior powers all around. They come, pick individuals and go. Some of us who have the capacity to call either numbers in the Police or officers that we know or ministers like you are fewer than the number of people whose relatives and neighbours are picked every now and again, taken away and they do not return. And when they are picked, these individuals are taken in vehicles that are disguised as police vehicles or CMI vehicles. 

Two weeks ago, I received a report and I passed it on to the Police that a young boy was picked from William Street and was taken in a car that was identified by number and the mother went to look for her son, she was denied access and later this boy was found in Kireka in a place that was not clearly gazetted –(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give about abductions and disappearances of persons at the hands of security agencies is that just last night at around 9.00 p.m. here in the city centre, there was a clash between Police and security operatives who are based around Sure House on Bombo Road. This is a team led by Kakooza Mutale and they are saying it is a unit in charge of fighting catching of immature fish and also human sacrifice. 

It was amazing and the Police were shocked to find people rotting there. I have their names here. They were picked from Kamuli and dumped here. Their relatives reported a case of missing persons – it is good the minister said not all cases of missing persons are linked to child sacrifice. This is one of the cases. The SD reference is number 110/18/05/2009. 

The people who were picked from Kamuli and dumped here are: Waiswa Robert, Maka James, Gitta Deo, Buyinza Samuel, Bagula Charles, Kilofo Muhammed, Lubandi Kenneth and Matula Peter. Their relatives and particularly one, Balanda Pasco, a resident of Kiwaba Kilimya Zone, Ndulya Parish, Ngondo sub-county, Budiope constituency, Kamuli District is the one who followed up this case and was all tears fearing that his relatives had been killed. 

And the captors were driving their vehicle, a Fuso number UAK 773E and like I said, there was a clash between the Police and these security operatives who did not want to release these people. The information is that not all cases of missing persons are linked to child sacrifice but the security agencies are also grabbing and kidnapping people. Thank you. 

MR KYANJO: I thank my colleague for giving this useful information. I would also like to add this number to the list the minister would like to put into consideration. It is number UAA 145U; it is a dark blue Toyota. It does this job around town; individuals are actually helpless. When we come here and issue statements, it sounds like we are dishonest.

3.14
MR ISHAA OTTO (UPC, Oyam South, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for responding to the cries of this House.

However, allow me say that this report is not comprehensive and inclusive. I am saying this because when I was in Oyam District three months ago, we had two or three incidents of similar nature in which children were abducted, they disappeared, but later their rotten bodies were discovered. I notice that those incidents are not reflected in this report, yet I even heard people on one of the radios in Lira discuss them. 

I would like to say that this report has only concentrated on issues of child sacrifice that have taken place in central and parts of eastern Uganda. I am saying this because what happened in Oyam, Lira and other areas has not been reflected in it. The hon. Minister is asking me when that incident happened, but it would have been me to ask the minister to tell us when. That is why he has reported to us –(Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. About two or one-and-half months ago, in Gulu, a child got lost. People looked for it and failed to do any recovery, but after one-and-half days the child’s body was found thrown near some stream with the tongue and some of the body parts cut out. When it came to arresting, it was discovered that the killing had been committed by a witch doctor. I am surprised this incident is not reflected in the minister’s report. Thank you.

MR ISHAA OTTO: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: I just want to add that the only case I see in this report in regard to Soroti District is possibly about the girl child who was killed. Although in the month of March some people killed a person in Kadungulu, Kasiro and were unsuccessful to take off with the head, that incident is not reflected in this report. Thank you.

MR ISHAA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I thought it was necessary for honourable members to give such kind of information. This justifies my argument that this report is not inclusive of what has been happening in the country.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think when you stood to make your contribution, you had reason to do so.

MR ISHAA OTTO: The issue we are discussing is very important because it is an issue that touches life and death. As we talk about it, we should be considerate of this information to help government and all of us to do something expected of us. 

Secondly, when that incident took place in Oyam, the action of the police was quite slow. And I would like to make it clear to government that the slow response to these situations by police, once reported, has always taken a lot of interests from the society. In many incidences, members of the community are forced to search for their dead or disappeared family members. I think this is what government should take as a serious matter.

3.19
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also wish to thank the minister for presenting this report that has covered four months from January to April this year. 

However, I would like to say that this tragedy is an old story. Ten years ago, there was the Kibwetere mystery during which it is believed that over 1,000 people were burnt alive. After that incident, we started hearing and witnessing horrific incidents of mass graves, which were unearthed all over the country. That Kibwetere mystery has never been investigated conclusively though we keep on asking for more information from government. 

Recently, I even read from the press a story in which Kibwetere’s wife said that her husband had died and that she had asked police to go and she shows them Kibwetere’s grave. I think it was reported either in The New Vision or The Daily Monitor newspapers recently. However, I have never heard of the police taking interest in that offer of information.

During the Kibwetere incident, we heard of a lady called Credonia Mwerinde who it was said used to drive a UC vehicle; we have never heard anybody follow that up.

Recently, I reported here that I had attended a memorial service for the children in the Buddo fire murders and also said that during that service one of the parents, Mr Speaker, stood and said that he has information that a very senior government official is related or responsible for the death of the children at Buddo. Although we have always talked about the bodies of two adults who are alleged to have been involved in the Buddo fire, many people including teachers and parents have said that police warned them never to mention anything about those two bodies.

I agree that this report is very inconclusive. In 1986, I presented here a petition on human rights abuse. That petition was a report of about 20 people who had disappeared. We presented to the CHOGM secretariat a petition by FDC in which we reported over 20 people that had disappeared. That report was, I think, trashed because even CHOGM did not care.

I agree that this report is inconclusive and very short and yet this is a very old story. Many people are crying; they do not know what happened to their people or what will happen to their children. I therefore would like to suggest that this House institutes a public inquiry in the disappearance, the murders, the abduction and the human rights abuse of the people of Uganda. I thank you.

3.24
MS REBECCA AMUGE (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Please allow me to appreciate the report from the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Internal Affairs. Y

You will allow me to begin from the observations, that is, five. The Deputy Prime Minister has agreed that Ugandans have increasingly started believing in witchcraft. I want us to find out why Ugandans no longer believe in natural things. They all believe in supernatural things be it for school fees, for food, for shelter, or even politics. Why do we believe in supernatural things now? 

I want Members of this Parliament to find out the root causes of this. One of them could be that they no longer have faith in us as leaders who should create the environment which would allow them to get what they need as citizens. It could also be due to poverty, when people believe that perhaps to have what to eat one must go to a witch doctor. This is unbelievable! 

Some of us who care to know about history will remember that at one time, we were told that there used to be something called embalasasa, which then moved to something like somebody moving on a wooden leg. In Lango, there was another one which was like a gourd which moved from Otuke to, I think, Anaka via Akokoro. The results are always not very good and I want Members of this Parliament to agree with me that we do not have to sugar coat the issue of child or human sacrifice. What we should do is to find the root cause! The government has all the machinery to handle this case. 

I am not very happy with my elder who has said that we are trying to mitigate - people’s attitudes must be checked and the religious leaders must help us. I want to propose that the government come out sternly and disagree with witchcraft. Witchcraft is not acceptable in a place like Uganda where, “For God and my Country,” is our motto! -(Interruption)

MR ANGIRO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and my colleague. The information I would like to give her is about the history of this kind of thing in Lango sub-region between 1965 and 1966 where the elders were thinking that, “Let us identify these people,” because the cause of this is nothing other than health, wealth and protection.

What happened in those years is that the elders, including the then Lango district council, came out and resolved that these people be identified and taken in for harassment. It happened that those who spearheaded the work were chiefs and they were rewarded. Eventually, all these people who were arrested dug a road called Yo Jogi which is still remembered in Lira. That is how we removed this kind of thing. Thank you very much.

MS AMUGE: Thank you very much, hon. Member, for that information but I need to get my time.

Mr Speaker, allow me to conclude by saying that where the security is implicated it becomes worse because they are supposed to protect us. I therefore would like to propose that whatever is called witchcraft is wiped out of this country. We cannot accept it! We are Christians and Moslems and we believe in God! Thank you.

3.29
MRS FLORENCE SSEKABIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Internal Affairs for this report. I would like to make just a few comments and requests to government.

I remember very well, when we had a problem of those thugs who were killing people in Kampala then and we were really becoming afraid of Kampala, Operation Wembley saved us. In the same way, these people who sacrifice children need severe punishments which should be clear to the public so as to make the others who plan to do the same fear to go ahead and sacrifice our children.

In the case of Shamim who died in the hands of those merciless people, and the case of Muguluma, the young boy who just came back from school and was sacrificed, those people who did it came out to say, “Yes, we did it,” but up to today, we do not know what punishment has been given to them. 

The punishment should be clear, severe and timely and the public should know. If someone has sacrificed a child and they come and confess why they sacrificed the child and how they did it and they narrate the story - even the child who was killed in Nakawuka. You know the uncle to the child was giving a testimony, “I did not kill. I called the child but I heard she was crying, ‘They are removing my nails’”. The child was crying to the maternal uncle. Such people should be punished and it should be a severe punishment. I propose firing squad -(Applause)- let it happen two or three times in Uganda and these people will stop it. But when we continue to talk about it and these people go to Luzira, where they are well fed and they continue rejoicing and the parents of Shamim and Muguluma are still shedding tears -

These days getting a child is a problem. Getting a healthy child is another problem So, we no longer want to entertain these stories, Mr Deputy Prime Minister. Let us see severe action and severe punishment as it was for Operation Wembley. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate.

3.22
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this report. Allow me to express my deepest condolences to all those who have lost their children in human sacrifice. The magnitude of this phenomenon is beyond taking it as business as usual. The minister has mentioned numbers of those who have died, the kidnaps, abductions and attempts as well as reports of missing persons. 

If he had given us the totals in each category, you would see the numbers. I have tried to calculate the number of people reported missing that is in 1.4 and they are over 211 people. Those are the cases of reports that have reached police. There are those areas that we have not mentioned that is unreported cases because of the limited number of police coverage in the entire country. 

I would like to enquire from the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs as to whether we can declare an operation. If an operation was carried out on mere thugs who had started masquerading, stealing and killing a few individuals within the city suburbs and since then there has been a degree of sanity as far as thuggery is concerned - when we are talking of killings and 211 missing people, I would urge the Executive to institute a thorough operation to first of all register all those who have opted to become traditional healers and are practising – (Interruption)

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and my colleague for giving way. I just wanted to inform you that we have recently passed an Act on human trafficking and a clause was put in concerning those who take children for sacrifices and kill them. The information I want to give you is that as UWOPA, we have been following up this Act to know where it has reached after Parliament passed it. I understand that it is still lying in the printery; it can’t be printed so the President cannot assent to it. This Act would have helped us, Police and Ministry of Justice to get punitive measures in which to punish some of these culprits. There is a problem of money to print this simple Act.

MR KASAMBA: Thank you, honourable colleague for that information. Some two months back, we passed the Bill that handles trafficking in persons and I think the earlier it is assented to by His Excellency, the President and it becomes an Act of Parliament, the better so that we can have a legal framework where we can operate from to catch the culprits. 

It is also very important to institute an operational mechanism by establishing a unit within the Police department to carry out the normal routine. When the numbers are in hundreds, it is very disheartening -(Member timed out)

3.37
MS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to appreciate this thought but I wanted to make an addition to this report on page 4 where factors, which have perpetuated human sacrifice, are listed. I want to submit that one of the factors is devil worship or Satanists. I want to submit that I had an opportunity, about three months ago, to witness the deliverance of a Satanist in the church in which I pray, which is Lifeline Ministries. 

What I am telling you is documented on video and it is available for anybody to see. This is a story of a young beautiful Acholi girl - I will not give her names, aged 23 years old. In the process of being delivered, she vomited 32 cowry shells, which witch practitioners - I don’t want to call them doctors because I think it is an abuse of the word - (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I have been touched by a statement made by my sister, hon. Beatrice Lagada, who I have known for quite some time. I remember you and I wedded on the same day and the wedding was officiated by His Lordship the Bishop of Jinja Diocese accompanied by seven other priests in Our Lady of Fatima Church. You have now mentioned a church, which is not Catholic and which is quite different from the Church in which you and I, among others, were wed. Have you since crossed from the Catholic Church to the other side? I just want to know, I am sorry.

MS LAGADA: Mr Speaker, the matters which we are discussing are matters of life and death and I wish hon. Wadri would desist from making frivolous my submission, which I think is quite serious. 

As a result of that particular deliverance, my pastor was attacked in his house. This matter, which I am submitting here, is with the Police as well as the documentation and the pastor together with the girl are under police guard. An attempt was made to abduct her in the middle of the city. The pastor of the same church was abducted on the 29th April, another pastor of the same church was attacked in Arua neighbouring Terego and as I talk, this afternoon before I came here I was checking on what is happening to that case in Police and I was horrified to hear that the officers in charge of investigating that case could not avail the investigative file to the CID boss Okoth Ochola as of yesterday.

I want to submit that human sacrifice and devil worship in this country is structured with a head, followers and all sorts of people. I am wondering about these CID officers who could not produce the investigative files. Are they part of the practitioners of devil worship? If we do not take this issue seriously - I think what I saw in the documents that are with the Police, which say that devil worshippers intend, by the year 2012, to have at least three million Ugandans dead, is not a laughing matter! I want to tell the Minister of Internal Affairs that you have a massive job on your hands because the people involved are not ignorant people looking for a quick buck, they are not small people. They are from the smallest to the biggest –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this debate has so far taken 35 minutes and it should have taken 30 minutes. I see that we all condemn what is happening and what we have to find out is how to handle it effectively. We may not be able to find solutions here today, I don’t know whether we should constitute a committee but we all agree. I have not heard anybody from the West from this side. I think I should conclude by getting somebody.

3.44
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As Members are correctly saying, I am from Kanungu where the incident of Kibwetere happened. I just want to inform this Parliament that as people of Kanungu, we still demand for the report on the Kibwetere incident. Just a few days ago, I was approached by the daughters of Mr Kibwetere and they gave me a lot of information, which I thought could be very useful to government so I call upon the minister to get in touch with me on the matter. (Laughter)

I think as has been expressed, this is a grave matter and I think the action being taken is still very light so we urge government to take stronger and deterrent measures over this matter of child sacrifice or child murders. Even when you look at the report of the minister referring to these people as traditional doctors, some of us feel abused as doctors; a government minister coming here and saying these are traditional doctors. There are only a few incidences where you can use the word doctor and therefore government needs to be more serious in handling this matter.

There is also strong suspicion of a linkage between the current prosperity gospel preached by these born again churches and these occurrences of child sacrifice. So as government investigates, I think you should explore the linkage between these mushrooming churches, which teach prosperity and the occurrence of child sacrifice, which is also highly prevalent.

Lastly, I just wanted to propose that to supplement the efforts being put in place by the government, this Parliament should institute a select committee to investigate this matter. This is because in light of the way we are debating and the minister’s report, we are just reducing individuals to statistics but these are human beings, these are children who have no opportunity to speak out and I think we should treat this matter very seriously. So I just wanted to propose that we institute a committee as Parliament, draft terms of reference and instruct this committee to investigate and bring a comprehensive report and measures, which will help government and all of us in addressing this matter, which is actually a crisis in this country. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I think that is a way forward. Should I put this as a motion? 

3.47
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Mr Speaker, I want to move that the Parliament institutes a judicial commission of inquiry, which will conduct public hearings and report to the minister who will subsequently report to Parliament. This is because I think Parliament will not have adequate time to carry out this matter given the programmes that we have ahead of us especially to do with the budget process. Thank you, Mr Speaker and I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that we urge the Executive to set up a judicial commission of inquiry to probe into this issue. Do we need a debate? We have very limited time, hon. Kikungwe unless you are standing to say you support -

MR KIKUNGWE: I am not very comfortable with the Executive forming the judicial commission of inquiry because they are the people under question and whoever is going to investigate is going to hand over the report to them. It is only that the debate is closed but I would propose that we go for a select committee, which we should own ourselves.

THE SPEAKER: The select committee will comprise Members of Parliament. Don’t you think there are other people who are better placed and can make a more elaborate inquiry than we Members of Parliament? I think nobody is saying the Executive is murdering children. What you are implying is that maybe the Executive has not done enough and that is different. She is saying let us have a judicial commission of inquiry.

MR KIKUNGWE: We should not entrust them with the responsibility of forming a judicial commission of inquiry.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion as moved by my colleague, hon. Judith Franca Akello. It is a fact that Members of Parliament are overwhelmed with work. A case in point is the select committee which was established to look into the Police affairs under the chairmanship of hon. Peter Nyombi. As I talk now, this select committee has either done a quarter of its assignment or not at all. 

Let us be fair to ourselves. Let us give the Executive the benefit of doubt. If not, we shall bring this up with the Rt Hon Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Internal Affairs on a different note. Let us give them the benefit of doubt under the Commission of Inquiries Act. Let the minister responsible go and constitute this judicial commission of inquiry that will be able to have public hearings. 

I think the most important thing for us as Parliament is to give the honourable minister clear terms of reference so that he does not take it from us to go and stay there until 2011. This is an urgent issue; it is from a public cry.

I urge that the minister immediately - within two weeks - institutes this judicial commission of inquiry, which should be given –(Interjection)– do not say it is not possible. We are giving you terms and you will go and work it out with your permanent secretary and the rest. At the end of the day, we will expect to give this judicial commission of inquiry up to two months within which to constitute so that thereafter the Executive can come in. The rest may be worked out, but at least we think that in order to do a thorough job, the responsible minister institutes a commission of inquiry. I, therefore, support this motion.

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wanted to give information to the member who was holding the Floor, even though I have not contributed. The issue of giving this exercise to a judicial commission of inquiry will not help us handle this matter. We know that the Judiciary is very slow and overwhelmed with a lot of cases. Look at the examples from the paper that the Minister has given us. There are a number of cases that have been reported but those that have been handled are very minimal. 

It is not going to help us, given that we have salient matters in this child sacrifice issue. An example is the street children; who knows where they go? Who reports if they are missing? The judicial commission of inquiry will not establish these facts. I think even the Judiciary has failed. Look at the Kibwetere Inquiry, the issue of Buddo and the issue of the late Mayombo. All these issues have not been brought here so that we know what happened. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the Judiciary you are mentioning has not been involved in Buddo and in Mayombo. We are talking about a judicial commission of inquiry, which is different and will inquire into this and the other. That is the essence of it. 

MS NALUBEGA: Mr Speaker, on several occasions we have heard that the Judiciary is overwhelmed and they have no manpower to handle most of these cases.

THE SPEAKER: No, when we say “judicial”, we need not have judges who are busy somewhere. We could have distinguished legal men and women to constitute a team, and not judges. It is judicial but it need not be headed by a judge. I think let us vote on this. The motion is that we urge Government to set up within two weeks a judicial commission of inquiry -(Mr Kivejinja rose_)– lives are being lost; we do not want to lose lives.

MR KIVEJINJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want to inform my colleagues that we also need to be realistic because you know when you set up such a committee, there are a number of factors that need to be put in place. You will have to create a budget for it, for example.

THE SPEAKER: No, let us vote on the motion. It is two weeks; just think about the personnel and then give them the time. We are talking about life, children being lost. (Applause) So the motion is that the Executive sets up a judicial commission of inquiry into the issue of human sacrifice.

(Question put and agreed to.) 

(Motion adopted.)

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION BY PAL (U) LIMITED AGENCIES OF SOROTI BUS AND TAXI PARK MANAGEMENT TO THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

3.56
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a petition by PAL (U) Ltd Agencies of Soroti Bus and Taxi Park Management to the Parliament of Uganda. 

“The humble petition of the bus and taxi park management agency, PAL, on behalf of the proprietors and employees of PAL Agencies to the Parliament of Uganda states as follows: 
1. That PAL Agencies is the organisation currently contracted to manage the main bus and main taxi parks in Soroti Municipality;

2. PAL Agencies went through the bidding process and was awarded a tender by Soroti Municipality to collect parking fees from all bus/taxi parks and stages in the municipality;

3. 	That on 27 June 2008, the municipality re-awarded PAL a contract to collect revenue on condition that the company remits Shs 25,016,000 to the municipality per month;

4. 	That owing to competition and bus park wrangles, Teso Coaches stopped paying revenue to the collector and later on established their own terminal, which to date is ungazetted and unauthorised by the urban authority;

5. That a court injunction stopping the construction of the Teso Coaches’ park was ignored;

6. 	That PAL Agencies, the authorised revenue collector, has been deprived of revenue to meet the contractual sum;

7. That Soroti Municipality and PAL Agencies petitioned the Commercial Court against Teso Coaches;

8. That there has been a lot of political interference by local politicians and the Ministry of Local Government;

9. That His Excellency the President had directed an investigation with a view to finally resolving the disagreement;

10.That in spite of the petition at the Commercial Court, the Ministry of Local Government has written to the Town Clerk advising the cancellation of the contract with PAL Agencies;

11. That your humble petitioners have hitherto suffered a serious setback on the contract, made loses and have been humiliated.

Now therefore, your humble petitioners pray as hereunder:

1. That Parliament intervenes to investigate and resolve the dispute of the bus/taxi park management in Soroti Municipality.

2. That Parliament puts to a halt the intervention/meddling and intimidation by the Minister of Local Government.

3. That Parliament considers the petition with a view to finally resolving the conflict and allowing the process at the Commercial Court to come to a logical conclusion.

4. 	That Parliament prevails over the Minister of Local Government to stop issuing directives that are meant to stop PAL Agencies from undertaking its contractual obligations.

Your humble petitioners as fully bound will ever pray.” 

It is signed by ten people. Their signatures and contact phone numbers are provided. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you have heard the substance of the petition. We should commit this petition for study and subsequent reporting. Is it the Committee on Local Government or should it be something dealing with transport?

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I am sorry it was an omission on my part. I would like to lay this petition on the Table. Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRANSPORT (Mr Simon Ejua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter of the wrangle in the park area was brought to the attention of the ministry in late December, 2008. Investigations have been going on and right now, the reports are being compiled and I believe with in a week, the report will be ready.

Many of the stakeholders have been involved. This was an appeal by Soroti Municipal Council and I do not know how -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Let us do our work here. Now that we have got that information, the committee to which the petition is sent will liaise with your officers and then expedite the work. (Applause) So it is sent to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government to expeditiously handle, however, you can liaise with the honourable minister to find out what they have.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek your indulgence to allow me lay on the Table these pictures as I promised. They are six pictures.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you are permitted.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you. They are six pictures of a vehicle, Prado, H4DF976 together with Shaban and pictures of human bones and skulls. They are here, including the suspect himself. I beg to lay them on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the gallery we have the Irish Ambassador to Uganda, His Excellency Kevin Kelly. You are welcome. (Applause)

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

4.04
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the motion for a resolution of this august House under Article 179 (1) (b) of the Constitution providing for the creation of new districts. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let the Committee on Public Service and Local Government undertake the study and report back to the House.

Whoever wants to comment, as well as outsiders, should go to the committee. The committee should expeditiously handle and report back to the House.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the list of new districts, there is no trading centre called Lamwo. There is Padibe Trading Centre, which has been elevated to the status of a town council. I think it should be Padibe Town Council. There is no Lamwo trading centre.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, the request we got was to create Lamwo district with its headquarters at Lamwo trading centre. That request is in writing. It is up to the committee to discuss it and investigate. If it is not true, it can be verified. However, this motion is in accordance with the records we got from the people who requested for Lamwo.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Mr Speaker, this is a matter of serious concern. My district, Pader, was created from Kitgum. Before Pader came into existence, we were in Kitgum. I still know, and I want to agree with hon. Okello-Okello, that there is no trading centre called Lamwo. Let this be revised and please, hon. Minister, whoever made this -

THE SPEAKER: If there is no Lamwo trading centre, this is not final. The committee will have to correct this and come out with a report. Whoever is interested in Lamwo should go to the committee and assist the committee to reach a just decision.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I know finally we shall go to the committee but just for the record, I was not excited about this creation of new districts. I just wanted to comment on the proposed Serere-Kasilo District. Given the reasons for the creation as getting services nearer to the people, I beg that when the time finally comes, Serere town should not be the headquarters because it is just 17 miles from Soroti town, and yet from Serere to the furthest point in Kasilo is over 40 miles. We do not want to bring the Terego-Maracha issues here, or the ones of Tororo. I know the minister will visit. I remember hon. Otafiire visited that place and I invite hon. Adolf Mwesige and his colleagues. Hon. Byanyima and hon. Byandala have been to the furthest points in those places. They know how far it can be if we are to support the issue of bringing services nearer to the people. I just want to appeal to the members to consider this seriously.

THE SPEAKER: I think we need not debate now. There is no need for debate. The matter is now going to the committee. Whoever has good ideas should go to the committee and we will also have an opportunity when the report is brought back. I think we should close this issue. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION FOR THE PERIOD 1999-2007

4.09
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Hebert Sabila): Mr Speaker, I am stepping in for my chair, hon. Stephen Tashobya, who is not around to present this report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Uganda Human Rights Commission annual reports 1999-2007. This is a very big report and it covers –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Do you have copies?

MR SABILA: The copies are in the lobby at the entrance. A number of copies were printed and I think they are enough for colleagues who are here. I will be referring to them.

THE SPEAKER: Please, bear with me because I have just received this copy; how do you intend to present it?

MR SABILA: I will not read every page but will give an overview of this report.

THE SPEAKER: This is a 76-page report, how are you going to present it? Do you have an executive summary?

MR SABILA: I do not have an executive summary, but I could present just –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Given the volume of this report and the fact that we just received them as we were getting in, I suggest that we are given time to read through and we continue with the report tomorrow.

MR SABILA: I concede, but it would be important also that I give an overview to allow distinguished guests in the gallery to listen, and so that members are able to see areas that are of serious concern.

Introduction 

Under Article 52(2) of the Constitution, the Uganda Human Rights Commission has to publish periodic reports on its findings and submit annual reports on the state of human rights and freedoms in the country.

The Uganda Human Rights Commission has submitted to Parliament ten annual reports, from 1997 to 2007, on the state of human rights and freedoms in the country and several recommendations have been made. Parliament has not considered any report on human rights since 1999. 

The methodology is indicated and I will not look at that.

In this report, we have the Uganda Human Rights Commission Report of 1999 covering pages 4 to 9; the 2000–2001 report covering pages 9 to 22; the 2001–2002 report covering page 22 to 26 and so on.

On page 74 of this report, we are looking at emerging issues, and this is an area that I feel colleagues would be interested in. If I would be allowed to read this:

Safe Houses and Special Detainees

The Uganda Human Rights Commission informed the committee that they have not received any complaint from anyone who has been detained in a safe house since 2006. The issue of safe houses has continued to appear in the press with the latest complaints by Mr Atugonza and Mr Masembe. 

The committee observed that the existence of safe houses is unconstitutional. The committee therefore recommends that Uganda Human Rights Commission investigates these incidences and reports back to Parliament. All places of detention should be gazetted.

Development of Karamoja

The committee observed that disarmament is going on in Karamoja. However, the other government departments like agriculture, education, health have not come in to start programmes and employ the redundant population. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the government should provide water for Karamoja, which has been causing conflicts with the neighbouring districts. Funds should be availed for development and the Government should consider establishment of boarding schools in Karamoja to retain pupils in schools.

Civic Education

The committee observed that civic education is a continuous process. There is need to train Ugandans from childhood about their civic rights. 

The committee recommends that civic education becomes part of the syllabus from primary schools so that children learn their civic rights from childhood.

Internally Displaced Persons 

The committee observed that there is no access to infrastructure as the people are returning home. There is no adequate security, police, water schools and health centres. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that government updates Parliament on the plans for resettlement and integration of people in the North. The government should implement the PRDP urgently and special measures should be taken to assist persons with disabilities.

Electoral Democracy

The committee has consistently raised the matter of funding the Electoral Commission Roadmap but no action has been taken. 

The committee recommends that government should urgently fund the Electoral Commission Roadmap to enable the Commission organise the elections properly.

Conclusion

The time lag before consideration of the Uganda Human Rights Commission reports by Parliament affected the implementation of the recommendations. Some of the recommendations have been overtaken by time and cannot be implemented, but some recommendations were acted on and others implemented in due course. In future, therefore, Parliament should consider the reports in time so as to make better use of the recommendations.

I beg to report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. I hope it is a consensus that we start the debate in respect of this presentation immediately we come here tomorrow. Can we be here on time? Okay, let us start at 2.30 p.m. and get to debate it immediately.

In lieu of this, I would like to say that we have the Budget Act and if you are conversant with it, you will realise that the Budget Committee should brief us on what it has recommended. I have already sent its recommendations to the President, but they should report. Now, don’t you think we should utilise this time to get the report from the chairperson of the Budget Committee so that tomorrow we can start on the Human Rights Commission Report? You said it will take only 30 minutes.

4.19
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Rose Akol): Mr Speaker, I will take only 30 minutes to present our report. Since it is a report of the Budget Committee of Parliament, there will be no need to debate it because it is our report.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, take your 30 minutes. Do members have copies of your summary?

MR AKOL: The copies are around and I hope they will be distributed to the honourable members soon.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you can go ahead.

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity. Before I start presenting this report, I would like you to permit me to, first and foremost, thank you and thank fellow members and staff of Parliament for the overwhelming support that I received when I lost my mother on 07 May 2009 and subsequently buried her on Mothers’ Day, 10 May 2009. May her soul rest in eternal peace!

I stand here to present a summary of the report of the Budget Committee that was prepared on behalf of Parliament and submitted to you, Mr Speaker, for onward forwarding to His Excellency the President on 15 May 2009, in accordance with the law. The full report has been sent to each Member of Parliament via e-mail. 

I would like to report that the committee made general and specific recommendations, including intra and inter-sectoral resource reallocations, to improve efficiency and effectiveness of the allocation and service delivery. I would like to say that appropriation of the 2009/2010 Budget will be hinged on the principles of budget allocations outlined in this report.

•	The committee notes that all its previous recommendations remain valid and should be attended to. 

•	The committee is concerned about continued use of the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) as the planning framework and urged Government to expedite the formulation of the National Development Plan.

•	It is the committee’s recommendation that the relevant laws be reviewed in light of five years of the proposed National Development Plan from the previous three years’ planning horizon under PEAP, specifically the Budget Act, National Planning Authority Act and the Public Finance and Accountability Act.

•	The committee commended the government for the manner in which they handled the global economic crisis, but urged them not to be complacent because the impact is now increasingly being felt in the economy.

•	The committee urges government to embrace the concept of gender-sensitive budgeting. It was found to be beneficial on equitable resource allocation.

•	The committee urges government to provide all sources of funds for the budget including the indication for new tax measures.

•	As a committee, we have asked government to diversify the routing of transport to the coast to avoid disruptions arising from political and civil instabilities in Kenya. In particular, we have recommended that government urgently takes measures to establish alternative routes through Lake Victoria and Tanzania to the coast.

Sectoral Analysis

In the sectoral analysis, we have identified the issues and made recommendations.

I would like to report that the committee noted a projected increase in the budget for the agricultural sector by 25 percent, from Shs 223.24 billion in the Financial Year 2008/2009 to Shs 278.8 billion in the Financial Year 2009/2010, representing 4.45 percent of the total national budget.

Our observation is that sector priorities should focus on the core mandate and functions of the Ministry of Agriculture under the four thematic programmes: enhancing production and productivity; improving access and sustainability of markets; creating an enabling environment; and institutional development in the sector.

The Issues

•	We observe that the sector lacks an agricultural policy to guide agricultural development. 

•	The other issue we observed relates to food security, lack of adequate water for agricultural production, and poor quality seeds/soil fertility depreciation.

•	We further identified the issues of disease control in the livestock sector being poorly managed and facilitated.

•	It is also our observation that poor implementation of the fisheries project and continued use of illegal fishing gear has led to declining fish stock.

•	Poor and declining output of cotton leading to a fall in exports is one of the issues we identified.

•	There was also the issue of coffee wilt disease and the challenge of planting materials.

•	We observed that duplication of the PMA secretariat versus the policy and planning unit has led to inefficiency in the use of scarce resources.

•	We also identified the non-functioning of the National Agricultural Genetic Resource Centre and Databank.

Recommendations

•	We recommend that the development of an agricultural sector policy and investment plan be included in the National Development Plan.

•	We also recommend that food security be one of the core objectives of the agricultural sector.

•	We recommend that government relocates the budget for water for agricultural production to the Ministry of Agriculture for proper management and have some funds set aside for the activity.

•	It is our recommendation that the Ministry of Agriculture and Uganda National Bureau of Standards play a big role to ensure sustainable agricultural production methods with more funds being provided to all seed and plant multiplication agencies.

•	We recommend that government avails sufficient funds to the sector in a timely manner to procure vaccines and carry out vaccinations promptly.

•	Production of poultry vaccines for Newcastle Disease should be prioritised to take care of the interests of the rural women engaged in poultry farming.

•	We have recommended that fisheries regulations be strictly enforced to halt the declining fish stock and that the fisheries project implementation be reviewed and strengthened.

•	Government should study the problems in the cotton industry to address the problem of perennial domestic price fluctuations and continued fall in cotton yields and earnings.

•	Funding for coffee planting materials be enhanced and farmers be provided with materials at subsidised prices.

•	PMA Secretariat and Policy and Planning Unit functions be streamlined and rationalised. 

•	NAGRIC and Databank be made self-accounting autonomous entities, each with its own vote to improve its functioning.

Tourism, Trade and Industry

The issues noted here were:

•	The Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry was in the process of rolling out the warehouse receipt system but needed five percent government counterpart funding equivalent to Shs 3.9 billion.

•	Synergies between the Commodity Exchange Programme and warehouse receipt systems are not utilised. 

•	Jua Kali park construction has taken long to start despite fund allocation since the financial year 2005/2006. 

•	Non-recruitment or establishment of district tourism officers and offices.

•	No funds allocated for e-tourism web portal development and the development of tourism generally.

•	Non-establishment of the National Accreditation Service Centre to facilitate our export drive.

•	Lack of a national standards policy or body.

•	Accumulation of arrears to the tune of 3.689 billion to international organisations.

•	Irregular inspections of hotels.

•	Incomplete classification and grading of hotels.

•	Lack of a strategic investment plan to guide the ministry’s activities.

The recommendations are as follows:
(i) 	Government should provide the five percent counterpart funding in order to access EU funding for the building, rehabilitation and refurbishment of these storage facilities, namely, the warehouse receipt systems which I mentioned earlier.

(ii) 	Synergies between the commodities exchange programme and the warehouse receipt system should be utilised.

(iii) 	The Shs 3 billion required to kick-start the construction of the Jua Kali parks should be provided since government had already purchased 4.5 acres of land in Makindye for this project.

(iv) 	The positions of district tourism officers should be established and recruitment done and personnel posted to each district.

(v) 	Required funding should be provided for e-tourism web portal development.

(vi) 	A national standards policy/body should be established and a policy be prepared.

(vii)	The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should release the outstanding balance of funds to pay the arrears.

(viii)	Recruitment of tourism officers at district level should be done to enable regular inspections of hotels.

(ix) 	In order to enhance tourism, classification and grading of hotels be completed since we now have the enabling law, the Tourism Act 2008.

(x)	The ministry should expedite the formulation of a strategic investment plan to guide activities of the ministry.

The Social Services Sector

The Health Sector

The issues here were:

•	Resource absorption challenges in all the agencies under the health sector stands as a constraint to effective service delivery.

•	Poor planning, procurement and distribution problems of pharmaceutical supplies leading to stock-outs by the National Medical Stores.

•	Parallel procurement and stockings of drugs especially by non-governmental agencies and donors.

•	A significant proportion of donor project funding remains off-budget and is not reflected in the MTEF hence excessive wastage of resources on administration costs and duplication of functions.

•	Salary enhancement of medical workers in the Financial Year 2008/2009 is not reflected or for that matter, maintained to continue in financial year 2009/2010 budget.

•	Staffing levels in the health sector are at 54 percent only.

•	The Health Service Commission’s plan to recruit more health workers in Financial Year 2009/2010 is not backed by additional increase in the wage bill to cater for the newly recruited staff.

•	The ARV budget and the Quality Chemicals factory production capacity for ARVs and Malaria drugs is far below the Shs 76 billion provided for in the coming budget of 2009/2010.

•	It was also noted that only Shs 38 billion out of the Shs 60 billion which was provided in the Financial Year 2008/2009 was utilised for purchase of ARVs.

•	Prices by Quality Chemicals were higher than the international market prices, which defeats the purpose of local production for cheaper medicines.

•	The Quality Chemicals factory is not yet accredited by WHO neither is it licensed by the National Drug Authority. 

Those were the issues.

Reproductive Health

•	There is a funding gap of Shs 4 billion.
•	Poor performance of Millennium Development Goal No. 5 on maternal mortality due to under budgetary provisions for reproductive health.
•	Cancer, being a serious health problem, is not attended to and its diagnosis and treatment is only centralised in Mulago.
•	No regional screening and treatment facilities established, hence patient congestion of cancer patients at Mulago.
•	Uganda Aids Commission being resident in the President’s Office yet its budget is considered under the health sector.
•	The Ministry of Health does not give comprehensive cost estimates of reproductive health needs in relation to the gravity of reproductive health challenges.
•	Land for government institutions is massively encroached on due to absence of land titles and land not being surveyed and secured. This problem cuts across all sectors.

Recommendations

•	The Ministry of Health should ensure that work plans and procurement plans are prepared by each spending agency within the health sector to guide the release of funds.
•	The credit line available to National Medical Stores should be increased from the current 30 percent of the drugs budget to 70 percent.
•	The National Medical Stores should establish regional centres to cut costs of service delivery.
•	All government health units should prioritise purchase of drugs from National Medical Stores.
•	The sector should harmonise donor assistance to government activities to stop wastage due to parallel procurements.
•	Entire donor project support to the health sector should be indicated in the budget and the MTEF to minimise wastage of resources due to duplication of administrative costs.
•	Shs 18 billion has been relocated within the sector to cater for salary shortfalls to medical workers in 2009/2010. Other relocations done within the sector are reflected in the main report.
•	The Ministry of Health should ensure that the Quality Chemicals factory is accredited by WHO and licensed by the National Drug Authority to guarantee quality of products from the factory.
•	Drastic reforms in cancer diagnosis, treatment and management, for example cancer related treatment and management should be housed under one unit. 
•	Cancer treatment should be rolled out to regional hospitals to reduce congestion at Mulago and improve access to the rural patients. A re-allocation of Shs 6.97 billion has been made to this effect.
•	The Uganda AIDS Commission, as recommended earlier, should be housed or resident in one place together with its budget. 
•	The Minister of Health should prioritise reproductive health in response to the gravity of the problem. 
•	Funds should be provided for demarcation and surveying of all institutional land to secure it.

Gender, Labour and Social Welfare 

The issues include: 

•	The ministry is not vigorously promoting affirmative action for marginalised and vulnerable groups. 
•	There is need to build permanent accommodation for the ministry. 
•	A wage shortfall of Shs 1.35 billion needs to be funded in line with the new approved structures.
•	The Ministry of Education needs to urgently complete the building designs for a national library.
•	Backlog of over 300 labour disputes pending before the Industrial Court. 
•	There is no proper institutional and legal framework in place for community mobilisation and empowerment. 
•	There is food shortage in children remand homes and youth reception institutions due to inadequate funding. 
•	Lack of funding to construct and rehabilitate Koblin Reception Centre in Karamoja.
•	Lack of proper facilitation to structures of Functioning Adult Literacy Programme. 
•	Reduction in funding for National Women, Youth and Disability Councils by Shs 1 billion despite increase in number of districts from 56 to 80. 
•	Occupational health and safety under funded in light of increased industrial and oil exploration activities. 
•	Government’s plan to construct houses for 52 clan leaders of Acholi has no legal provision and is not sustainable if applied equitably across the 80 districts in the whole country. 
•	Lack of supervision of cultural centres as tourist attractions. 
•	Unpaid domestic arrears amounting to Shs 7 billion. 
•	There is no programme for care of elderly persons.

Recommendations

(i) 	The ministry should have affirmative action for vulnerable and marginalised groups and also ensure that they benefit from all government programmes like NAADS and Prosperity for All.

(ii) 	Government should avail the outstanding Shs 20 billion to enable the ministry procure its own accommodation.

(iii) 	The Shs 1.35 billion wage shortfall should be funded to operationalise the new approved structure of the ministry.

(iv)	The ministry should urgently complete the building designs and take up the opportunity offered by UNESCO to build a public library in the land identified at Naguru.

(v)	Shs 200 million should be provided in FY 2009/2010 to fund operational expenses of the Industrial Court, and the Industrial Court should be placed under the Justice Law and Order Sector.

(vi)	Tenets of community mobilisation should be designed and a proper institutional and legal framework be designed and implemented.

(vii)	The Shs 180 million shortfall should be funded to address food shortage in children remand and reception institutions. Koblin Reception Centre in Karamoja should be rehabilitated to ease resettlement and retention of children in Karamoja.

(viii)	The Functional Adult Literacy (FAL) instructors should be facilitated to do their work.
 
(ix)	Substantial funding should be provided to National Council of Women, Youth and Disability Councils to match the increase in number of districts.

(x)	Construction of houses for 52 Acholi clan leaders is not sustainable if equitably applied across the country to all clan leaders, and this burden, the committee feels, cannot be borne by the tax payer.

(xi)	Management audit of all cultural sites and attractions be carried out with a view to making them centres of cultural promotion and revenue generation.

(xii)	Funds should be located to pay outstanding arrears of Shs 7 billion and Commitment Control System be enforced.

Information and Communication Technology (ICT) 

The issues here were: 

•	There is slow growth in the ICT sector. 

•	It is the least funded sector yet supposed to accelerate growth of the entire economy. 

•	There is also under funding of the following priority sectors, which could create employment opportunities for the nations: the National Data Transmission Backbone and e-government infrastructure is under funded by Shs 7.1 billion; Implementation of Business Processing Outsourcing is under funded by Shs 5.75 billion; and the National Information Technology Authority is also under funded by Shs 1.5 billion.

•	It was also noted that there are overlaps in the activities of the ICT ministry and the Uganda Communications Commission hence confusion in the mandates/roles of each. 

•	Lack of a communications tribunal to handle all ICT sector matters.

•	Under capitalisation of Posta Uganda is also one of the issues.

•	There is also under collection of revenue from mobile phone service providers due to lack of technical equipment, and this is the intelligence network equipment.

•	Free licenses offered by the Uganda Government to Hits Telecom were sold to Orange handsomely. GEMTEL was using Uganda’s country code under unclear circumstances without any revenue accruing to Uganda.

The recommendations under the ICT sector are as follows:

(i) 	Government should allocate additional funding to the three key strategic areas as outlined above, that is, the National Data Transmission Backbone, the Business Process Outsourcing and the National Information Technology Authority.

(ii)	Ongoing consultation to harmonise the Electronic Media Act and Communications Act be expedited.

(iii) 	A communications tribunal be established to handle the ICT matters.

(iv) 	The government should provide Posta Uganda with the required Shs 6.2 billion for outstanding projects.

(v) 	The Intelligence Network Equipment should be bought urgently to ease billing by URA and the Uganda Communications Commission.

Foreign Affairs Sector 

Key issues in the sector are: 

•	Funding for the AU Summit/Conference. 
•	Management of properties abroad. 
•	Wellbeing of Foreign Service officers. 
•	New missions abroad. 
•	Ratification of covenants and protocols. 
•	Resident minister in Arusha. 
•	Shortage of funding for the East African Secretariat. 
•	Awareness on East African integration.

Recommendations 

(i) 	The committee recommended rationalisation of the AU Summit budget, given that basic facilities were put in place by CHOGM

(ii) 	Government should put in place an effective mechanism for renovating and managing the properties abroad profitably. There should also be a fund created for acquisition, management and development of properties abroad. 

(iii)	Government should improve welfare of Foreign Service officers.

(iv) 	Government should formulate a foreign policy and strategy to have representation in places where we have positive benefits.

(v)	All protocols and covenants that need to be ratified should be done in accordance with the law.

(vi)	Government should have the Minister of East Africa Affairs resident in Arusha for effectiveness.

(vii)	Government should provide a shortfall of Shs 1.15 billion for topping up contribution of the nation to the East Africa Secretariat.

(viii)	Awareness creation should be undertaken with the involvement of local leaders and members of Parliament who understand the plight of their communities.

Physical Infrastructure 

The key issues:

·	Poor resource absorption and continued poor road network. 

Delay in completion of projects, and these projects are specified here - delay in compensation, changes in designs, lack of supervision capacity, lack of competent contractors and also lack of political and technical supervision in the Ministry of Works and Transport. 

•	Encroachment on road reserves. 
•	Incorporation of the Road Fund Act. 
•	Widespread road accidents. 
•	Second bridge at Jinja. 
•	Lack of traffic management plan for Kampala. 
•	Poor inland water transport infrastructure. 
•	Lack of attention to railway transport. 
•	Poor management by RVR concessionaire. 
•	Lack of provision of office and staff for Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. 
•	Absence of an urban policy. 
•	Management of the Land Fund is in question. 
•	Demarcation of national borders. 
•	Statutory vote for the Uganda Lands Commission 
•	Absence of a land use policy. 

Recommendations

(i) 	To improve resource management through technical and political supervision in the ministry.

(ii) 	Government should demarcate all government land including the reserves.

(iii) 	Government should operationalise the Road Fund.

(iv) 	Government should strengthen traffic control and management including putting in place a traffic management plan.

(v) 	Repair of the old bridge and construction of a new bridge at Jinja should be prioritized.

(vi)	Government should provide for landing sites to improve water transport.

(vii)	Government should revitalise railway passenger transport.

(viii)	Government should move to resolve problems of RVR and consider terminating the contract, which has been poorly managed;

(ix)	Government should consider the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development as important and provide offices and staff facilities for the ministry, otherwise the ministries should be recombined.

(x)	Funds for the preparation of the Urban Policy should be provided.

(xi) 	Government should operationalise the Land Fund by treating land compensation as a priority. 
	The Land Fund should also be legally established to define how it is operated.

(xii)	Government should cooperate with authorities of neighbouring countries to demarcate the national boundaries.

(xiii)	Government should establish a Vote status for the Uganda Land Commission.  

(xiv)	Funds should be provided for preparation for the land policy and land use plan.

Legal and Parliamentary Affairs 

The issues:

•	Shortage of office accommodation for all JLOS departments.
•	Impact of new districts on JLOS departments needs to be considered.
•	Lack of funds for the Uganda Registration Services Bureau.
•	Over centralisation of Administrator-General’s services.
•	Lack of a centre for arbitration and dispute resolution.
•	Computerisation of the Judiciary and the DPP’s office.
•	Widespread shortage of Wage Bill provision. 
•	Shortage of funds for Parliamentary committees’ oversight work.

Recommendations

(i)	Government should provide funds for construction or procurement of office space.

(ii)	Government should consider financial implications to the JLOS of opening new districts and make provisions.

(iii) 	Government should provide for all wage and salary shortfalls in the sector to avoid supplementary requests on wage/salary.

(iv) 	Government should set up regional centres for services of the Administrator-General.

(v)	Government should provide for software in the DPP’s offices and provide funds for computerising the Judiciary in order to improve case management. 

(vi)	Funds should be provided to strengthen Parliamentary committees’ oversight work. The shortfall on the Commission’s budget should be provided for.

Public Service and Local Government

The issues here are:

•	The new districts.
•	Management of the wage component of conditional grants.
•	Sharing of graduated tax compensation.
•	Shortage of the equalisation grants.
•	Delay in preparing a formula for conditional grants.
•	Inadequate salaries for public servants.
•	Outstanding pension arrears of Shs 130.54 billion.
•	Delay in paying severance packages.
•	Lack of funds for skills development for District Service Commissions.
•	Lack of counterpart funding for Development Project of Local Government. 

Recommendations

(i) 	Government should bring the list of new districts to Parliament for consideration prior to budget appropriation, which has been done today.

(ii) 	Government should make wage and salary releases conditional to avoid diversion of salaries.

(iii) 	Government should augment the provision of equalisation grants from Shs 3.5 billion to Shs 6.5 billion.

(iv) 	The committee recommends expediting the review of the formula for conditional grants to districts so that it starts in 2009/2010 budget.

(v) 	Government should raise the pay of public servants by at least 30 percent to match the rising cost of living.

(vi) 	Government should provide for the deserved pension and severance packages of persons who served this government.

(vii) 	Government should provide funds for giving skills, and retooling the District Service Commission.  

(viii) 	Counterpart funds to be provided to local government projects after their approval by Parliament.

Natural Resources 

The committee noted the following issues in this sector: 

•	Shortage of fuel reserves in Jinja.
•	Inadequate supervision or regulation of oil companies.
•	Regulation of the Energy Fund.
•	Delay in the Karuma Project.
•	Delay in the Kaiso Tonya interconnection. 
•	Shortage of funds for the Rural Electrification Programme.
•	Shortage of water budget. 
•	Control of polythene bags and plastic material. 
•	Cost of VAT on water. 
•	Poor monitoring of sector projects. 

Recommendations

(i) 	Government should restore the fuel reservoir in Jinja and construct regional facilities.

(ii) 	Effective regulatory framework of oil companies to curtail oligopolistic exploitation when international prices fall.

(iii) 	An appropriate legal framework for operationalising the Energy Fund in form of the Energy Fund Act is being recommended.
 
(iv) 	Fast tracking of the Karuma Project through restricted bidding as per the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act.

(v) 	Funds for the Kaiso Tonya Project be relocated to other uses as the Kaiso Tonya Project is being deferred.

(vi) 	Reallocation of the Shs 20 billion to boost the Rural Electrification Programme; this has been done.

(vii) 	Construction of many small scale multi-village piped water supply systems in water stressed areas is recommended.

(viii) 	Raise the ban on polythene bags and plastic material to 100 microns.

(ix) 	Exempt VAT on water bills. 

(x) 	Institutionalise the National Project Data System to improve monitoring. 

Presidential Affairs

The issues here were:

•	Gratuity arrears for Internal Security Organisation (ISO) still outstanding.
•	Inadequate facilitation of Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) was noted.
•	Recruitment of the new RDCs for patriotic clubs in schools.
•	Absence of a disaster policy.
•	Lack of evaluation of OPM’s projects, that is, NUREP, NUSAF, KIDDP and Luweero Triangle Plan.
•	Inadequate political supervision of Northern Uganda programmes.

Recommendations 

(i) 	Government to pay arrears of the ISO officers.
(ii) 	Improve facilitation of present RDCs and enhance their schedule to cover work hitherto of new deputies.
(iii) 	Government to prepare a comprehensive disaster policy. 
(iv) 	Strengthen evaluation of NUSAF, NUREP, KIDDP and Luweero Triangle programmes in order to form successor programmes.
(v) 	Establish a fully fledged ministry of Northern Uganda to be headed by a full minister for proper supervision.

Defence and Internal Affairs 

The issues here are: 

•	Operationalisation of the UPDF Fund. 
•	Poor state of accommodation and barracks for combatants.
•	Non-payment of auxiliary forces. 
•	Encroachment on UPDF land. 
•	Wellbeing of combatants. 
•	Strengthening support for AMISOM. 
•	Incorporation of construction unit and mechanised training school. 
•	Poor pay of police officers.
•	Deplorable housing/accommodation status in the Police Force. 
•	Encroachment on Police land and rampant disputes.
•	Duty free shops and attendant administration and tax leakage problems. 
•	Delay in the National ID Project. 
•	Vote status for Immigration Department. 
•	Poor remuneration and conditions of work for Prisons’ warders. 
•	Shortage of food for inmates, especially local administration prisoners.

Recommendations

(i) 	The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (MOFPED) and the Ministry of Defence (MOD) should resolve outstanding matters relating to the UPDF fund and how it operates. 
(ii) 	The Ministry of Defence should revamp the construction unit for construction and refurbishment of barracks countrywide.
(iii) 	Non-payment of auxiliary forces in the country presents a threat to security of communities. Government should therefore carry out further verification and complete the payment. 
(iv) 	Survey of all public land to avoid land disputes.
(v) 	Apply the peace dividends to the wellbeing of combatants. 
(vi) 	Use AMISOM to equip the Singo Peace Training School. 
(vii) 	Improve the Police wage bill by Shs 2 billion hitherto meant for the duty free shop. 
(viii) 	Disallow duty free shops as commercial trading is not business of government, given complex administration obstacles and tax haemorrhage.
(ix) 	Provide vote status for Immigration Department and commence the National ID project soon; and
(x) 	Improve work conditions for workers and warders and provide food for inmates. 

Finance, Planning and Economic Development

The issues were:

•	Inadequate disclosure of the global financial crisis and its impact.
•	Delay in the preparation of the National Development Plan (NDP). 
•	Conflicting data on Gross Domestic Product (GDP) projection and trends on ground. 
•	Lack of enforcement of the Commitment Control System. 
•	Incorporation of the contingency fund. 
•	Lack of disclosure of the consolidated fund balances at the end of each financial year. 
•	Shortage of preparatory funds for the National Census. 
•	Inadequate/outdated poverty measurement indicators. 
•	Lack of office accommodation and shortage of a budget for Uganda Revenue Authority (URA). 
•	Delay in setting up free trade zones.

Recommendations

(i)	 Government should disclose the impact of the financial crisis and advise citizens on how to conduct themselves to avert the crisis. 
(ii) 	Government should expedite the formulation of the National Development Plan. 
(iii)	Government should match growth projections with the exact developments on the ground. 
(iv) 	Enforce the Commitment Control System. 
(v) 	Government is to prepare a Statutory Instrument to operationalise the contingency fund provided for in Section 10 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act to avoid supplementary requests. 
(vi)  	Declare Consolidated Fund balances at the end of every June as opening balance for a new financial year. 
(vii) 	Fast track the preparation of the National Development Plan incorporating all development issues of the nation. 
(viii) 	Provide additional funds, that is, Shs 2 billion for the census preparation. 
(ix) 	Redefine an appropriate poverty measurement parameter away from “a dollar a day”. 
(x) 	Provide for a shortfall in URA funding and allocate the former Coffee Marketing Board (CMB) Bugolobi plant for URA headquarters. 
(xi) 	Finally, start construction of free trade (EP) zones throughout all regions of the country starting with Tororo and Nakasongola.

I invite your attention to the inter-sectoral reallocation attached to this report. After examining the proposed MTEF and Budget framework of the government, the committee recommends the following inter-sectoral reallocations, and compliance will be actively enforced by Parliament. On the left hand side is the reallocations of sectors from which money was removed to address the issues on the right hand side.   

1. 	The Ministry of Water and Environment – Shs 2.5 billion.
2. 	Summit and conferences - Shs 7 billon. 
3. 	Deputy RDCs - Shs 6.9 billion.
4. 	Duty free shops - Shs 4 billion.
5. 	Ministry of Security (Patriotism in schools) – Shs 3 billion.
6. 	Purchase of ARVs – Shs 36 billion.
7. 	Kaiso-Tonya interconnection (since it has been deferred) – Shs 12.7 billion. 
8. 	The Ministry of Works - Shs 20 billion.

This money has been allocated to the following activities:

1. 	The Ministry of Agriculture, water for production – Shs 2.5 billion.
2. 	Education, sports development – Shs 1 billion.
3. 	EAC Secretariat shortfall – Shs 1.15 billion.
4. 	Additional resources to the PRDP – Shs 20 billion.
5. 	Gulu University, Lira Constituent College – Shs 5.27 billion.
6. 	Enhance salary of medical workers – Shs 18 billion.
7. 	Cancer treatment and screening equipment – Shs 6.97 billion.
8. 	Consumption water in stressed areas – Shs 8 billion.
9. 	Enhance salary for Prisons – Shs 3.2 billion.
10. 	Additional equalisation grant – Shs 3 billion.
11. 	Additional salary to Police – Shs 2 billion.
12. 	Women, Youth and Disability councils – Shs 1 billion.
13. 	National Planning Authority for staffing – Shs 0.91 billion.
14. 	Parliamentary Commission wage shortfall – Shs 0.10 billion.
15. 	UBOS census – Shs 2 billion.
16. 	Police accommodation – Shs 15 billion.
17. 	Fifteen (15) additional seed schools – Shs 1.5 billion. 
18. 	Teacher recruitment – Shs 0.5 billion.

Total re-allocations, Shs 92.10 billion

I beg to move that the august House adopts the report of the Budget Committee on the medium term micro-economic plans and programmes for social and economic development for the fiscal years 2009/10 to 2013/14, and the indicative revenue and expenditure framework of government for the Financial Year 2009/10. I beg to lay a copy of this document on the Table. I beg to move.

5.01
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have been following this report and from the Committee of Social Services we have two sectors - health and education but I do not see our recommendations for education in this report. I thought before we could adopt it, we could present the recommendations for the Social Services Committee on Ministry of Education and Sports as well and then we would adopt the report.

THE SPEAKER: The fact is that we have already gone past that because the Budget Act provides for 15th May and they have already sent the report. I think this was just information about what they have done.

MS ALASO: Yes, it is information but I think there is just a small omission in the compilation, yet as a committee we worked on the Ministry of Education, just as we did Ministry of Health. If you look at the drafting of this report, it provides for social services sector and number one is the health sector. We assume that there would be a number two, Ministry for Education, which has been omitted. This information is available in the committee report.

THE SPEAKER: Is there a page missing?

MS AKOL: Thank you for that clarification. I would like to inform the House that in the main report that was submitted to the Rt Hon. Speaker for onward forwarding to the President, page 21 has the detailed submissions on the education sub-sector in the social services sector. If you do not mind, I could give you issues that were raised here. 

Under education, the committee noted the following agencies: Education and Sports, Education Service Commission, National Council for Higher Education, public universities. 

The students’ loan scheme was one of the issues. The committee commended the effort by government to allocate Shs 300 million towards the formulation of the relevant laws and guidelines for operationalisation of the loan scheme.

On USE, it was noted that there was a funding gap of Shs 3.9 billion and the committee recommended that this shortfall be funded.

UNEB examinations also had a Shs 1.5 billion shortage, which we have re-allocated to cater for exams of the UPE and USE candidates.

On patriotism clubs, the committee noted that there were no funds earmarked for patriotism clubs in 5,000 secondary schools. While the committee appreciates the value of inculcating patriotism in students, the implementation modalities seemed lacking. 

The committee recommends that funds amounting to Shs 3.5 billion meant for patriotism clubs, which includes funding for the secretariat, be shifted from security, governance and public administration to the education sector. 

The committee also further recommended that out of the Shs 3.5 billion, Shs 500 million be utilised for developing the legal and institutional framework and curriculum for teaching patriotism in schools. That implies that the balance of Shs 3 billion is reallocated.

Physical education lacked Shs 1.1 billion and they had a benefit of Shs 1 billion from patriotism clubs. 

Seed schools in the remaining 15 sub-counties have been allocated Shs 1.5 billion.

Another issue was recruitment of teachers in primary schools and accessing the pay roll. The committee was concerned about the low absorption and performance of the education budget and the committee recommends that the three ministries, Finance, Education and Public Service, harmonise to sort out the above problem. 

The committee further recommended that the Shs 500 million be allocated for the provision of patriotism clubs to cater for the recruitment of teachers.

The committee noted with concern the meagre allocation provided to the special needs sector. 

The constituent colleges of Gulu University have been allocated Shs 5.27 billion. The committee was also concerned that in spite of the directive by the President and the Cabinet to establish the Lira Constituent College, there was no provision for the activity, which we have addressed by reallocating Shs 5.27 billion.

That is the Education sub-sector. I thank you.

MS ALASO: How about the recommendations?

MS AKOL: The recommendations are in the main report and even in the report which I have just submitted, and the re-allocations have been done.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you have heard. The motion is that House adopts the report of the Budget Committee as outlined. I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and the committee. This brings us to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. Please read the human rights report so that you can effectively participate in the debate. 

(The House rose at 5.07 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 20 May 2009 at 2.30 p.m.)

