PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - THIRD MEETINGTHURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA8688BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024Thursday, 18 May 2023deliver the Budget to this country. Given the fact that it is one of the roles of a Member of Parliament, we have to execute it without fear or favour and we must pass it.  This morning, we are basically here to supply and give this country what belongs to them. I thank you for coming and we will continue with business as usual. Thank you.Hon. Musasizi, I do not see the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget.  8.04MR ALLAN MAYANJA (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke): Madam Speaker, you have said that today is supply day. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for all ministers to be in the House? This is because we might need clarification from them, for example, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, specifically on women councils. The leaders in those women councils, from the local councils to national level, are there illegally. In that line, the gender ministry and the Attorney-General were tasked to come up with a Statutory instrument, but the Attorney-General never came back.As we supply funds to that ministry to be used by the councils, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that they are in the House - including the Attorney-General - to talk about that issue? Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we started the budget process, we had IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 3 9TH SITTING - THIRD MEETINGParliament met at 8.00 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Annet Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning’s sitting. Yesterday, we received, with deep sorrow, the news of the demise of a former Minister of State for Public Service and former Member of Parliament for Padyere County, Hon. Patrick Aloysius Okumu Ringa, who passed on yesterday, 17 May 2023.  We acknowledge the tremendous contribution the deceased made to this country when he was a Member of Parliament and a minister. On my own behalf and on behalf of this House, I convey our sincere condolences and sympathies to the family, the people of Padyere, Nebbi and the entire country. May we rise to observe a moment of silence in his honour?(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you all know why we are here this morning. It is our constitutional obligation to ensure that we 8689THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023ministerial policy statements and that is where the ministers came in. They even went to the sectoral committees. The presumption is that those issues were catered for. That is why money is allocated to them. Can we go to the next item?Honourable members, by the time I leave my house at seven o’clock to come here, I have come for a purpose.MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROV AL OF THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion was moved on 18 April 2023, pursuant to Rule 151 of the Rules of Procedure and under it, reports of sectoral committees on ministerial policy statements were presented.The House duly referred the reports to the Committee on Budget, pursuant to Rule 149(2) of the Rules of Procedure, for harmonisation, reconciliation and consolidation. In furtherance to Rule 149(3) and (4) of the Rules of Procedure, the Committee on Budget is ready to report.I will first call the minister to lay the Certificate of Financial Implications and give his remarks. I am also aware we have a minority report, which will also be laid. Thank you.8.08THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have the final Certificate of Financial Implications for the budget estimates of revenue and expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024, which I would like to lay on the Table. To start the process of supporting the motion, I seek your indulgence to make a brief statement. In line with Article 155(1) of the Constitution and Section 13(3) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, as amended, I have prepared the draft estimates of revenue and expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024 under the theme, “Full Monetisation of the Ugandan Economy Through Commercial Agriculture, Industrialisation, Expanding and Broadening Services, Digital Transformation and Market Access.”The total budget for the next financial year amounts to Shs 52.737 trillion, up from Shs 50.912 trillion, from the time I laid the proposed estimates for Financial Year 2023/2024 in Parliament, as detailed in the Corrigenda.This reflects an increase of Shs 1.821 trillion on account of the following reasons:1. Increase in domestic revenue projections - Shs 328.9 billion.2. Increase in the budget support - Shs 0.7 billion.3. Increase in domestic financing - Shs 668.6 billion.4. Increase in local revenue projections - Shs 4 billion.5. Increase in project support - Shs 819 billion.The budget will be financed as follows:1. Domestic resources - Shs 33.341 trillion;2. Budget support - Shs 2.781 trillion;3. Project support - Shs 8.25 trillion;4. Domestic refinancing amounting to Shs 8.358 trillion;Totalling to a resource envelope of Shs 52.737 trillion.The overall goal of the budget for the next financial year and over the medium-term is to redirect more resources towards wealth creation by facilitating more Ugandans to join 8690BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024the money economy to accelerate the rapid expansion of the economy. We prepared this budget in a highly constrained environment and the only priorities that fit within the available resources will be financed as appropriated by Parliament. The resources available for distribution to the Government entities fulfilled the following criteria:1. Higher multiplier effect and attainment of the NDP III targets; 2. The recent presidential directives;3. Increase in Government revenue;4. Economic recovery and increasing household income;5. Operationalisation of the Parish Development Model;6. Improvement of the Government’s efficiency;The budget priorities for Financial Year 2023/2024 include the following:1. Peace and security under the security and governance programme;2. Roads: Maintenance of both tarmac and murram roads under integrated transport infrastructure services programme;3. Electricity: Construction of power substations and transmission lines under sustainable energy development programme;4. Railways: Rehabilitation of the Metre-Gauge Railway and the construction of the Standard Gauge Railway. This will connect with the improvements in the water transport and aviation industry. All of these will be undertaken under integrated transport infrastructure services programme.5. Irrigation, particularly the small-scale solar-powered irrigation under the agro-industrialisation;6. Industrial parks development: Building of infrastructure and connecting them to electricity and other infrastructure under the manufacturing programme;7. Support science-based research and development; 8. Funding the Parish Development Model and Emyooga under the Private Sector Development Programme; 9. Oil and gas development; 10. Enhancing support to Uganda Development Bank and Uganda Development Corporation;11. Support to Information and Communication Technology and tourism development.  The economic growth this financial year is projected at 5.5 per cent - from 4.7 per cent in Financial Year 2021/2022, in the spirit of the impact of external shocks on the economy and the fiscal and monetary policy measures taken to contain inflation. Financial Year 2023/2024 The economic growth is projected to reach six per cent and an average of seven per cent, over the medium-term on account of increased oil and gas activities, production from the implementation of the Parish Development Model, regional trade and the positive impact of the continued recovery in regional and global economies. I wish to assure this august House that the economy is on a progressive trajectory to achieve an average of at least seven per cent in the period 2022/2023 to 2024/2025. Therefore, by the end of Financial Year 2023/2024, Uganda’s GDP is projected to grow up to Shs 206.54 trillion, equivalent to $54.99 billion, translating to $154.27 billion in purchasing power parity terms. This, in turn, is projected to grow our GDP per capita to $1,182 up from $1,093 in Financial Year 2022/2023. [Mr Musasizi]8691THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023I have prepared a revised certificate which I laid. Once again, I beg to move that the House resolves itself into the Committee of Supply to consider and approve the Budget Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024, totalling to Shs 31.228 trillion, of which, Shs 16.842 trillion is recurrent and Shs 14.386 is development. THE SPEAKER:  As I said, this motion was already moved. Can we hear from the chairperson of the Committee on Budget and then the Shadow Minister of Finance? Please, give us a summary.MR MPUUGA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the fact that some of us, who are aging have come very early. However, the absence of the substantive Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is very precarious on such a day. The Budget Framework Paper and all documents do not bear the signature of Hon. Musasizi. Given the history of denials of commitment in this House, may we know, especially in the absence of the Prime Minister, why the senior minister, on such a day when his most important delivery is being considered, is absent? I do not know whether the Prime Minister is on the run.Madam Speaker, the absence of the Prime Minister and the Government Chief Whip is very critical. Is the Government fully constituted? Is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, whose document we are considering, fine? I have not seen the signature of Hon. Musasizi in any of the documents we are considering. May we get a clarification?THE SPEAKER:  Government Chief Whip, can we have Hon. Kasaija here? Much as we will go ahead with the report, we want Hon. Kasaija, the Attorney-General and the Prime Minister here; We want them in the House. We do not want this aspect where we pass the budget and they become the first people to deny it – and they like reporting.8.20THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati):  Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the Leader of the Opposition and the House that I am the acting Government Chief Whip now and I am going to –THE SPEAKER:  I got a letter assigning Hon. Bahati to stand in for the Government Chief Whip. As the Government Chief Whip, I want you to whip the three ministers that I have asked for to be in the House – I have asked for the Prime Minister, the Attorney-General and Hon. Kasaija. Committee chairperson, please, go ahead. You need to upload all these reports. Yes, Hon. Jonathan?MR ODUR:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. This report has just been uploaded – about 10 minutes ago – and your guidance was that the committee chairperson provides a summary. Madam Speaker, we are dealing with - and we are going to supply figures. Given that we have not had adequate time to look at them, would it not be procedurally right that the committee chairperson reads his entire report, including mentioning those figures, so that we can then process them? Otherwise, it would defeat the purpose of the rules provided under Rule 204 of the Rules of Procedure.Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Another procedure?MR SSEMUJJU:  Madam Speaker -THE SPEAKER:  Just for correction, we uploaded this report last night, immediately after the committee had finished their work. I know my little son, Hon. Jonathan, has just seen it. However, to allay your fears, it will be read.MR SSEMUJJU:  Madam Speaker, the three ministers that Hon. Bahati has gone to call – 8692BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024Hon. Nabbanja, Hon. Matia Kasaija and the Government Chief Whip – are all suspects. (Laughter)  Maybe they have been summoned by the Court or police. (Laughter)  That is why some time back, I said the Government would need to reconstitute itself. You are looking for people that the police are also looking for. (Laughter)   I fear that if we condition the reading of the budget on the presence of the three, we may need to ask the police and Court to stop. Otherwise, we are looking for people who are being hunted.THE SPEAKER:  There is information.MR BASALIRWA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to provide to my brother, Hon. Ssemujju, is that, usually, when people of that calibre are summoned, the Speaker is notified. So, the Speaker could be privy to the information that they have been summoned, yet, at the same time, she is summoning them here in which case there, would be a dilemma. I thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I think we need to continue with the report. However, I also want you to be mindful that COVID-19 is back. I can say this without mentioning names: Some Cabinet members may not be able to attend because they tested and found out that they are positive. The rest will come but there are some whom I have told not to appear here because I do not want my Members to be infected. I want Hon. Ssemujju to be okay. (Laughter)  Honourable committee chairperson?8.25THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Patrick Opolot-Isiagi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In accordance with Article 155 of the Constitution, the Public Finance Management Act and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Committee on Budget is mandated to examine, discuss and review policies, programmes and annual budget estimates, including plans -THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Odur, listen to the report.MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI:  … and, where necessary, make appropriate recommendations to Parliament. We are supposed to consider sectoral committees’ reports on the budget estimates referred to us by Parliament for reconciliation, harmonisation and consolidation. Madam Speaker, on 30 March 2023, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development laid before Parliament a proposed annual budget estimate for Financial Year 2023/2024. It was followed by Corrigenda on the same estimates on 10 May 2023 and an addendum to the Corrigenda was also laid and referred to the committee on 17 May 2023. Parliament referred all these documents to the Committee on Budget. The Committee on Budget has, therefore, examined, discussed and reviewed the proposed policies, plans, programmes and annual estimates of the Government for the coming financial year. I now wish to report what the committee has prepared. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the committee.THE SPEAKER:  Please, lay it.MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI:  I also beg to lay on Table minutes of the meetings of the committee as well as copies of the Corrigenda and the addendum. Madam Speaker, the report is structured in two parts: Part A and Part B. Part A is the macro aspects of the budget and Part B is the reconciliation, harmonisation and consolidation of the proposed adjustments to the annual estimates as well as the budget estimates recommended for supply. Part A also has the PFMA compliance as well as economic and budget performance for the past financial year and the estimates for the next financial year.[Mr Ssemujju]8693THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023MethodologyAs usual, the methodology involved interactions with a number of stakeholders relevant to the process. The committee interacted with the Equal Opportunities Commission, Presidential Advisory Committee on Export and Industrial Development, chairpersons of sectoral committees of Parliament and the relevant ministries. The committee also made reference to a number of documents as laid out on page 4 – NDP III, budget framework paper, annual estimates – it is a long list and runs up to number 23.In the interest of time, honourable colleagues can read the list of the relevant documents.   Madam Speaker, I now go to part A. When we receive this, we have to carry out a number of tests, which are compliant with the way the estimates have been prepared. The first compliance test is the submission requirements. Section 33 of the Public Finance Management Act has a number of parameters that we must comply with when processing this. Therefore, most of this compliance is by the Minister of Finance or the Government. The committee has assessed these compliance requirements - like the date of submission and the date of laying the budget estimates. The committee perused and found that a number of compliance requirements under Article 13 were complied with and found out that the Government, as per these submission requirements, had complied highly. Another compliance test we had to carry out is the consistency of the estimates to the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. Madam Speaker, on 27 January 2022, Parliament approved the second Charter of Fiscal Responsibility - which is a contract between the Government and the people of Uganda. The charter, therefore, has to be met in full. The first objective of a charter is the control and the target of public debt. We would like to report that the public debt, in nominal terms, is reduced to below 50 per cent of the GDP by Financial Year 2025/2026 as shown in the table; that is the target. Therefore, the Government is supposed to move towards achieving that by 2025/2026; the measure is flowing as per Part B. The indications, as per the stringent measures put in place by the Government, are that the debt shall be moving strategically until we achieve that, which is an ideal position. Fiscal balance is indicated as objective two. And objective three is about the petroleum fund transfers to the budget to contribute to our petroleum revenue investment reserve. The committee also analysed the consistency, as you see in Table 2, and found out that the annual budget estimates are not consistent with the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility in regards to the ratio of total domestic debt interest payments to total revenues, excluding grants that are projected at 16.8 per cent in 2023/2024, which is against the charter. The major reason for the deviation from the Charter is highlighted above as the rising cost of debt payments arising from global economic shocks like COVID-19, and the Ukraine-Russia war. The committee recommends that over the medium-term, the Government fully implements the domestic revenue mobilisation strategy for us to generate our own resources to finance the budget and not rely on borrowing at a very high interest rate, which is going to cost and prevent us from achieving the objective. We tested the consistency of the estimates in the Budget Framework Paper. You are aware that the Budget Framework Paper was discussed and processed by this House. The Government, therefore, was mandated to prepare the estimates in relation to and in compliance with the consistency to the Budget Framework Paper. On scrutiny, the committee found out that the resource envelope in the estimate is consistent with the national Budget Framework Paper. In regards to the financial privatisation, the committee found that -8694BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024THE SPEAKER:  Please speak to the microphone. MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I was saying, there is consistency with the National Budget Framework Paper. We also tested the recommendations that have been considered - how far the recommendations to the NBFP that were adopted by this Floor were attended to in the budget estimates. We, therefore, captured the recommendations from Table 5, starting from V ote 013 - it runs straight up to page 20. Those are the recommendations this House made and were captured, aware that the recommendations talked about a total of about Shs 70 trillion. Therefore, the Government had to incorporate some of those that were critical - priorities upon priorities. We also tested the consistency of the estimates to the National Development Plan III. The committee found out that there were a lot of departures of the estimates from the NDP III. The scrutiny of it found that NDP III seems to be very unrealistic. And as we speak now, the National Planning Authority is cutting out a review of the NDP III at least to inform us of the realistic targets. Some targets seem to be very ambiguous. We also tested the responsiveness of the estimates to gender and equity as required by the laws and found that most of the entities fully complied. The certificate laid had the measure whereby some scored below average. While 22 entities scored below average, the rest performed well.Madam Speaker, we also looked at the economic and budget performance for the current Financial Year 2022/2023. The GDP growth for the year is projected at 5.3 per cent, compared to 4.7 per cent in the last financial year. So, that is good news coming; it shows that there is a pickup in the economy and it is a measure of good resilience. The economic outlook in the medium-term remains positive with the economy projected, in the coming year, to be at above six per cent. This outlook is premised on the recovery in the aggregate demand due to an expected decline in inflation, the continued implementation of the Parish Development Model, the increased oil and gas sector activities, growth in regional and global economies and investment in productive sectors like agricultural mechanisation and value addition, tourism and manufacturing, to name a few. Therefore, by the end of Financial Year 2023/2024, Uganda’s GDP is projected to grow up to Shs 206.54 trillion. This in turn is projected to grow our GDP per capita, up from $1093 to $1282. Unemployment and inequalityMadam Speaker, we tested and found out that there is still trouble, as far as income inequality is concerned. Much as the economy is growing, money seems to be in the hands of a few and it is what the Government is trying to fight and we expect models like the Parish Development Model. Honourable colleagues, I would like to clear your doubts; the Parish Development Model is a baby. It has just started this financial year and has to go through a learning curve but the expected outcomes are very positive. In the medium-term, this is one of the models which are going to save us by reducing the gap between the low incomes and the high incomes.InflationThe Financial Year 2022/2023 has been characterised by inflationary pressures occasioned by high international oil prices and higher food crop and manufactured food prices, as well as education and transport services. It should be noted that during the first half of this financial year, headline inflation rose significantly to 9.7 per cent from an average of 4.6 per cent during the same period last financial year. 8695THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023Food crop inflation averaged to 22.3 per cent during the period of July to December 2022, up from 6.6 per cent recorded during the same period last financial year. Food crop inflation was driven majorly by the prolonged drought, which we suffered in the country between April and August 2022. However, on the other hand, core inflation, which is the policy inflation, rose to 8 per cent during the first half up from 4 per cent recorded in the same period a year ago. This is 3 percentage points above the NDP III policy target of 5 per cent. There is good news; the Government’s effort to implement both contractionery fiscal and monetary policy mix have complemented each other to tame the high inflation. So, things are getting better. Going forward with the now reduced inter -national fuel prices, decline in transportation costs, therefore, lower production costs follow and improved weather conditions - rain is very consistent these days. These have supported in -flation, whereby the average headline inflation for 2023 projected at 8.3 per cent would be de -clining to 7.2 per cent by the end of the year.  By next year, it will have declined to around 6.7 per cent.Exchange rateThe shilling has remained relatively stable during the first three quarters of Financial Year 2022/2023. This is despite a number of domestic and external shocks that have characterised the economy through 2022 to 2023, arising from COVID-19 and the Russia-Ukraine conflict. The shilling has been very resilient.By the end of the first half in December 2022, the shilling had strengthened by 1.5 percentage points. That is also good news. The shilling is now projected to trade at Shs 3,754.9 per $1 by end of June 2023. It is projected to average at Shs 3,754.2 during Financial Year 2023/2024. Interest ratesIn order to curb the inflation rate, Bank of Uganda tightened monetary conditions by raising the Central Bank rate from 7.5 per cent in June to 10 per cent to date. As a result, commercial bank lending rates have remained high, averaging 18 per cent between July 2022 and February 2023. Therefore, commercial bank lending rates also increased from 15.53 per cent recorded in July to an average of 18.7 per cent by end of February. That has been a deterrent to the private sector.External sector developmentUganda registered the highest trade surplus in the East African Community region following a significant rise in the exports in the region - that is also good news. The trade surplus amounted to $725.4 million in the period July to December 2022, up from $195.1 million recorded during the same period the previous year. This was attributed to easing of non-tariff barriers with Kenya, the full reopening of the Uganda-Rwanda border and admission of the Democratic Republic of Congo to the EAC. Despite these integration benefits, Uganda is still losing a lot of foreign exchange as a result of high imports. We still import until we develop our own manufacturing sector, where we shall substitute the imports. Despite the impressive performance of trade within the EAC in the first half of the year, Uganda’s trade with the rest of the world resulted in a deficit amount of $1,861.1 million. This is higher than the deficit of $1,528.3 million recorded in the same period last financial year. It means we are importing too much - these suits and the rest. That is worrying; so we need to increase our manufacturing and continue marketing our exports and value addition.Madam Speaker, one of these factors is for us to improve on our standards. Uganda National Bureau of Standards needs to be revamped and made very active in supporting the improvement of the quality of our goods. 8696BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024Uganda’s public debt situationUganda’s public debt stock increased from Shs 78,798.1 billion – the mathematics takes it to a trillion - recorded in Financial Year 2021/2022 to Shs 80,774.8 billion in Financial Year 2022/2023. That is a high rise in debt. This translates into an increase of 2.5 per cent points. Out of this, Shs 47,764.5 billion - equivalent to $12.85 billion - is external debt while Shs 33,014.6 billion is domestic debt. Whereas currently Uganda’s external debt is largely concessional –THE SPEAKER:  The external debt is at 59.1 per cent and the domestic one is at 40.9 per cent.MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The weight of the external debt is more but the domestic one is also quite high. Whereas currently, Uganda’s external debt is largely concessional - that is a cheaper debt as of now; about 75 per cent - the share of non-concessional debt is on the rise. That means the lenders are tightening their lending policies and review the terms. If we are to borrow now, we shall most likely borrow at a very high interest rate and that will raise our interest. Therefore, as a country, we should be very cautious and maintain a favourable debt interest ratio to tax. By the end of December 2022, the share of non-concessional debt had increased from 21.9 per cent - recorded in June 2022 - to 25 per cent. The rise in the share is mostly attributed to the growth in the interest rates in the London Interbank Offered Rate(LIBOR) and Euro Interbank Offered Rate (EURIBOR) resulting into loans that were previously semi-concessional to becoming non-concessional. There is bad news here.Public debt servicePublic debt service involves financial operations related to repayment of principal, interest, commissions and commitment fees, service charges, and other fees interest payments where applicable. Debt service obligations approved for Financial Year 2022/2023 amounted to Shs 15,005.5 billion. By the end of the first half in December, a total of Shs 6,596.7 billion had been spent, translating to 44 per cent.Debt sustainabilityDebt sustainability is about measuring how stressed we are. The committee observed that the debt sustainability analysis for Financial Year 2021/2022 revealed that Uganda’s overall risk of debt distress has remained moderate although with limited fiscal space for absorption of any extreme shock occurrences. We must pray seriously that bad things and international shocks do not happen. Consequently, whereas Uganda’s public debt is still sustainable in the medium-term, if not well checked, in the long-term, it will become a very heavy burden. The committee, therefore, recommends the following as far as that threat is concerned: The Government should be committed to fiscal discipline to minimise deviations from the projected path. To this end, the Government should ensure that over the medium-term, borrowing is limited to critical projects while minimising acquisition of debt on non-concessional terms. Our negotiators must step up so we borrow only on concessional - and if we are to invest, we must invest where there is productivity and ensure value addition so that we earn our own money. We should not borrow and invest anyhow. We should be very cautious while investing.Half year revenue performanceMadam Speaker, cumulative collections for the half year of Financial Year 2022/2023 amounted to Shs 11,670.03 billion against a projection of Shs 11,764.83 billion, registering a deficit of Shs 94.8 billion.[Mr Opolot-Isiagi]8697THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023Income taxesThis includes taxes on employment income, business income, property income. Revenue collections for the period under review amounted to Shs 3,989.33 billion against a projection of Shs 3,904.59 billion, registering a surplus of Shs 84.74 billion. This is good news.Major surpluses were registered on PAYE, casino tax - Our people who go to casino are very good, rental tax - those houses. However, on rental tax, Uganda Revenue Authority should step up so that all property taxes are collected. There is also tax on bank interest with huge amounts of money. Corporation tax also registered a good amount of Shs 59.08 billion and treasury bills registered Shs 39.31 billion. The good performance is mainly attributed to the following:Shs 225.85 billion surplus on PAYE was on account of payment of bonuses and higher salaries in the private sector; rebound of private sector activities after a COVID-19 pandemic registered a surplus of Shs 248.35 billion. This led to an increase in the private sector contribution from the previous period by 27.9 per cent. We should celebrate that our private sector is picking up.Shs 59.08 billion shortfall on corporate income tax is attributed to lower level of profitability in transport, storage, communication activities as a result of various economic shocks, including high inflation and depressed demand that have negatively affected enterprises. We are aware some of these shocks raised the cost of production and demand had fallen due to pockets and interest rates had gone high. So, the companies were just registering losses. The committee observed that some of these are effects of Government not paying their suppliers. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government must fast-track payment of arrears in order not to cripple our private sector.International trade taxesDuring the first half of Financial Year 2022/2023, international trade tax collections amounted to Shs 4,444.84 billion, registering a deficit of Shs 114.04 billion against a projection of Shs 4,558.88 billion. On a year-on-year basis, international revenue collections registered a growth of 9.18 per cent, an equivalent of Shs 373.8 billion compared to the previous period.Major deficits were registered in Value Added Tax(V AT) on imported salt, imported iron and steel, imported vehicles and spare parts, petroleum duty on diesel, excise duty on un-denatured ethyl alcohol, withholding tax on vehicles and spare parts, infrastructure levy, and export levy on fish maws. While major surpluses were registered under import duty and surcharge on imports. This performance is on account of the following: Colleagues, you will read that part. In the interest of time, I would like to go straight to the budget for the coming financial year, which is on page 44. To avoid repetition, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented part of this report and I think colleagues noted that. The theme and priorities for the coming year was presented here by the minister; so I will not repeat. Madam Speaker, I can only confirm that the total resource envelope is Shs 52.74 trillion from Shs 48.13 trillion. The budget has grown but this growth is not going to raise the discretionary expenditure; most of the monies in this envelope are fixed because of the restrictions the Government has put in place. Madam Speaker, some of these monies, for example, budget support, grants and loans, are fixed for particular projects. Others such as domestic debt refinancing roll over – the rollover automatically offsets itself in expenditure; so, you cannot spend it in other activities. We have also realised that one of the things we have to do is to recapitalise Bank of Uganda – and that is one of the issues reducing the discretionary expenditure. Bank of Uganda has to be recapitalised by Shs 217.3 billion. 8698BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024Recapitalisation of the Bank of Uganda has been found to be very important because it is impaired and we must put it back to its normal efficiency. The impairment means the level at which damage is starting to occur in the bank, yet this is the bank which helps us in the management of the economic trends – controlling inflation, controlling debt and so on. The Bank of Uganda reimbursement must be fast-tracked. The committee learnt that the Government has a debt with the Bank of Uganda, amounting to about Shs 3 trillion. It was agreed that this debt can lead to the bank getting “lame and disabled”. So, this payment must be fast-tracked within these two financial years. The Government –THE SPEAKER:  What procedural matter do you have? MS ASAMO:  Madam Speaker, I am sorry that I am raising a point of order against my own brother. How can he call the bank “lame and disabled”? I think that makes us useless. He should use a better word.THE SPEAKER:  He did not mean a person; he meant the bank. MS ASAMO: No, Madam Speaker. When you use these words, you have to be very careful. Chinua Achebe said that “ An old woman is always uneasy when dry bones are mentioned in a proverb .” So, I think the committee chairperson should withdraw that statement. THE SPEAKER:  Committee chairperson, maybe you should use a better word.MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI: I apologise to my daughter. Let us use the word “impaired”. (Laughter)  THE SPEAKER:  Committee chairperson, can we move on?MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI: Madam Speaker,  the Government has agreed to clear Bank of Uganda’s debt within these two financial years; paying Shs 1.25 trillion each financial year and also ensuring that more debt is not created. As we pay, the residue has to be tracked seriously. Therefore, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, together with the Committee on Budget, will be monitoring these movements seriously. Madam Speaker, the interests on debts have also grown. There is also the issue of domestic refinancing. Those are the issues which have reduced discretionary expenditure as compared to last financial year; last financial year was better than this financial year in terms of discretionary expenditure because of some of those fixed commitments.The committee also found that there is something missing in terms of State-owned enterprises and public corporations fulfilling the requirement of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 where their budgets and accounts must be presented to Parliament. So, in part one, we have about 31 State-owned enterprises that submitted and that includes Uganda Civil Aviation Authority. The next part has those ones that have not submitted – and they always avoid it.The committee recommends that all State-owned enterprises, corporations and commissions must submit their budgets to the House to be scrutinised – (Interruption)MR SSEMUJJU:  Madam Speaker, Rule 83(b) of the Rules of Procedure states that: “A member shall not cross the Floor of the House or move around unnecessarily.”  I do not know what is troubling Hon. Musasizi. He brought his budget and it is being processed and he is walking around as if he is grazing. (Laughter)Is Hon. Musasizi proceeding well by refusing to sit and listen to the report of his own budget and unnecessarily moving here and there?THE SPEAKER:  First of all, he knows the content of his budget. Secondly, I gave him permission to move around. (Laughter)[Mr Opolot-Isiagi]8699THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI: Madam Speaker,  I discussed domestic arrears.  THE SPEAKER:  Actually, it is free sitting. Hon. Musasizi can even sit next to the LOP; there is no problem.MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI: Madam Speaker,  I will  go to part B of the report, that is, the reconciliation and harmonisation of the budget estimates for Financial Year 2023/2024. This part deals with the reconciliation of the recommendations that were submitted to the committee by the House, arising out of recommendations by the sector committees. We were not able to capture all, but the amount was about Shs 17 trillion. We looked at priorities upon priorities and captured those priorities that the committee would like to recommend the House to approve because if the priorities are not approved, it can lead to some consequences, including the loss of growth in the economy. Madam Speaker, that is captured from page 54 up to page 85. Honourable colleagues can read them. Other committee’s observationsOn scrutiny of the Corrigenda, it was observed that Shs 70 billion had been provided to support private entities in vaccines and pharmaceutical manufacturing under V ote 167: Science, Technology and Innovation. The Corrigenda had come requiring the purpose of this money to be changed for only pharmaceutical manufacturing. The committee recommends that the purpose of this money should remain the same so that both vaccines and pharmaceuticals, innovations and all manufacturing can take place. So, the committee recommends no amendment to that.On page 86, those are figures recommended for supply. Arising from all of the adjustments, the following figures in the table below are recommended for supply and appropriation as expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024. The table is a consolidation of schedules A, B, and C and it has annexures. The expenditure category is the heading and the amounts are in there. Table A shows the Central Government’s recurrent expenditure, referral hospitals, foreign missions and local governments, amounting -THE SPEAKER:  Chairperson of the committee, can you give us the figures for central government, referrals; that summary?MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI:  Here, the central government V ote has Shs 12,205,794,287,000. Referral Hospitals have Shs 282,242,229,000.Foreign missions have Shs 189,698,845,000. Local governments have Shs 4,154,732,317,000, giving a total recurrent budget expenditure for all the V otes in here as Shs 16,832,467,678,000. Development expenditure Madam Speaker, here the central government has Shs 13,223,122,671,000.For referral Hospitals, the development expenditure will be Shs 25,060, 471,000.Foreign Missions’ development expenditure is Shs 58,388,000,000.Local governments have Shs 1,124,667,065,000, giving a total development expenditure of Shs 14,431,238,208,000. This gives a grand total of Shs 31,263,705,886,000. Part C is Statutory Expenditure, and these include expenditures such as interest on a debt, arrears, payments for bonds, amortisation when we are paying our debt. These total to Shs 21,473,079,372,000. The grand total is Shs 52,736,785,258,000. Madam Speaker, the schedules are attached to the following pages from 87, giving details of the budget for each V ote, starting with the recurrent budget - it is bundled as; Missions, referral hospitals, Central Government and local governments. All the details run up to page 106.8700BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024THE SPEAKER:  Chairperson of the committee, on the Statutory expenditure, that is on the statutory V otes, which is on part C, not on interests - Statutory V otes include V otes 001,007,130, 101,102,103,104,105,106,107,108, 131, 133, 144 and 145.MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. That is exactly the Statutory Expenditure, which means that once supplied, it has to be handled as it is.Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Parliament approves and adopts the report with amendments so we can go to supply. I also received a notification and the report of the minority, which forms part of our committee report. The minority report is signed by Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, MP for Butambala County, and the Shadow Minister for Finance; Hon. Namugga Gorreth, MP for Mawogola South constituency; Hon. Ssemujju Ibrahim Nganda, MP for Kira Municipality; and Hon. Anna Adeke, the Woman representative for Soroti City. (Interjection) I am reading what the minority has indicated - “Woman Representative for Soroti City.” And she signed it.THE SPEAKER:  Chairperson of the committee, thank you for your report. We will listen to the minority report and that is in accordance with Rule 205 of the Rules of Procedure. We have heard the report from the chairperson of the Committee on Budget. We can also now hear from – Yes, Hon. Francis?MR MWIJUKYE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will seek your guidance because I am lost. I have patiently followed the chairperson’s presentation and the one by the Minister. The rosy pictures and good news of progress and growth that were painted are not reflected in the villages I come from, in my pocket and amongst Ugandans. I wonder whether I or Ugandans have a problem or it is the minister or chairperson that have a problem. Are we living in the same country or are we in different countries? I do not see the 6 per cent progress. I am worried and lost; I need your guidance.MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My colleague, it is true that we have made progress in some areas but in other areas, things are not going well. You recall that I did indicate that we have issues. As much as there is growth, there is income inequality in this country. As you grow in GDP, the money is in the hands of a few and the majority do not have it. I did mention that, Madam Speaker. It is one of the issues we said must be addressed. If well handled, the intention of the Parish Development Model is one of the methods which is going to curb that gap –  (Interjections) - Yes, the Parish Development Model is just starting. (Applause)If you look at the growth in the manufacturing sector, those are the areas which are going to bring in more money. Of course, the fight against corruption is what we must intensify, so that funds are invested and they reach the last person. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. As I said before, these reports are informative. Let us listen to the minority report too.MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, this report is very important. The chairperson has not been able to read it word for word. Isn’t it procedurally correct that you exercise your power, under the rules, to direct the Hansard to capture the entire report?THE SPEAKER: It is good you arrived “earlier” than me and you are repeating exactly what I said before. That is the benefit of coming very early. (Laughter)9.21MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. Let me start with a disclaimer for purposes of principle and clarity; nothing will be in this budget that is personal. I made it clear to the Committee on Budget.  8701THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023Madam Speaker –THE SPEAKER: I think the disclaimer is for everybody - all the Members of Parliament. There is nothing personal against any of the Members of Parliament. If anything is going to Amuria, it is not for Hon. Amero but for the locals.MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I take it at that but as a question of principle, I needed to be very clear. Madam Speaker, these are our areas of dissent:1. Non-compliance;2. The budget is inconsistent with the borrowing plan for the next financial year;3. Falsification of the resource envelope;4. Revenue impropriety;5. Specific issues on budget allocations;6. Committee conclusions on projects exiting the budget investment plan and non-complying retooling projects in the next financial year;7. Failure to provide for interns, senior medical officers’ allowances and funding for the Uganda Red Cross Society; 8. Bloated budget for the presidency at the expense of other priority sectors; and9. Suspicious budget allocations and re-allocations.Non-complianceParliament referred the budget estimates to the Committee on Budget for scrutiny. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented their budget proposals, contrary to programme-based budgeting, as clearly envisaged in the NDP III. They only mention programme-based budgeting. Budget allocation stops only on one page and we then go back to sector allocations. So, the whole inference to budget programming is just a theory. We recommend that expenditures of the Budget Framework Paper are aligned and harmonised with programme-based budgeting. Non-compliant public corporations and State EnterprisesThe committee observed that out of the 70 public corporations and state enterprises, only 23 submitted their budgets - that is revenue and expenditure to Parliament. Here below, I have 47 corporations and enterprises that did not submit their budgets and expenditure proposals to Parliament. We disagree with the committee’s observation that since the inception of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, Parliament has never received the entire budgets of the public corporations and state enterprises, as required by the law. We recommend that no funds should be appropriated for all corporations and state enterprises that did not submit their budgets because it has been going on every other year. So, for all these 47 that have not submitted their budgets to Parliament, we differ with the committee’s report. It is just the way it has been; business as usual. This year, we do not provide.Off-budget supportIt is projected that off-budget support will decline from US $351 in Financial Year 2022/2023 to US $295 million in the coming financial year. It should be observed that this decline is mainly caused by failure to account for donor money, misappropriation, shrinking civic space, corruption, abductions, arrests of citizens without trial, brutal killings and general decline of the rule of law. As a result, the country has lost the trust and confidence of our development partners, to the detriment of our citizens. 8702BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024Our recommendation is that the Government should address concerns related to human rights abuse, democracy, governance and the rule of law. It is our considered view that the address of these issues should not be mainly anchored on attracting off-budget support, but also on enabling citizens to enjoy their inherent fundamental human rights and liberties. The budget is inconsistent with the borrowing plan. Madam Speaker, this is where we start to miss the point. The budget for the next financial year will be financed, as was elaborated, by the majority report. 1. Domestic revenue - Shs 29.34 trillion;2. Budget support - Shs 2.78 trillion;3. Domestic financing (borrowing) - Shs 2.71 trillion; 4. Domestic debt refinancing – Shs 8.36 trillion;5. Project support (external financing) - Shs 7.44 trillion;6. Local government revenue – Shs 283.1 billion. This budget is inconsistent with the Medium-Term Debt Management Strategy for Financial Year 2023/2024, as laid out in the table below. The minister accompanied this budget with a debt management strategy. This is what it says and I will take note: “The total debt for external debt was projected to be Shs 8.3 trillion. For domestic, it was projected to be Shs 10 billion. The details are on that table.These are our concerns: let me demonstrate the inconsistencies as hereunder. Under the provision of Section 13(10)(a)(5) of The Public Finance Management Act, the Ministry of Finance is mandated to table a plan on public debt and any other financial liabilities whilst presenting the national budget to Parliament to ensure proper debt management.The annual budget estimates must be consistent with the medium term debt management strategy. The Government has committed to secure external financing to a tune of Shs 10.22 trillion as shown in the budget estimates whereby Shs 2.78 trillion is budget support, grants and loans and Shs 7.44 trillion is project support. This is inconsistent with the sum of Shs 8.84 trillion total external borrowing, as per the borrowing plan in the medium term debt management strategy. When you go back to the table, you will see that Government said that they will borrow Shs 8.4 trillion. Now they say they are going to borrow Shs 10 trillion. For external, they committed to borrow Shs 10 trillion, for domestic borrowing, they have gone ahead and borrowed Shs 11 trillion.Two things to note, there is also a debt inconsistency when you read the table with the level of concessional versus non-concessional loan. We note that only 7.9 per cent, which is Shs 1.4 trillion, of the total borrowed money will be concessional. The rest of the money is non-concessional.Government is also going to the domestic market to borrow huge amounts of money to the disadvantage and in competition with the private sector. The effect of domestic borrowing on the private sector is tackled.Falsification of the resource envelope When you look at the resource envelope, there is a huge amount of falsification. They are giving us a total discretionary budget of Shs 25 trillion, but in effect, they have not deducted pension and gratuity and they have not deducted the total wage. They have also not deducted the contingency fund. When you deduct the two from all the four items, the true discretionary expenditure of Government comes down -THE SPEAKER : Hon. Kivumbi, regarding the pension fund, give us the amount of the gratuity.[Mr Kivumbi]8703THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI:  The pension is Shs 278.57 billion, gratuity is Shs 115 billion and 2.3 trillion. Total wage in the budget is 6.959 trillion. Contingency fund, as per the law established, should have been Shs 240.65 billion.When you deduct these figures in addition to what they have as the discretionary fund, you remain with Shs 17.5 trillion. That is a true reflection of -THE SPEAKER:  When we are talking about figures, we have to be very careful. It is not like talking about the Columbus.MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I am being a bit fast, it will to save time. Madam Speaker, this is very absurd because as we go to reallocate, let us know that the only money to play with in the whole Shs 52 trillion budget is only Shs 17 trillion. The rest of the money goes to debt management and that answers your queries, Hon. Mwijukye.Uncollected mineral -THE SPEAKER:  Members, the debt management that we are paying was not borrowed during our time. That money was borrowed over a period of time; we are just victims. Let us go on. MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI:  But it was borrowed under this regime for the last 34 years. THE SPEAKER:  I am saying not in the 11th Parliament.MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI:  Definitely, not in the 11th Parliament. It is not your fault.THE SPEAKER: I am also giving a disclaimer.MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI:  It was also in steady progress. Uncollected mineral taxes The Auditor-General’s report on the performance of Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) for Financial Year 2021/2022 indicated that URA failed to collect Shs 340 billion in taxes from gold exports estimated to be recovered after the 5 per cent levy was implemented.In March 2023, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development directed the Uganda Revenue Authority to halt the recovery of gold exports tax. This was in addition to the directive of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development halting the implementation of the 5 per cent levy; $ 200 on each kilogramme of gold exported.During the plenary, the Attorney-General disclosed that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development slashed taxes on gold from Shs 616 billion to Shs 43 billion. There are other minerals whose revenue is hardly declared by Government and I want to note the following:1. Phosphates and steel at Sukulu. The company, Dong Song Energy Group Company Ltd is fully operational but it does not pay any tax.2. Marble from Karamoja. M/S Sunbelt is fully operational but does not pay any penny on the mineral tax.3. Tin, African Partner Resource Ltd is also fully operational but does not pay any penny. 4. Vermiculite is dealing with minerals; I think gold in Busia but it does not pay. 5. There is also a company mining gold in Busia called Wagagai Mining Limited. It does not pay any penny.With the foregoing mineral activities in the country, one would expect a corresponding increase in revenue from the mining sector. However, there is still obscurity and unwarranted waivers thus revenue leakage. 8704BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024Our recommendation Establish a monitoring mechanism to track and recover all revenues from the minerals and mining activities.Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs The Government has had a contractual commitment on classified equipment that has cost Uganda a total of Shs 16 trillion over the contractual period. The outlay for Financial Year 2022/2023 was Shs 1.9 trillion. This project has elapsed and will soon end in June of this financial year. Ironically, in the supplementary schedule for this financial year, a sum of Shs 339.8 billion was moved from a contractual commitment and located shortfalls in the wage for UPDF. To our surprise, under the budget estimate for Financial Year 22023/2024, a sum equal in amount of Shs 1.9 trillion, the amount previously allocated for contractual commitment, has been allocated to retooling under classified expenditure without following the retooling guidelines under The Public Finance Management Act. In another twist of events, with the intention of sanitising the Shs 1.9 trillion, the Ministry of Finance, in a corrigendum, has again deducted Shs 339 billion from a sum of Shs 1.9 trillion and shifted it to cater for wage shortfalls. Clearly there is suspicious motive in the way the ministry is holding on to this money to the extent they have now hidden it in classified expenditure to avoid scrutiny. Luckily, we can infer from the circumstances that this is a form of haemorrhaging public coffers and this raises many questions. We recommend that the allocation of Shs 1.9 trillion for classified expenditure be rejected.We further recommend that the Public Finance Management Act be amended to define the structure of classified expenditure to limit wastage and abuse of public resources.Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation –THE SPEAKER : Just a minute, before you go ahead, Prime Minister, can I have the Minister of Energy here? We need to get information on the gold collections. You can continue.MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI:  Madam Speaker, I am now going to science, technology and innovation under Presidency V ote 167: Presidential Advisory Committee on Export and Industrial Development by Mr Odrek Rwabwogo and Dei Biopharma factory in Matugga. Support for the coffee value chain development Shs 37 billion and support for vaccine and pharmaceutical Shs 70 billion to Dei Biopharma Factory in Matugga and now suspicious subventions put in the newly created V ote 167 for Science, Technology and Innovations. When Mr Odrek Rwabwogo appeared before the Budget Committee during the retreat at Munyonyo Resort, he informed the committee that this project on coffee value chain development required $ 100 million. He has been allocated $ 10 million equivalent to Shs 37 billion in the budget. This amount for a private investment was directly charged to the Consolidated Fund. In the subsequent Corrigenda, it has been shifted to State House under classified expenditure. Madam Speaker, we differ with the majority decision to provide and shift money mounting to Shs 37 billion for Mr Odrek Rwabwogo under the disguise of coffee value chain development from V ote 167: Science, Technology and Innovation to classified expenditure for logistical support and security under State House V ote 02, as indicated in the addendum to the Corrigenda to the draft budget estimates for Financial Year. Classified expenditures should not be abused to hide irregular personal, illegal expenditures on the Consolidated Fund. Madam Speaker, we have also informed this committee that this new Pinetti; Black Pinetti requires $ 100 million and what is going to happen, Madam Speaker - and I know the game plan now - the moment you make an entry of $ 10 million, they will now go under 3 per cent and provide the rest of the money under [Mr Kivumbi]8705THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023insufficient funding. That is what is going to happen and expect a supplementary budget to have provided the rest of $ 100 million. We are saying, for heaven’s sake, since when do some people have the audacity to go to the Consolidated Fund for a personal venture? It does not matter who you are and who you know. This is taxpayers’ money. Madam Speaker, there is no letter that a President will write to intimidate me with an arrest that will make me go silent on some of these matters.THE SPEAKER:  Did they write to you?MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI:  They wrote a letter to every MP where my name and that of Hon. Luttamaguzi was mentioned and instructions were made to the relevant authority that whenever I talk about some of these things where I am critical-THE SPEAKER:  Did he mention that when you talk about Pinetti they will arrest you?MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI:  No, he talked about Parish Development Model but now I am talking about this one and I want to state that no amount of intimidation will make us go silent on some of these issues.THE SPEAKER:  You said this one is a Black Pinetti?MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI:  This is the black –THE SPEAKER: At least now we have a black Pinetti not a white one.MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI:  Hon. Speaker, the big issue is you are going to –THE SPEAKER:  I was just cracking a joke, please, continue.MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI : The bigger issue is, you want to invest - Kenya has the same structure across Europe for their flowers and fruits, even at Heathrow, but it is Government owned. That infrastructure is Government owned and that is why, in our proposal, Rt Hon. Speaker - I better wait for the resolution. In the same vein, the budget allocated Shs 70 billion to Dei Biopharma Factory in Matugga to establish a pharmaceutical plant by Mr Mathias Magoola, the Managing Director, and not Hon. Mpuuga. He informed the committee - good enough all this is on record - that the project required the total sum $ 1 billion, an equivalent of Shs 303.7 trillion. The Government will continue charging the Consolidated Fund for a private undertaking for a long period at the tax payers’ expense. Even if Government was to facilitate the establishment of a pharmaceutical facility, the $ 1 billion is a high scale for such a facility. Comparatively, Madam Speaker, the biotechnology firm MODEMA is set to build a similar facility in Kenya at a cost of only $ 500 million and the President of Kenya, His Excellency William Ruto, launched this project just the other day. We are land locked? Okay, that is for another day.We submit that the Consolidated Fund should not be used to act as a lender of first resort to every non-bankable idea. If these projects are feasible and worth support, there are many ways through which the Government can support them. For instance, that money should be channelled through the Uganda Development Cooperation or the Uganda Development Bank for onward lending or, as we have done for ROKO, Abubaker and other agencies, let us go and acquire equity in those ventures and that will protect our children’s money. Besides the V ote, there are nine agencies under the table below with audit queries. Some of the outstanding audit queries include Kira Motor Cooperation. The Auditor-General raised an audit query. The UNCCT has an audit query under the same V ote. Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development (PIBID) has an audit query. Madam Speaker, we recommend:Funding amounting to Shs 37 billion meant for Mr Magogo’s coffee chain should not be approved –8706BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024THE SPEAKER:  Meant for who? Not Magogo, Magoola.MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI : Mr Rwabwogo - (Laughter)  THE SPEAKER: Withdraw your statement. MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Rwabwogo and not Hon. Magogo. You know Moses is my OB. It should not be approved.Two, funding amounting to Shs 70 billion to this factory in Matugga manufacturing pharmaceuticals should not be approved. It is our alternative proposal, Madam Speaker, that allocations made to Coffee Chain Development and this other factory should be shifted to Uganda Development Cooperation where interested parties should access it through loans; either Uganda Development Cooperation or UDB where they can go and borrow or UDC where Uganda will be able to acquire equity in those undertakings. That will protect the crucial sums of money that the country is due to invest in these ventures. Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development We disagree on the additional Shs 2 billion towards monitoring of wealth funds under the Parish Development Model for Secretariat allowance on top of the initial allocation of Shs 9.2 billion. This is wasteful expenditure and unjustified.We also disagree with the allocation of Shs 12 billion to facilitate the procurement of bicycles for parish chiefs and rent for their offices. The country has a total of 10,595 parishes with the same number of parish chiefs. If the unit cost for a bicycle is Shs 400,000, it will cost a total sum of Shs 4,238,000,000 to cover all the parishes, exclusive of maintenance costs. The balance of Shs 8.5 billion cannot sufficiently cater for rent, utilities, furniture and other office equipment. In our observation, the sustainability of the policy for paying rent for parish chiefs is highly questionable, considering rent arrears burdening other Government agencies. However, we recommend an additional Shs 5 billion to be added for bicycles and Shs 2 billion that is for the Secretariat to cater for office equipment. We are only saying that if you are to go for rent at Shs 100,000 per parish, it will consume Shs 12 billion. However, the President wrote and said he wants money for each parish chief to have a bicycle. The current market price for each bicycle is around Shs 400,000. If you put in this money, the Shs 12 billion provided is not enough. We want to provide Shs 5 billion and then provide the Shs 2 billion. If he has an office, he should be able to put a table and a chair for him to sit on. That is our proposal and I think the President will be happy with that. (Applause)  I hope he will not arrest me for that proposal. Dissent on committee conclusions on projects exiting the public investment plan and non-compliant retooling project.Madam Speaker, the following projects from pages 13 to 16 are supposed to exit and end and they are due completion by 30 June. To our surprise, going forward, money has been provided to the tune of Shs 538 billion. Our proposal is, if these projects are due to exit and be completed by June, why do we make a further provision of resources? The money for these projects should be shifted to other useful needs.Madam Speaker, we also have a long list of non-compliant retooling projects in the country. All these projects underlined under retooling - Honourable members who don’t know about retooling, this is where the Government agencies normally put money for vehicles, AOB, etcetera. All those things come under retooling. There is a criterion in the Public Finance Management Act on how to go about retooling for each agency. All these projects have not followed that criteria, but they are within the budget allocations. Our view is that this will lead to wasteful expenditures and all these projects should not be funded. 8707THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023Failure to provide for interns and senior medical officers’ allowance and funding for Uganda Red Cross. Madam Speaker, we have noted with concern that both in the first and second Corrigenda and in the budget allocation, there is no money for medical interns, but we have money for retooling. It is interns that are running the medical facilities countrywide. Therefore, for all these deductions we get, we would like the Budget Committee to adjust the figure and provide money - it is Parliament with the last call - for interns. The country is tired of strikes by people who are here to serve the commonest person. That is our point of view. Before I invite Hon. Ssemujju to go for another part, Madam Speaker, as you know, much as I have been around for the last two months, I am not at full charge; you are aware. (Interjection)  No, we will not go into details. I cannot speak for so long so I am going to have Hon. Ssemujju deal with the last part. (Laughter)  Suspicious budget allocations and re-allocations Madam Speaker, listen to this. The Budget Committee has identified a source for re-allocation for rural electrification and taken away Shs 100 billion that is supposed to go to the Ministry of Energy for provision of electricity to rural areas. Our humble view and opinion is that much as there are issues in that sector, I am coming from a constituency where poles were put two years ago and the same is true in so many constituencies and they are costing MPs dearly. We keep on explaining, “There is no wire, there are no transformers and the country is in the darkness.” However, you have the audacity to shift Shs 100 billion from rural electrification and take it - I am going to tell you where they have taken the money and in my humble view, these kinds of re-allocations should be resisted with utmost sincerity. The first point is that we reject the shifting of Shs 100 billion from rural electrification to the column of re-allocation and we maintain this money there. If there are issues, let the oversight committee ensure that the ministry sticks with its plans and the projects get implemented. We are tired of answering these questions and I think it will also cost the President dearly in the coming election or whoever - (Laughter)-  and I mean so.Madam Speaker, this is where I have issues. I have identified agencies in the re-allocation schedule for the last four years; these agencies get the “mercy eye” of the re-allocation schedule. We are saying they can’t be the same agencies every year and in this submission, I have identified them. Most of them are not in areas where there is critical service delivery. Most of them are the following – I am trying to trace the page. We tried to make it coloured printing for clarity of the columns that have been receiving re-allocations for three or two years. We have a project in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for purchase of tractors –(Interjections) – I am the one speaking, sir.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Amero, can we allow you to come and continue presenting? Let us allow the Member to present. MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI:  Madam Speaker, over Shs 6 billion has been allocated for the purchase of tractors. We have been constantly making a case; where is the rationale for these tractors? Who gets them? If you are taking away money for electricity, let us first provide electricity for our people. We are saying that we should stay this allocation because we have been funding this project for the last three or four years but the tractors are nowhere to be seen. We are saying that money that has consistently gone –THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, listen to the Member presenting. If you want to speak, go to the corridor.MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI:  Money that has consistently gone to the Inspectorate of Government (IGG) - It should be allocated Shs 14 billion. Money that has gone to the 8708BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024National Planning Authority - these are things in Kampala for planning; UNDP and the rest. We can have electricity and do this next year. Law Development Centre – Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory (DGAL), since I was in the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, these fellows get re-allocation. For all the seven years I have been in the Committee on Budget, DGAL, National Planning Authority, Uganda Bureau of Statistics and Financial Intelligence Authority get re-allocations. I have collected all the money from all those agencies that have no direct bearing to service delivery and you are cutting money for electricity – Let us not give them the re-allocation but restore the Shs 100 billion for electricity. I am going to provide a list of those agencies. With that - and I mean well for everyone - I invite Hon. Ssemujju to deal with part two.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, like I told you, all these reports are informative. Where you cannot make any changes, they will inform us on what to do in the next financial year. The Budget helps us and that is why I will not put a vote to the minority report because you need that information. If you put a vote and it is voted out, then it will be thrown out. Honourable members, can we listen?10.02MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso):  Thank you, Madam Speaker and Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi. I will begin with V ote 001: President’s Office. Madam Speaker, the Constitution under Article 98 creates the President and provides for his or her election in Article 103. Article 99 (3) of the Constitution states: “It shall be the duty of the President to abide by, uphold and safeguard this Constitution and the laws of Uganda and to promote the welfare of the citizens and protect the territorial integrity of Uganda.”The President under the Constitution works or is supposed to work for the sole purpose of promoting the welfare of citizens, not himself or his family. The proposed budget for Financial Year 2023/2024, V ote 001: Office of the President has been allocated Shs 239 billion - Of course, this figure changes if you look at the second Corrigenda. This money is to facilitate the President’s work as the Constitution mandates him to promote the welfare of citizens. I have provided that figure for you to see what that money will do. The first item on the table is official ceremonies and functions – Shs 43.7 billion. You can read the table by yourself. I propose that we reduce this budget under the President’s Office by Shs 82 billion. Why? This money for ceremonies and classified expenditure is a candidate for re-allocation. How on earth can we provide for Shs 43 billion for ceremonies when the road network in the capital city has broken down? The money for ceremonies should be spent on repairing roads in Kampala and Wakiso. (Applause)In Tanzania, for your information, the only activity that the late President Magufuli undertook on independence day of Tanzania was a speech. He said the money should be used to construct roads in Dar es Salaam. V ote 002: State HouseThe total budget for the residence of the President in this budget, before the second Corrigenda, was Shs 417.9 billion. This means that every day, the President and his family - because they are the ones staying in State House - spend Shs 1.1 billion. They spend Shs 47.7 million per hour and Shs 795,000 per minute. (Laughter)  To put it even more clearly, for every two minutes - you can count now – they are spending Shs 1.5 million. This Parliament will be in breach of the Constitution if it passes a budget that allows the President to illegally swim in luxury at the expense of the citizens’ welfare. [Mr Kivumbi]8709THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023The Presidential Emoluments and Benefits Act, 1998 provides a salary, allowances and benefits to the President. When budgeting for the President and his family, this law applies. Unfortunately –THE SPEAKER:  There is a point of order from Hon. Cecilia.MS CECILIA OGWAL:  Madam Speaker, the Member holding the Floor is talking about the expenditure for a family; the President and his wife. The information we have officially is that the President receives only Shs 3.6 million as salary per month. Is the Member in order to impute that the President is spending all these billions when he actually officially receives only Shs 3.6 million per month? (Laughter)THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, V ote 001: Office of the President is a statutory V ote just like Parliament. Money that is allocated to that V ote can only be discussed by a specific committee just like we do not discuss the V ote of Parliament. Hon. Ssemujju, continue.MR SSEMUJJU:  Madam Speaker, I am on page 32. The Presidential Emoluments and Benefits Act, 1998 provides a salary, allowances and other benefits to the President. When budgeting for the President and his family, this law applies. Unfortunately, previous Parliaments have not guided themselves on what the President and his family is/are entitled to legally. I have, for that purpose, attached a schedule of the benefits of the President and his family. You can straightaway go to that table. The point Hon. Cecilia Ogwal made is that the salary of the President, according to the First Schedule of The Presidential Emoluments and Benefits Act, 1998 is Shs 3,600,000. The list is longer; I may not read the whole list. Please take, note that anything you give to the President and his family, either in excess or below what the law provides, is illegal. Madam Speaker, the makers of the law knew there would be a President and his or her family. That is why they are providing for his children’s education and a trip abroad. Do not be tempted to provide beyond. In the future, you are going to be arrested for money you are splashing. Madam Speaker, that is specified in the First Schedule of the Presidential Emoluments and Benefits Act. I do not have to read it. I now want to draw the attention of the House to the budget that has been provided for the President and his family so you can compare whether it complies with the Presidential Emoluments and Benefits Act. The details are on the table that follows. For your quick reference, we have: • Donations - Shs 137 billion;• Classified expenditure, including money for Rwabwogo: Shs 120 billion;• Travel abroad – (Mr Oboth rose)Has he finished his mabaati  problems?  (Laughter)  THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Oboth? MR OBOTH:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take cognisance that this is a very serious House.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, it is free sitting. You do not have to stand as if you are looking after cows. Member for Kakumiro, move this side. MR OBOTH:  Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I would like to state, for the record that it is obvious to us that this is a very serious House; this is a National Assembly. Parliament of Uganda - whether your sneeze, whatever you say here is captured on the record for generations to come. I actually said “it is obvious” -(Interjections) - and I am restating “it is obvious”. This is for emphasis. THE SPEAKER:  Members, stop heckling and listen to the Member. 8710BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024MR OBOTH:  If you know it, probably I knew it before you do. Is it in order for us to drag names of individuals as we consider the national budget?  THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, listen.MR OBOTH:  We either debate logically or illogically. Is it in order for us to bring names of people that are not in this House to defend themselves?THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Oboth, in the report it is indicated that Mr Rwabwogo appeared before the committee. The only thing I do not see in the budget is a company indicating Rwabwogo; it is not shown. If he appeared before the committee, I cannot stop anyone from mentioning his name. Honourable members, what I see here is the figure being reported as having been given to Rwabwogo and I do not see the name of Rwabwogo in the report. Maybe, let me hear from the chairperson. MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI:  Madam Speaker, the person of Rwabwogo appeared before the committee to give insights on export promotion. He had a team and they had a number of products. They were trying to give us a vision, if we invested in value addition, that would eventually earn a lot of income. They included coffee, fish, beef and milk. They gave an insight to the committee and we received the information. Madam Speaker, as far as these estimates are concerned, nothing is allocated to what Rwabwogo spoke about. (Interruption)MR KABERUKA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the chairperson for giving away. Appearing before a committee is not a crime. We have interfaced with many people and agencies headed by people whose names could be mentioned. Picking one person’s name is demonising the process of promoting exports in Uganda. THE SPEAKER:  Hon. James, I said, if Rwabwogo appeared before the committee, there is no problem. What I do not see is the allocation to Rwabwogo. MR KABERUKA:  The information I would like to relay to my chairperson is that - THE SPEAKER: Talk about State House.MR KABERUKA:  Madam Speaker, let us debate the national budget not individuals. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Let us talk about State House. Members, can you summarise?MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I am concluding. There are things that happen in the committee that we do not want to bring here. For example, when Rwabwogo came to Munyonyo, Hon. Kaberuka almost knelt down to greet him. (Laughter)  THE SPEAKER:  Can you stop that? Is that what we are supplying today? (Laughter)  MR SSEMUJJU: We do not want to say those things. This is why I want to concentrate on the report. THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Ssemujju, let it be substance over form. MR SSEMUJJU: I agree, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  I need some substance from you. MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I have provided a table and I would like to invite Members of Parliament -THE SPEAKER:  Read what is in your document. MR SSEMUJJU: That is what I am reading, Madam Speaker. I would like to invite Members of Parliament to look at the voluminous revenue estimates; Hon. Ekanya has a copy and they are too voluminous. Before you pass 8711THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023figures, you need to look at the details. That is why some people are uncomfortable when you begin mentioning names because they are used to small reports. Go to these voluminous books and read them.Madam Speaker, I have provided a table there. The law provides for one residence – you can see this is one volume but there are about four. If you cannot read them when you are debating the Budget, keep quiet. (Laughter) The law provides for one residence as State House but the President operates two residences. Go back to the law on Presidential Emoluments and Benefits Act. It provides for one residence to the President. THE SPEAKER:  Which residences are those?MR SSEMUJJU:  You have told me to read the report. Can I read, Madam Speaker? (Laughter) The President operates two residences at Nakasero and Entebbe illegally. That is why his electricity bill at Shs 500 million and water bill at Shs 500 million per year is bigger than a big factory like Roofings Group. Whatever they are manufacturing at State house, Allah knows. (Laughter) Honourable members, I would like to draw your attention to other items to be funded under State House. There is Shs 550 million to buy clothes and the same amount was provided last year. This means we are spending on average - (Interjection)-  I am reading the report. THE SPEAKER:  He is reading the report. Honourable minister, sit down.MR SSEMUJJU:  The same amount was provided last year. This means we are spending on average Shs 1 million on President Yoweri Museveni’s clothes every day. Our president is not a staff from Hollywood that requires him to change wardrobe every day. He is a President of a poor country; why buy him clothes worth Shs 350 million every year? What happened to the clothes that were bought last year? We are providing Shs 600 million for furniture and we provided the same amount last year . [Member: “Order.”]  This residence has won itself a –THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, you will have time to debate that report.MR SSEMUJJU:  We are providing Shs 600 million for furniture and the same amount was provided last year. This residence has won itself a place in the history of Uganda. There are no beds in public health facilities are not there but the President is buying clothes and furniture every year. We are providing Shs 7.8 billion for agriculture supplies. We are providing another Shs 184 million for veterinary services. Did the President turn State House into a farm without the knowledge of the country? Parliament must be sure that we are not the ones funding President Yoweri Museveni’s private farms in Kisozi and Rwakitura. To make matters worse, he has provided himself with Shs 120 billion for classified expenditure at his residence. We have spoken about that earlier; I can skip it. The President has a duty not to abuse the State House but if he chooses to do so, this Parliament is under obligation to stop him. President Museveni despised the former President Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa for turning State House into what he called “clearing house” but he has now surpassed him. In fact, President Museveni has turned State House into an enterprise for himself and his family. Remember V ote 002: State House started around 1997 with just about Shs 12 billion. Last year, the money we appropriated here for State House budget was Shs 682 billion and another Shs 150 billion has been provided in the supplementary expenditure. The budget on donations; Shs 137 billion under State House falls under what the President called “cheap popularity” in his letter dated 3 April 2023 to the Prime Minister, Hon. Nabbanja and copied to all Members of Parliament. He said distribution of items such as iron sheets is “cheap popularity” and under NRA code, it is subversive. It, therefore, violates the NRA code and is classified as subversive in his letter. 8712BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024The NRA should tell Parliament why it has not arrested its officer; RO 001 Gen. Museveni for distribution of khaki  brown envelopes in search of cheap popularity. In fact, Gen. Museveni should be court-martialed. I therefore propose that the President and his family are given only Shs 12 billion under State House for their welfare. The extra Shs 400 billion should be used to fund priorities in the health sector. You need to go to Mulago National Referral Hospital; they fetch water in the night and by midday only – THE SPEAKER:  Is that in the report?MR SSEMUJJU:  I am illustrating. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER:  Go to the next V ote.MR SSEMUJJU:  Madam Speaker, the money meant for luxury under State House should be used to fund the priorities in the health sector that have not been provided for. The funding gap is Shs 700 billion and that is what our committee was able to provide.Office of the Prime Minister This office has been allocated Shs 222 billion. The Prime Minister, according to Article 101(a) of the Constitution, is charged with the following responsibilities –Shall be the Leader of Government Business in Parliament and be responsible for the coordination and implementation of Government policies across ministries, departments and public institutions. The Prime Minister is, therefore, at the heart of running the State. This Parliament is aware that the current Prime Minister is right now hiding in Kakumiro and remains a suspect in the case of disappearance of iron sheets meant for Karamoja. Not only did she fail to coordinate and implement the distribution of iron sheets to Karamoja but she personally took 3,000 iron sheets. Her deputies; Hon. Rebecca Kadaga and Hon. Rukia Nakadama also shared. I would like to remind this Parliament that money meant for Karamoja iron sheets and goats worth Shs 339 billion was passed by this Parliament in a supplementary request. It cannot be the same Parliament now placing a whole Shs 222 billion in the hands of those who have feasted on the Shs 339 billion. Madam Speaker, you owe it to the country. The honourable colleagues involved in this case have demonstrated inability to supervise public funds. The President wrote to the Prime Minister and copied that letter to all of us; he accused his own ministers of theft and subversion. He actually promised action. I, therefore, propose that the budget for the Office of the Prime Minister, save for the salaries of staff, be withheld until the President has taken his promised political action. There is no way this Parliament will place money in the hands of suspects who are hiding and they are not even sitting in office. Below I reproduce what is already in the letter that each one of you has. Moreover, there was even a proposal from the accounting officer of that department, late Keith Muhakanizi, that this department must be restructured immediately. Honourable members, I would like to remind you that the two ministers of Karamoja; Hon. Mary Kitutu and Hon. Agnes Nandutu have already been charged and were remanded to Luzira. That ministry is, at the moment, without a minister or a deputy because the two ministers were just granted temporary freedom to go to hospital and visit law chambers.On page 67 of the estimates of revenue and expenditure, Shs 4.7 billion has been provided for the Ministry of Karamoja Affairs under budget output. This Parliament should not send money to a ministry that, at the moment, is crumbling; our money should not crumble with the ministry. I invite Parliament to look at Section 11(g) of the Public Finance and Management Act. In the case of civil servants, the law does not allow anyone to be appointed an accounting officer if he has accountability issues. It states: “An appointee or a designated accounting officer in accordance with this Act, except the Secretary to the Treasury, shall not appoint or designate a person or an accounting [Mr Ssemujju]8713THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023officer where, according to the report of an internal auditor or the Auditor-General, that person has not accounted for the public resources or assets of the vote for a financial year.” This Parliament should apply the same and similar standards when it comes to public resources. A Prime Minister who has issues of accountability must not be allowed anywhere near public resources. As I finish, Madam Speaker, the Office of the Government Chief Whip is a creation of the Administration of Parliament Act and our Rules of Procedure. There are seven political parties in this Parliament; all of them with Whips. In the budget of the Office of Prime Minister, there is Shs 2 billion for the exclusive use of the NRM Whip. He is being provided with Shs 800 million for donation, Shs 150 million to maintain his cars, Shs 100 million to fuel his cars, Shs 815 million for inland travels, Shs 100 million for security and guards and Shs 130 million for special drinks and meals. This is not the only Whip in this Parliament. The Opposition Whip and other Whips are not provided with these facilities yet they are doing the same thing under the law. I am inviting Parliament to withhold the approval of this money. Finally, the President, while speaking at the requiem mass of our late colleague, said that we should not be providing money for guards because we turn them into mercenaries. What, therefore, should follow is the removal of any money for guards in the Budget. You can see I have provided information here. The NRM Whip has Shs 100 million for his guards. The Prime Minister has Shs 800 million for her guards. The President himself who said we should not provide money has put Shs 2.5 billion for his guards. I do not know whether this Government speaks to itself. One person says this, another does the other. Madam Speaker, thank you very much for listening to me.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Ssemujju, Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi and the chairperson.The Office of the Prime Minister: V ote 003 - one thing I need to clarify is that it is not person to holder. It is an office and because it is an office, today Hon. Nabbanja is the Prime Minister, tomorrow, it can be Hon. Ssemujju. Therefore, it is not personal and money should be given to the office. I want clarification on the Government Chief Whip. Aren’t we doing double accounting on the Government Chief Whip? If there is money released from OPM and there is money released from Parliamentary Commission, isn’t that double counting?10.30THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, the question you are asking is very pertinent, if it is true -THE SPEAKER: No, we need to go and verify whether what has been said is correct regarding the figures because as Parliamentary Commission, we support the Government Chief Whip and the Opposition Whip. That is why we need to confirm the amounts. Members, when we are talking about budgeting, we talk about figures.MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise guidance. It is important that we do not lose anything when we listen as some of us are talking about these matters. Madam Speaker, double accounting is something irregular and I want to undertake that we are going to crosscheck and if we find that the item being talked about amounts to double counting, we shall definitely eliminate it from the books.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. On the issue of gold - I want us to answer these questions one by one. On the issue of gold and minerals -8714BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/202410.32THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENER -GY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Sidronius Okaasai): Mad-am Speaker, the report says, “hardly any reve -nues”. It is true that there are hardly any reve -nues generated from the minerals, which have been highlighted here. Guangzhou Dongsong Energy Group Company Limited, producing fertilisers, is not operational. It went through financial challenges and there is no production. That shows there is no revenue that is expected from a non-functional factory.MS Sunbelt Marble Blocks -THE SPEAKER: So, you are saying it is non-functional?MR OKAASAI:  It is not functional.THE SPEAKER: The report is saying it is fully functional.MR OKAASAI: That is not true. It is not functional; it had financial challenges and is currently closed in Tororo.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Angura, if it is in Tororo, can we get confirmation? Let our research assistants not just get information from the corridors. Do you know the factory? 10.33MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Dongsong Company was one of the flagship projects that the Government supported to produce five key products: fertiliser, iron ore, glass, among others. It started with a lot of vigour but to date, as we speak, bushes have overgrown the factory. It has financial challenges and I think the Government is trying to see how to create a partnership and look for other investors to work with those who are there to support the factory to come up again. It is not functional.THE SPEAKER: So, it is not functional.MR OKAASAI:  Two, MS Sunbelt Marble producing marble blocks, slabs, tiles, etc. It is reported here that it is fully functional but to the best of the ministry’s knowledge, this factory was licensed to get into an operational state but currently, it is not functional. Therefore, this is also not true. THE SPEAKER: Next.MR OKAASAI: The next one is African Panther Resources Limited producing tin ore. Government issued a ban on export of raw minerals. We wanted all our minerals to be added value. The 70 per cent purity, which is stated here, is not yet to a level of export and this is because of our Government ban on exports of minerals. So, they are producing but there is no revenue that is being earned because it is meant for export.THE SPEAKER: Can I hear from Hon. Ekanya? Give me information on ore because I know you are one of them.MR OKAASAI: Tin.10.36MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo North County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, minerals attract different forms of revenue to the Government. There is royalty that also goes to the Consolidated Fund account, which the Government must collect whether you export or add value domestically. Therefore, the minister needs to tell us as to what is happening with royalties. Then there is export levy, which is charged by Uganda Revenue Authority for export purposes as well as income tax at the end of Financial Year. Is the minister telling us that we get zero in all this?MR OKAASAI: That is an interesting submission. The miners are not doing business so where do they get the money to pay those taxes? They are not functional.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what the minister is saying is that there was a ban on exportation. I will leave you to debate. Let us hear from the minister. Next.8715THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023MR OKAASAI: The next one is Namankera Vermiculite Mine. Current production stands at 30,000 tons per year from 150,000 tonnes.Namekara Deposit is considered to have world class vermiculite deposit. It is true that it is world class, but look at the drop in production. The title said, “Hardly”. It means there are some taxes which are accruing from this but not to the expected level of revenue. Look at the title, “Hardly any”. That means that by dropping from 150,000 to 30,000 tonnes, it is actually something that is paying but not to the expected level.Wagagai Mining LimitedIt has got 9.24 square kilometres and is in Busia. That mine is actually under construction. There is no work going on and we have not even given them electricity which they had asked for. We are going to provide them with a line to enable them add value. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, this takes us to the report that the Leader of the Opposition asked for. You are going to be on the Order Paper of Tuesday to give us a report on the exemptions you gave under your ministry. You need to bring the instruction that gave you permission to do that and lay it on the Table. We are going to discuss the issue of minerals on Tuesday.MR OKAASAI: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Listen. When you are in the House, please observe decorum. I will also ask you to kneel down. (Laughter)Minister, do you have anything to say? Can we hear from the chairperson on the issues that have been raised? This is a kind reminder; these reports are informative. Let us hear from him - There is a procedural issue. MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Wouldn’t it be procedurally okay – if it pleases you - that this does not appear like a sparring session between the chairperson and the shadow minister but that you allow debate so that the chairperson responds at once to all emerging issues, to avoid a monologue of sorts? THE SPEAKER: He has a clarification to make so let him first make it.MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank my colleagues for the minority report submitted. Colleagues, let us all remember that the Budget Committee is a committee of this Parliament and whatever this committee processes is referred to the committee by the Floor. Sector committees scrutinise these estimates and present the report on the Floor. The reports are referred to the Budget Committee for reconciliation and consolidation. Nothing appears in our report that is not within what is adopted by the Floor. Colleagues, I would like to respond to issues like budget support. Our colleagues stated that the amounts towards budget support are declining. These are grants and loans. If they are declining, shouldn’t we celebrate because it is reducing our debt? We also have to understand the parts for concession are going up. We mentioned in our report the reasons why these non-concessional loans are taking stride. If you are getting loans, the lenders also face shocks and when shocks hit the world, even the lenders get affected. So, they are less willing to lend; they can only lend based on the terms which can accommodate their level of risk. If you are lending where there is a lot of uncertainty in global economies, you lend only when the benefits seem to be convincing. That is why the non-concessional loans start growing. Even the internal generations in the lenders’ businesses are not doing very well so they raise the interest. That is where we are. The problem is the capacity; do we have the capacity to reduce the concession and non-concessional loans? That is where the trouble comes – (Interruption)8716BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024MR OGUZU: Chairperson, you have attempted to explain why we cannot get concessional loans or why the burden of non-concessional loans is growing. I am acutely aware that Uganda has drawing rights with the International Monetary Fund of up to $1 billion, which is a concessional facility. We could not fully exploit it because the country was supposed to undertake reforms.Has the Budget Committee attempted to ensure that the Ministry of Finance qualifies with the proposals which were put to the ministry so that going forward, we can be able to benefit from these concessional facilities?MR ISIAGI-OPOLOT: Thank you, honourable colleague, for that question. I think the Minister of Finance, who is the implementer, has up to date information on that. Madam Speaker, if the honourable minister can chip in, he could give an update.THE SPEAKER: Let me first hear from Hon. Angura then the minister can come in.MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think my colleague has mixed the two; non-concessional and concessional funding. The challenge that we are experiencing is arising from our major development partners or funders; the World Bank and International Monetary Fund who have been giving us concessional funding. We are now moving to expensive funding. I thought that is what the Ministry of Finance should clarify further, based on many circumstances that could be arising from the shocks coming from COVID-19 and the challenges that we are experiencing from Ukraine. The funding will continue to reduce and that is why, as a country, we should start looking at how to generate local revenue, expand our revenue base and see how we can reduce on interest payments, going forward. Thank you.MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I need to update Hon. Lee Oguzu that it is true we received Special Drawing Rights amounting to $ 1 billion for budget support and specifically to mitigate the economic impacts of COVID-19. We have since drawn these rights to the extent of $ 750 million and we are left with $ 250 million. Therefore, it is not true that we are not utilising these Special Drawing Rights. On the service level agreement you are talking about, we had several engagements with International Monetary Fund and we agreed. Everything is now going on as we had planned. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you.MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI:  I now move to the corporations and state enterprises. Colleagues, the committee analysed truly and found out, as it is mentioned in the main report, that some corporations have not yet fulfilled the requirement as per the law. When we interrogated, we found a situation whereby we thought we could appropriate the funds and have the oversight role of our sector committees where these enterprises fall -THE SPEAKER:  Mr Chairperson, what was your basis of allocation? If they have not told you what they want, how did you allocate that money?MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI:  The money which they brought for allocation in the estimates is what was appropriated and the reports came from the Floor to the committee. Where there are non-disclosure issues, we check the substance and the legal form and we found that in order not to cause paralysis, this money be appropriated. That is what we pray. However, let us all be informed that the committee does work on behalf of Parliament. We bring our report and the Parliament takes a decision. We are not a dictatorship. THE SPEAKER:  Can we first hear from the minister on that? What does the law say about giving your budget estimates to Parliament vis-8717THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023a-vis  appropriation and what are you going to do as a ministry? Are you going to give money that they did not ask for to the entities?MR MUSASIZI:  Madam Speaker, budgeting is a process and right now, we are at the tail end of the process. I wonder how, at this stage, we pick a figure which has not been in our first budget call circular, second budget call circular or in the minutes of the engagements we have had in this Parliament. To me, that figure is irregular and we can deal with it in that regard.THE SPEAKER:  Should we pass the budget and you deal with it administratively? I am asking and you are not the ones to answer me.MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, the debate can continue as we consult on how to deal with it.MR BASALIRWA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am shocked that the Minister for Finance can even think about a debate continuing on this matter. What we are talking about is a constitutional issue. How are we going to proceed when there is a flagrant violation of the Constitution? I would like to invite the Minister for Finance to address his mind specifically to Article 156 of the Constitution and Section 14 of the Public Finance Management Act. Contextualise those two legal provisions with the submission you are making. There is a fundamental flaw that must be addressed because if you do not address it, we are going to have a constitutional crisis. I ask that you address it on the position raised in the minority report regarding allocations that have no foundation in terms of budgetary estimates and how the figures found their way here in light of the Constitution and the Public Finance Management Act.MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI:  Madam Speaker, not all these corporations require funding from Government. The ones which require funding are those who are under subvention. They earn money from some activities so the law requires them to submit their entire budget. How does it come in? While the sectors were interrogating, they found it necessary to allocate some monies to these corporations as subventions and that came to this Floor. It was debated and adopted. That is what comes for allocation. How the debate went on, at that time, led to recommending those allocations.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, I am now opening the debate for 20 minutes. I will start with Hon. Meddie - There is a procedural matter.MR ODUR:  Madam Speaker, during the presentation of the report, you made guidance that these reports are informative and you also stated that nothing will change.THE SPEAKER:  I think you heard it wrong.MR ODUR:  That is why I want clarification so that when we debate, we know where we are going. When we debate in light of the rules that are provided in our Rules of Procedure, specifically rules 151 and 152, this debate is supposed to inform how we supply the figures to specific V otes in response to the concerns raised by the Members. Where, for example, the Members have concern that a certain sector - I will give an example of the current trend; the intern doctors are not provided for in the final figures presented by the Committee on Budget and the entire debate points to that direction; that the House wants more money to be added there and some money deducted, how will we proceed if we are not going to have powers to vary anything in this report? That should be clearly brought to us.THE SPEAKER:  The issue of the interns - I am answering question by question.MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI: Madam Speaker, the available funding provided for interns is Shs 10.8 billion but the required ideal is about Shs 80 billion. I think the minister can clarify on that matter because -THE SPEAKER:  Mr Chairperson, can you first submit?8718BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI:  Among the issues which needed harmonisation and reconciliation, we did not receive, as a committee, an issue on interns -(Interjections)–  I am saying, among the issues that came from the Floor, which were critical, the issue of interns did not arise. However, funds were provided for the interns.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable chairperson, the issue of the interns was in the report of the Committee on Health which was discussed and referred to the Committee on Budget. It is a very serious matter that was referred to your committee.MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI:  Thank you for the guidance. What we can say is that the committee was able to allocate Shs 10 billion but among the competing priorities. What I would like to correct is the perception that there is nothing that can be changed in this report. This is a report to the House –(Interruption)MR ODUR:  Madam Speaker, the point of order I am raising is related to -THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Jonathan, the minister has some good information.MS KAWOOYA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Indeed, the issue of the interns and senior health officers is very vital and a big concern. A petition came to your office and you passed it over to the committee. The Members of Parliament and the Ministry of Health are all concerned. The information I have is that the Cabinet discussed and agreed that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, by the end of this week – we have Shs 22 billion, in arrears, for the interns that had already done their work. We have an outstanding amount of Shs 80 billion for 1,091 interns that are yet to be deployed – and the senior health officers. As a ministry, we have already prepared and are ready to deploy the 1,091 to our 51 deployment sites. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is saying they have provided Shs 10 billion, which you said is not enough. Hon. Kasaija and all the Members of Cabinet, having discussed the issue – committed that by the end of this week, he is going to look for this money. I am giving information to the budget committee and the finance minister. However, as a Ministry, we are waiting for this money so that we can deploy the interns. I thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we get the arrears, we need what is sustainable for the whole period of the internship. That is why we need to have it budgeted for sufficiently. Let us clear the Shs 22 billion, which is supposed to be paid by the end of this week. However, we also need the money in the budget to sustain the whole stay of the interns.Members, when you take me into points of procedure, we shall not debate. If you want to debate, do not go into issues of procedure. Hon. Avur, what is your issue?MS A VUR:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are appropriating for Financial Year 2023/2024. I listened to the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Health raising a critical concern about interns. Madam Speaker, we budget based on some figures, which the Ministry of Health does not have. They do not know the number of interns and do not even know the number how many of them are sent into the labour market every academic year by the various universities.Therefore, would we be proceeding rightly –(Interjections)-  Madam Speaker, I need your protection –THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, sit down. Hon. Avur, this House passed a report on health. A petition was brought to my office and we referred it to the Committee on Health. There are 1,900 interns and we know the figures that they are talking about. The Shs 80 billion they are mentioning is money that was returned in the last financial year. However, the number of interns is known. Yes, Hon. Meddie?8719THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 202311.03MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala):  Thank you, Madam Speaker-THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we have two minutes each.MR NSEREKO:  Madam Speaker, I rise to air out the views of the people in the Kampala metropolitan about the state of our infrastructure and its reflection in the national budget estimates that we have. As a House, we are debating the same matter. The President has also aired out his views – I do not need to go back because the reflection or mirror is outside there for all of us to see that our Capital City and the metropolitan area, including Mukono, Wakiso, etc., is in a dire state.Whereas we contribute about 65 per cent to the GDP of this nation, the reflection, in the form of benefits from the allocation, is still very meagre. I have heard the proposals by the budget committee for an extra Shs 33 billion. Yes, we cannot say “no”. The Baganda say – and I quote – “Nyama ntono, okayana eli mu’nkwawa”  (even if you have little, first take hold of it and then make your arguments).So, we appreciate it, but we need more. Again, we are back to square one, honourable minister for finance, Hon. Musasizi. An extra Shs 33 billion cannot cater for new road reconstructions or even the maintenance of the drainage in the metropolitan area. I know my friend, Hon. Ssemujju, from Kira, where most of you reside – I think, including Hon. Musasizi - I have seen you there, attending some ceremonies; do not hide. The reality is that we all either -THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Meddie, do you want to say that my Members cannot reside in the central region?MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO:  They can, including the Rt Hon. Speaker who resides near the premises of Parliament. (Laughter) However, the reality is that our infrastructure is in a dire state and the provision for our infrastructure is meagre. If we want to collect more, we must demonstrate to the taxpayers that as they pay more taxes, they have returns in the form of services. Additional Shs 33 billion is a starting point, but meagre. We have the Non-Aligned Movement conference, where we are going to host over 90 Heads of State, but look at the state of Salaama Road and the other roads in Kampala. Let us share this responsibility in order to demonstrate to our countrymen that we care, when they pay their taxes, let us respond in form of services. Look at the state of Kiruddu Hospital and the others.Finally, the ICT sector has nothing provided for it; it is dire. We are talking about unemployment, but if we want to curb unemployment, let us respond more to the ICT sector that can help our people perform work remotely and enhance students to do their class work remotely. Today, we are talking about interns in the medical field; tomorrow, we will talk about interns in the education sector, the next day, it will be about interns in the engineering sector and the Pandora Box will open to that extent. We might come back crying the next time.Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the time allocated to me.11.07MR HERBERT TAYEBWA (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have heard the report – the minority and the majority report. The discretionary amount for spending in the coming financial year is Shs 25.16 trillion. However, this has been reduced by the minority report, by Shs 7.55 trillion, to Shs 17.6 trillion.Madam Speaker, the report of the committee did not go further to analyse, out of this Shs 17.61 trillion, how much is for consumptive expenditure and how much is for investment? Because if we have a discretionary expenditure of Shs 17 trillion, and a consumptive expenditure of the same amount, yet no money 8720BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024will be put into investment, then this country is not going very far. We need an analysis to know how much is consumptive; how much will be spent on travel abroad; and how much is going to be spent on workshops for us to know how much is in the investment that will prepare the growth of this country. Otherwise, what Hon. Mwijukye said that we are showing a rosy picture, but it is not felt in our pockets and in our communities. We are looking at the discretionary expenditure of Shs 17.5 trillion, which is going to be spent in consumptive expenditure? I thank you, Madam Speaker.11.08MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee for working around the clock to make sure that this report is presented. I have looked through both the recurrent expenditure and the budget and have seen a number of universities. Last year but one Government took over Busoga University as a public university. However, in this appropriation, I do not see any reflection of Busoga University. Whereas we appreciate what the Government is doing to make sure that education is implemented, especially higher education, Busoga Region does not have any public university. So, I call upon the Government to come and explain to us why Busoga University has been dropped because it is not reflected anywhere in this budget. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Yes, Hon. Solomon Silwany.11.14MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri) :  Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee -(Interruption)MR OGUZU:  Madam Speaker, yesterday we identified an irregularity relating to the certificate of financial implications that should have accompanied the Corrigenda, and today the matter was addressed. Today, we are observing, from the reports, that there is noncompliance with the law, the Constitution and Presidential Emoluments and Benefits Act, and my colleague who just submitted earlier on, has clearly highlighted the disparity in figures in relation to the discretional amount available in this budget. Madam Speaker, these are all matters that require time to examine. The Member on the Floor is going to debate a report of a committee whose debate has not complied with rule 204, which requires that for a report of a committee on a Bill to be debated, it must be laid and actually uploaded on the intranet three days before. And the Member is attempting to do this when the Speaker has not exercised her discretion in accordance with the same rule 204(6)(a) and (b). Therefore, is the Member in order to continue debating when we are not proceeding in accordance with the rule?THE SPEAKER:  Which Member are you referring to? He is not the only one who has debated; even the report was presented. I gave guidance that we debate and pass the budget. However, if you want us to suspend the rule, it is not entrenched. So, you suspend it. Get up and suspend it through a motion.11.12MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha):  Madam Speaker, bearing in mind that sometimes courts have ruled against Bills that are passed by this Parliament on the account of its failure to comply with the rules, I, hereby move in accordance with Rule 16, that Rule 204 be suspended to allow debate to proceed so that we are compliant with the law. I beg to move. THE SPEAKER:  Is it seconded? (Members rose_) Okay, it is seconded by the whole House. Let the debate continue now.[Mr Tayebwa]8721THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023MR SILWANY:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the majority report, and I thank the committee for the elaborate report they have presented. My issues basically relate to health. When you look at the allocation to the Ministry of Health and the different referral hospitals, you notice that it does not depict what is on the ground.Madam Speaker, Mulago National Referral Hospital is in a dire state, but when you look at the amount of money that has been allocated to it and the different regional referral hospitals, you realise that it is not commensurate with what Ugandans need. This Parliament should be alive to the truth and the facts on the ground that we need to sort out the health sector in this country. And the only time we can do that is through budgeting. We are talking about internee medical doctors who are doing a lot of work but the infrastructure in the hospitals, the medicine - when you compare the funds that have been allocated to the Ministry of Defence and Veterans Affairs with the funds that are going to different sectors, including health, you find there is more money going to Defence. Madam Speaker, we should prioritise health because of the health of our community and the population. A healthy country is definitely a strong country. I, therefore, would like to propose that when we get to the committee stage, let us reallocate some monies; let us transfer some monies from the non-vital sectors and take it to the health sector –(Interruption)DR BATUWA:  Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way so I can provide some information relating to the health sector as the Shadow Minister of Health.THE SPEAKER : No, please sit down. Can you finish? Have you concluded? You are giving him space as who? Are you the Speaker? You are going to speak.MR SILWANY:  Madam Speaker, those are the basic issues I wanted to mention; that we reallocate money - because this Parliament has the power to save this country by giving the health sector of the Republic of Uganda more money. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Musasizi, what the honourable member is saying is that as we pass the budget, we need to recognise that there are challenges, especially in the health sector. When you look at some of those entities that you have appropriated money to when they did not need it - you as finance have powers - this House is going to pass a resolution that the money be reallocated to those sectors that need it the most. MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I want to commit that if Parliament passes a resolution that we look for money to finance the health sector from within this budget, we shall comply.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. You need to comply and make sure that the money is reallocated to the Ministry of Health, the Uganda Cancer Institute and Mulago National Referral Hospital - you can see some wasteful expenditures in this budget; you need to do re-allocation. MR MUSASIZI:  Madam Speaker –(Interjections) - I do not need to be informed on this subject. I will be making some observations as we conclude. I agree with you that there are some areas where more work needs to be done. We shall do the work with the view of funding the most critical areas, particularly the Ministry of Health. (Applause)11.19MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I recall you had asked the Government Chief Whip to invite the Attorney-General here. I do not know whether he is also the Acting Attorney-General because the issue - Oh, my brother, Hon. Kafuuzi, has come. I want to draw the attention of the House to page 63 on the allocation to the Directorate of Ethics 8722BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024and Integrity. There is funding to the tune of Shs 8.5 billion and the justification is the funding of pornography control committee activities. The Constitutional Court has nullified the offense of pornography. The Attorney-General has not appealed; there is nothing for that committee to control or work on because the offense is not there and it was declared unconstitutional.That is the case of Centre for Domestic Violence Prevention and Others v. Attorney-General of Uganda (Constitutional Petition No. 13 of 2014) [2021] UGCC 20 (13 August 2021) . Now, we are allocating Shs 4.5 billion to that committee to do work for a non-existing offence. Madam Speaker, obviously at an appropriate time, I am going to bring a Private Member’s Bill because sometimes they are reluctant to - I want to alert the House that this committee is virtually redundant. There is no offence and this Shs 4.5 billion is available for some other things. Finally, from this report, on page 89, V ote 166: National Council of Sports has been given Shs 47.4 billion. The report talks about ring-fencing. Unfortunately, in the annex, where the ring fence is supposed to be clarified as a detail, it is silent on it. In the report, you are talking about ring fencing but in the schedules, particularly Schedule A, there is no ring fencing indicated; that is very important.We have discussed ring-fencing for sports here. If you just make mention in the body of the report and you are quiet about it in the annexure, there is a problem. It is something that must be clarified. Once it is clarified, the money should also be released.I propose that the ring-fence, you talk about on page 89 that details the schedules - In the schedules, nothing is mentioned. What you talk about under page 89 should be reflected in specific terms in the schedules as your report states and the Hansard should be able to capture it. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Committee chairperson, can you guide us on what is ring-fenced under the Fifth Schedule? MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI:  Madam Speaker, the whole schedule indicates how that money should be spent. That is what we mean by ring-fencing; so the whole of it is ring-fenced to those particular areas. The lawyer here is guiding us that we could make an amendment to the report, to which I concede so that it strengthens the spirit in which it is being proposed. Thank you. THE SPEAKER : Thank you. Therefore, the amendment is that Annex V should be read together with the report on ring-fencing. Is that what the mover wants? MR BASALIRWA:  Madam Speaker, the annexures ought to be attached, but also Schedule A, where there are recurrent budget estimates, particularly page 89 that I mentioned. When you look at that V ote - the Shs 46.9 billion - this is where the annex should have indicated the ring-fencing. Therefore, it should be attached and read as one and the same with this report.  The Hansard should be able to capture that.THE SPEAKER : So, V ote 166 should be read together with Annexure 5 on the ring-fencing?MR BASALIRWA:  Yes.THE SPEAKER : He has conceded. That is okay. Thank you. MR BASALIRWA:  I have made a proposal for amendment and you have conceded.11.25DR TIMOTHY BATUWA (FDC, Jinja South Division West, Jinja City):  Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity to speak to the budget. First, I thank the minority group for their report that has ably pointed out a major issue in the health sector; the interns and the senior health officers.We are gathered here this morning believing that we have the right to act on these budget estimates. We have decided to vacate the position or the impression that has been [Mr Basalirwa]8723THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023created that ours is only a duty to rubber stamp whatever has been brought before us. In that belief - and like the finance minister proposed - that money should be allocated somewhere and provided for the allowances of the interns and senior health officers. I have looked at V ote 167: Science, Technology and Innovation. There is Shs 37 billion that is allocated to a classified budget, specifically looking at logistical support and security. They can get the logistical support and security that is classified in nature from another agency that is handling even a bigger classified budget in the President’s Office, where this ministry resides.Madam Speaker, Shs 37 billion together with Shs 70 billion is still in the same V ote for Dei Biopharma Pharmaceuticals. This is a privately owned pharmaceutical industry that is presumed to manufacture pharmaceutical products and vaccines for the benefit of Ugandans. The pharmaceutical needs of Ugandans are catered for in the V ote for National Medical Stores (NMS). We think Dei Bio Pharma Pharmaceuticals can still get money from Uganda Development Bank and Uganda Development Corporation. If that is the case for this financial year, then this Shs 70 billion should be reallocated to handle the issue of the intern doctors and senior health officers. In total, it will be Shs 107 billion and that money will pay for the intern medics, senior health officers and outstanding. That is the decision this House should take today as we exercise our rights. It should not be a duty; it should a right. If we do not do that, the implication is that this budget will totally collapse the health sector service delivery in this country. When Ugandans are in hospitals, they buy medicine -THE SPEAKER:  The decision has already been taken. Money is going to be given to health.  11.28MR ISAAC MODOI (NRM, Lutseshe County, Bududa):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for admitting to some flaws in the budget. I have looked at page 86 of the report on the development budget for local governments. Colleagues, we come from the local governments. These local governments operate in a very poor infrastructure; some of them have even nowhere to sit. I believe the budget allocation given is insufficient. There should be some improvement in that budget. We also have the issue of the cities. You have heard our colleague Member for Kampala Central. The scenario is the same all over the country. How I wish the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the committee looked at means of improving that budget. I have heard the minister say “we have noted and we are going to improve”. I believe the mandate of improving or re-allocation should not be given to the ministry; it should be the committee. Otherwise, I do not see how you can reallocate when you are the same person that made the proposal.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, as we discuss this budget, let us be mindful of the resource envelop. Let us not talk as if we have it all. 11.30MR BOSCO OKIROR (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend the committee for the budget report. My concern is on page 60 of the report of the committee, specifically on the transfer of the Road Fund. It is V ote 118, Uganda Road Fund. There is a recommendation that the Uganda Road Fund money is going to be transferred to KCCA.The justification is transfer of about Shs 66 billion to KCCA roads and drainage maintenance. 8724BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024The Road Fund has been helping us hold on to some of our roads which are not tarmacked in most of the districts upcountry. It is totally unacceptable to transfer this money. Right now, our roads are clogged and we are suffering with a lot of drainage issues; these are murram roads; this is murder to us. In fact, our roads will totally be impassable. Therefore, I would like to appeal to the committee to reverse that decision. I know there is a proposal by the Government to allocate Shs 1 billion, but that is even not sufficient. THE SPEAKER: Hon. Bosco Okiror, there is an allocation of Shs 1 billion. How much do you require? How much would be sufficient? MR OKIROR:  Districts would require Shs 2 billion to maintain roads.THE SPEAKER: Where do we get Shs 2 billion? Tell us where we can get the money. Otherwise, we can even allocate Shs 5 billion. MR OKIROR: What I am appealing, Madam Speaker - THE SPEAKER:  Tell us where the money will come from.MR OKIROR:  The money for the Road Fund has been in the budget. Let us maintain the money for the Road Fund as we wait for the Shs 1 billion. MR ISIAGI:  I would like to clarify that there was a resolution in this House.  THE SPEAKER:  We made a resolution in this House that every district be given Shs 1 billion straight to the local government. The problem is that most of you do not come to the House. The money for the Road Fund is intact. The Shs 1 billion going to each district is there and it is what they have sent. This was a resolution of this House.MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI:  Madam Speaker, you are perfectly correct. We resolved to allocate each district Shs 1 billion on top of what the districts have got in the Road Fund. A district like Butambala has been getting about Shs 380 million from the Road Fund for road maintenance. Our resolution was that on top of that, each district gets an additional Shs 1 billion annually for road maintenance. The argument of Members is that –THE SPEAKER:  Honourable member, the Shs 1 billion goes to the local government. In fact, all of you are chairpersons of the road committee in your districts and this is where you need to exercise your oversight role. If you are going to receive this money and just sleep on duty, then the problem is yours.MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI:  The argument of the Member is that the money in the base that has been used by the Road Fund is being reduced by Shs 66 billion to cater for roads in Kampala. Madam Speaker, what Parliament can do is to give Shs 1 billion and take away the other Shs 500 million that districts have been having. The argument of Members is that we have an urgent need to address the infrastructure in Kampala. Kampala requires Shs 800 billion annually -THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Nsereko, please, respect the minister. MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI:  KCCA said they need Shs 800 billion annually for the next 10 years to be able to fix the road infrastructure. The argument of Members is that the money for the districts should be intact and we should add Shs 1 billion.  (Applause)Madam Speaker, the Government must find a way of consistently funding the infrastructure in Kampala and the neighbouring districts in a marshal plan; that will for once address the infrastructure. Even if you take the Shs 60 out of Shs 100, it will not fix the challenge.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Nsereko?MR NSEREKO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  (Interruption)THE SPEAKER:  There is a procedural matter.[Mr Okiror]8725THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023MR SILWANY:  Madam Speaker, I would like to raise a procedural matter. When you look at the budget, there is a Government policy – and it has always been debated in this Parliament – that every subcounty should have a seed secondary school and a health centre. However, when you look at the budget, there are areas where one subcounty –(Interjection)-  Can you allow me to drive my point?THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the Member is on procedure and we are debating the budget. Each Member has his or her views. You proceed. MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the protection and wise ruling. The procedural matter I am raising is that when you look at the budget, there are areas where one subcounty has two seed schools, a health centre or an upgrade of health centres, yet some areas have nothing. Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right, at this stage, to allow us to re-allocate resources so that instead of having two seed schools in one constituency, each constituency gets a seed school and a health centre? For example, when you look at V ote 830: Buyende District, there is the construction of Buyanja Seed School and the upgrade of Ndolwa Health Centre II to health centre III. Madam Speaker, all these two are in Budiope West County – the same constituency. I, therefore, propose that money for the upgrading of Ndolwa Health Centre II to health centre III goes for the upgrading of Kagulu Health Centre II and to health centre III - instead of doing two things in one constituency. We are not touching the figure, but just changing the words so that there is balance in the constituencies and each constituency gets a Government programme. THE SPEAKER:  Committee chairperson?MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI:  Madam Speaker, I think the issue that the Member has mentioned is about balancing, which, of course, is very paramount. So, if the proposal is taken, I concede.THE SPEAKER:  So, instead of Ndolwa Health Centre II, are we are putting Kagulu Health Centre II? Hon. Meddie? There is a procedural matter from the minister. MR OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, first of all, for us to reach where we have reached today, a lot of work has been done. We know the work that ministries do in consultation with local governments. For instance, I want to give the case of my own county. The Minister of Health, together with her team, went to the district and carried out specific monitoring of the state of the health facility in my area. In their own report – and she is here. I have a health centre, which is condemned. At the same time, I have challenges with infrastructure in other sectors. So, for us to come here and begin saying that the work, which the technical team has undertaken, in consultation with the local governments, should be undone at the last minute – Madam Speaker, I kindly request that that could begin in the next financial year’s budget. However, as of now, Madam Speaker, this is going to create a big problem, which in my considered opinion, we might not be able to handle at this time. I thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, the issue of changing that health centre has been done; you cannot reverse it. 11.41MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Indepen -dent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I can see that we have reached the moment of “every man for himself and God for us all”. (Laughter)  The reality – THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, can we finish? I am going to put the question and we go to the next item.8726BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: Madam Speaker,  I have stated clearly, in my first submission, that what we have been given as the capital city is much less than what we require – and that was the resolution of this House – and we contribute 65 per cent of the taxes that the House wants to supply today. We all agree that whereas we all have to develop in a systematic manner, we have to address the issue of the capital city and the metropolitan area. Last week, we were here –THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Nsereko, you have spoken. Can we have Dr Abed?11.43DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I largely represent farmers. For the majority of the Members of Parliament in this House and our voters are farmers. The budget estimates, which we are considering today, provide less than 3 per cent of the budget to the farmers. We passed a resolution in this Parliament that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development would provide money for coffee seedlings to the nursery operators. The amount was Shs 42 billion, but I do not see any provision in this budget. The nursery operators have borrowed money from banks and the banks are taking their property. There is zero shillings being provided to them. Secondly, I have heard the minority report; they are talking about tractors. Uganda has the lowest number of tractors per 100 square kilometres. We have five tractors per 100 square kilometres, compared to Kenya which has 25 tractors per 100 square kilometres. How can we come on the Floor of Parliament and say that we are going to remove tractors, which are going to help us? Madam Speaker, I pray that we maintain the tractors. The Members of Parliament who never received tractors in the last financial year will receive them this financial year. Lastly, when I checked –THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, listen to Dr Abed very carefully; he is a farmer.DR BWANIKA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I checked on page 102 of the report, I saw that the development budget estimates for Mbarara City are Shs 31.4 billion, and Soroti City has Shs 6.8 billion. That is a variance of 78 per cent. They are allocating –  (Mr Oguzu rose_) – Madam Speaker, I pray that you protect me. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, leave the person on the Floor to speak. When the two minutes are over, it switches off automatically. Clerk, switch off when the two minutes are over.DR BWANIKA:  Yes – (Member timed out.) (Laughter)  Madam Speaker, I am finishing; just 30 seconds.THE SPEAKER:  Let us first have Hon. Oguzu Lee and then Hon. Richard LUMU.11.47MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha):  Madam Speaker, the point of privilege I am raising arises from my engagement with the Committee on National Economy.THE SPEAKER:  Are you a member?MR OGUZU:  I am a member of the Committee on National Economy and I also sit on the Committee of Education and Sport. I have seen in this budget that a proposal has been made for seed schools in a number of subcounties but others have been repeated as rightly observed by the commissioner. In those engagements, we learned that many times resources are located for the construction of classrooms and the health centres when there is no land. I want the minister and the budget committee to satisfy this House that all they have proposed 8727THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023for construction here has met the requirements as directed by PS/ST, Ministry of Finance. We were told that the Ministry of Lands is still processing titles for all those proposed places. Therefore, if we go ahead with approving this proposal, we can be sure we are approving money that will not be properly absorbed. Therefore, that list of development expenditures for secondary schools and health facilities must be re-examined and reviewed by this House again. Otherwise, you are about to commit –  (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you.11.48MR RICHARD LUMU (DP, Mityana County South, Mityana):  I have two issues to talk about, and one is about the $100 million -THE SPEAKER:  By the way, Members, not all of you are going to talk. The House is full; not everybody will talk because we must finish this business.MR LUMU:  I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I want to talk about the $100 million equivalent to Shs 37 billion to be allocated, according to the report made here - I want to propose that this amount of money should be allocated to resuscitate cooperative unions. Why am I saying so? It is the cooperative unions that can employ as many people as possible. A cooperative union will employ people from the driver to the accountant, to the most senior person. This money that is going to Mr Odrek Rwabwogo, you rightly said that -THE SPEAKER:  Have you seen any allocation to Mr Odrek Rwaboogo in the budget? MR LUMU: No, I am reading from the report. THE SPEAKER:  Look at the allocation sheet.MR LUMU: The minority report, Madam Speaker - THE SPEAKER:  Where is Mr Odrek Rwabwogo’s V ote? MR LUMU: Madam Speaker,  I am reading from the report. THE SPEAKER:  Listen to my question. Where is Mr Odrek Rwaboogo’s V ote, because we have allocated money to V otes? MR LUMU: The report, Madam Speaker, says the money was re-allocated to classified - and I wanted to make my point, going that way. Allow me, Madam Speaker, to say that if this money, which is in the minority report is to be re-allocated to the classified amount, then let that money be re-allocated to the development of cooperative unions. Lastly, Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)11.50MR SAMUEL OPIO (Independent, Kole North County, Kole):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Every year, the Government gives subventions to private not-for-profit health facilities. These facilities use these funds to carry out eye surgeries such as what is done at Ruharo Eye Hospital in Western Uganda. They also carry out brain surgeries such as what is done at the Cure Hospital in Eastern Uganda, Caesarean Sections in Lacor Hospital, and many other private not-for-profit health facilities. Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, they have received a 50 per cent budget cut. Their budget of Shs 11.6 billion for medicines has been removed yet they are expected to carry out their surgeries. By removing the budget for medicines, you have taken away the oxygen. The hospital is left to die, yet we want to appropriate Shs 70 billion to one investor for vaccines, but we cannot prioritise Shs 11.6 billion. So, I want to recommend, Madam Speaker, that the Shs 11.6 billion that has been cut from these private health facilities’ budget for medicines be reinstated. 8728BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024Secondly, Madam Speaker, on page 20, the committee indicates that data on poverty has not been provided for Financial Year 2023/2024, same with data on employment. Currently, World Bank reports show that the poverty rate in Uganda in 2023 is at 41.4 per cent. Our NDP is saying it is at 21.4 per cent. Although our plan is to do wealth creation, the Word Bank data now talks about poverty creation instead of wealth creation. I want to propose an amendment to this report that where they had indicated that the data has not been provided, let the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or any other relevant ministry should provide that information and it should be attached to the report. 11.52MR PETER MUGEMA (Independent, Iganga Municipality, Iganga):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Today, I had a delegation of Arts teachers from Iganga who came on a bus. However, when I listened attentively, I did not hear anything to do with salary increments for arts teachers yet our kids are about to go back to school. There is a possibility that they will also go on strike and at the end of the day, we will end up fidgeting. I propose that we cut off some money from the budget of the Office of the Government Chief Whip, which we do not know where it goes, and put it this side to take care of the salary for Arts teachers because, at the end of the day, they are also vital.THE SPEAKER:  Why don’t you say that we removed it from the Parliament budget? (Laughter) We have had a debate and it is now coming to two hours.11.53MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga North County, Isingiro):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have assured us that Shs 1 billion per district is included, although we do not know where it is. However, we want to know how this money will go. I would have loved for this money to go into one single - so that it can have an effect because Shs 250 million per quarter will not do us any service.Second, some districts might want to decide that instead of working on the roads, they buy a grader for themselves – we would want those people to be free to use the money appropriately because the moment you give them money and they work on the roads but they do not have a grader, then what happens to them? I would have preferred that this money goes to the district through the Uganda Road Fund. I know the way people want to send it directly to the districts. Madam Speaker, I – (Member timed out.)11.54MS SYLVIA AWAS (NRM, Woman Representative, Nabilatuk):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to raise the issue of the new districts in relation to road equipment. As you are aware Government allocated Shs 1 billion, but new districts normally hire tractors, and excavators at Shs 2,500,000 per day. The grader is hired at Shs 1,500,000 per day. What will happen to the new districts? I am saying this because I am not seeing any budget for the purchase of road equipment for the new districts. The minister came to the Floor of Parliament and said that they budgeted for Shs 28 billion and requested Parliament to appropriate more Shs 28 million to procure road equipment. What happens to the new districts that have not been taken care of? Shall we not be cheated because I notice that the old districts, which already have equipment have the same amount of money as the new ones? Let me take the information.MR JULIUS TUSIIME:  Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I want to relay, Madam Speaker, is that the Government, through the Ministry of Finance frontloaded about Shs 28.6 billion to purchase road units for the 17 districts that do not have them. That money was provided for. Now, we are wondering why cannot we again frontload money, which is about Shs [Mr Opio]8729THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 202327.4 billion to procure the road units? Madam Speaker, we are stuck. We recently read in the report by the Public Accounts Committee (Local Government) that the absorption of funds in the districts is wanting. We do not have the money to hire road equipment to work on our roads. We do not even have enough money to hire them, like my sister has said.My prayer is that you direct the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to front-load the remaining Shs 28.7 billion to purchase the road equipment for the new districts. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Finance ministry, what happened to the money for road units? MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, the money for the remaining administrative units without road equipment is provided for in Financial Year 2022/2023. We are going to release the last bit in this quarter.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the last bit of the money for equipment is going to be released this quarter, which is the fourth and last quarter. If the finance ministry has said they are going to release it, why are you arguing? Are you the ones who release the money? By the end of June, we want to see that the money for the equipment has been released because that is when this quarter ends. Remember, we budgeted for that equipment.Hon Cecilia Ogwal, do you have something to say?11.59MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I only have a few concerns to raise. First of all, we should not use the minority report just for information. We need to incorporate some of the concerns raised, in order to create a balance –THE SPEAKER: Imat, correction - the information is that it must help us in performing better. You know, in most cases, the minority reports have helped this House. So, in the next budgeting process, it should be taken as a priority.MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, that is what we have always pleaded for, but the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development keeps repeating the same mistake. However, I have looked through the figures that have been given to the House. I found that certain critical areas have been ignored, and yet we had concerns about them in our earlier debate. First of all, cervical cancer is the number one concern among women. To the committee report, Uganda only needs Shs 1.5 billion to provide equipment in order to allow women to have access to facilities for early identification and treatment in the referral hospitals; and they are only 10.If we really care about our mothers, who are dying from cervical cancer, we need to provide a machine per referral hospital in order to decongest the Uganda Cancer Institute and help our dying mothers. That is the first priority. (Applause)We talked about the Positron Emission Tomography (PET) project when our late Speaker passed on. Out of the Shs 250 billion committed by the Government, only Shs 65 billion was released. This is now the third year and it is coming to an end.Before we conclude, there must be additional money for the PET project, so that we can at least have that facility available in Uganda, instead of going to Aga Khan Hospital, India and so on. Madam Speaker, you are also aware that the Nodding Disease is a serious menace in the north. There is nothing there provided for the Nodding Disease. I wish to see Nodding Disease catered for in this budget. Finally, the north and north-east have been affected by cattle rustling. I pray that the operational fund for Northern Uganda to 8730BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024combat cattle rustling is in this budget. Some of our people have been deprived of animals and their means of livelihood. We have talked about compensation for those people to settle them because we cannot continue like this. We cannot go through with this budget, unless we have provided for something to allow the people in the north and north-east to settle and effectively handle this menace of cattle rustling. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER: Do you have a motion? Let Hon. Odur first speak. 12.02MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Madam Speaker, I have some brief comments on the report of the Budget Committee and I will make some guidance on how we can get additional money. I have looked at V ote 022: Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage. In the Corrigenda provided by the ministry, an amount of Shs 45,311,000,000 was provided for as an increment. I am very disappointed that the Budget Committee could not properly scrutinise and identify the following; an amount of Shs 1,130,000,000 has been provided for adverts and PR for domestic tourism promotion under budget output No. 12/0012.The same budget is provided five different times under the same narrative. This means that under output 12/001, they have provided Shs 240 million, enough to do eight videos. However, under another code, they have Shs 1,130,000,000 to do the same activities. The narrative is to do adverts and PR for eight domestic tourism videos. This money is available; it is under the Corrigenda that you have provided. My point is that when we move to the Committee of Supply, we have identified areas where we can get more money. When we reach that point, we should allow this money to be moved to critical areas that Members have already cited here. Secondly, Madam Speaker, I want to talk about the tax expenditures. The tax expenditures in Financial Year 2021/2022 amounted to Shs 2.478 trillion; that is 5 per cent of our national budget, waived by the ministers. I have a few examples; if I could read for you here: Capital gains tax amounting to Shs 13,942,753,000 was waived for a company of somebody called Goodra T. Behakanira; for a company called UGACOF Limited, Shs 33,942,488,000 was waived. Another company called Fresh Cuts had Shs 2.4 billion waived and then the Government comes here and says, “We do not have money to fund the unfunded priorities.”By way of resolution, I want to persuade this House that we put a moratorium on the powers of the minister to waive taxes because you cannot be waiving taxes and then come here to borrow. (Applause)  In the last financial year, we borrowed nearly the same amount in trillions to finance - and yet we are not allowing some people to pay taxes.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when we asked you to bring a list of people and companies that you have given a tax exemption to, you said they were not there. We need that list of exemptions; we need to examine it.MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Tax Expenditure Report is provided to this House on a quarterly basis, which we have always done except for quarter three of this financial year, where the minister did not give any tax waiver and I informed the House that we did not grant any tax waiver. (Mr Ekanya rose_)THE SPEAKER:  First sit. You are a member of the committee and that is one of the things you should have asked before proceeding.MR MUSASIZI:  Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with the House. On our side, we are developing what we call a Tax Expenditure Governance Framework which will analyse for us areas where we think is not necessary to continue granting tax waivers and exemptions. [Ms Ogwal]8731THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023When we finish, we shall go to Cabinet and subsequently Parliament for approval. However, not all waivers are bad and I do not want to argue because I am now a minister. I was 10 years in the backbench and I still hold the same view. It is important that the minister gets the authority to do work. Some of these waivers like the one of Goodra Behakanira - all of you know the circumstances under which this waiver was granted.THE SPEAKER:  We do not know the circumstances until you put them in writing.MR MUSASIZI:  I can provide further information.MR EKANYA:  Order.MR MUSASIZI:  I have finished my submission.MS OGWAL:  I stand under rule 43-12.09MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I listened very carefully to the debate for over four hours and it shows me clearly that Members studied the budget and have understood it very well. Actually, they have identified the areas they want to reallocate money. I would like to move a motion that we go to the Committee of Supply so that Members can identify the different areas they want money to be reallocated. I beg to move.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, the best thing is for us to look at V ote per V ote. Is the motion seconded? ( Members rose_) It is seconded by Hon. Tinkasiimire, Hon. Alioni and Hon. Ogwang. I put the question that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply for Consideration and Approval of the Revised Expenditure Estimates for Financial Year 2022/2023 and the Budgetary Proposals for the Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)COMMITTEE OF SUPPLYTHE CHAIRPERSON:  There is a procedural matter.MR EKANYA:  Thank you. We have just discussed a very important aspect of tax expenditure and the finance ministry -THE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Ekanya, we have agreed to have a report in this House on exemptions. Now, we are supplying. Hon. Alioni, put him to order.MR ALIONI:  Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. A motion has been moved on the Floor, seconded and you have ruled. Yet, my senior honourable colleague, Hon. Ekanya has raised a procedural matter after your ruling. Therefore, is Hon. Ekanya in order to disrupt the Chairperson? THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, let us supply. However, finance ministry, take note of all issues that have been raised with regard to the monies that should go to the respective votes which are a priority in this country and the first is the intern doctors.MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI:  Madam Chairperson, with due respect to your ruling - and that ruling means that the majority and minority reports were both adopted by the House. So, at this stage, we have to critically be firm out monies that are in the minority report. I moved on a very critical sector and said money under the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, under a programme called rural electrification, Shs 100 billion that was made for re-allocation be brought back.I also moved in the minority report that the agencies who have continued over the years to consistently get re-allocations at the mercy of the Committee on Budget be reconsidered so 8732BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024that the loss of Shs 100 billion is balanced up with the monies that have been deducted. These are the following sectors where monies were reallocated:1. Ethics and integrity - Shs 8 billion;2. National Intelligence Authority - Shs 3 billion;3. Office of Auditor-General - Shs 15 billion;4. Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory (DGAL) - Shs 16 billion;5. Uganda Police Force for operational purposes - Shs 51 billion; 6. Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (PPDA) be reallocated. 7. Money for gender, labour and social development, which was reallocated under ethics and integrity, should be reallocated. The total sum is Shs 115 billion. It balances up very well with the money we would have lost if we stored Shs 100 billion on the other side. So, we have balanced up the revenue with expenditure. My humble view is that it is budget neutral and does not distort the budget.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.Recurrent expenditureV ote 001: Office of the PresidentTHE CHAIRPERSON:   I put the question that Shs 241,179,103,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 001: Office of the President for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)THE CHAIRPERSON:  Clarification from Hon. Jonathan?MR ODUR:  Madam Chairperson, when you proposed and put the question, you included item 3(A) on the Order Paper. It would be important to clarify to the House that we are actually supplying and the figures provided only capture the budget for Financial Year 2023/2024 – not including the revised estimates for Financial Year 2022/2023, which is a supplementary. Last time, we raised this matter with the Presiding Officer on how this matter was organised.So, let it be clarified that the supplementary that we rejected has not been smuggled here because the question put by the Chairperson includes both. Once that assurance is given, we can move.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Jonathan, the supplementary is still on the Order Paper; it is not here – no, I corrected it to Financial Year 2023/2024.V ote 002: State House MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI : Madam Chairperson, V ote 002 is where I want us to go for the Shs 37 billion meant for the coffee chain that has gone for classified expenditure and the Shs 70 billion for pharmaceuticals and move them to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to on-road to UDC and UDB.MR SSEMUJJU:  Madam Chairperson, I made a proposal in the minority report that in compliance with the Presidential Emoluments and Benefits Act, we should not tempt the President into breaking the law – we should remove Shs 400 billion from V ote 002 and put it under the Ministry of Health. So, I would like to move that amendment before you put the question.MR OGUZU:  Madam Chairperson, I have observed that in V ote -THE CHAIRPERSON:  Members, have you started the debate afresh? We are in supply – V ote 002.MR OGUZU:  I am supplying, Madam Chairperson. Under V ote 002, a provision [Mr Kivumbi]8733THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023has been made of Shs 120.1 billion, under classified expenditure. We are aware the President made a written pronouncement that the West Nile Tobacco farmers must be paid. The Prime Minister came here and confirmed those commitments. Madam Chairperson, you directed that a provision should be made in this financial year’s budget. The Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury went ahead and wrote to the trade ministry, saying they must provide this resource. As we scan through, this resource has not been provided. Since it is in the best interest of the President that the economy must be spurred – and we can only spur the economy by supporting farmers – I, therefore, move that Shs 9.7 billion, from the Shs 120 billion, be removed from this V ote and reallocated to compensate -THE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Lee, that should be under the trade ministry. We should make a provision for the - it has been an issue; there was a resolution on that. So, we need to make a provision for payment of the tobacco farmers.MR MUSASIZI:  Madam Chairperson, I wish to allay the fears of the House that we are only dealing with 12 months. What we have not been able to provide now shall be provided for in the future. (Laughter)MR OGUZU:  Madam Chairperson, these are matters on which commitments have been made.THE CHAIRPERSON:  I have already made a ruling; that money should be found. Wherever they find it is not our issue -MR MPUUGA:  Madam Chairperson, there are a plethora of amendments that have been made. Before the general question, wouldn’t it be -THE CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. Can I put the question on the amendment?MR MPUUGA:  They are various and not uniform. I pray that you handle them one by one to avoid confusion.THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question on the amendment that we remove the Shs 37 billion.(Question put and negatived.)THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that we remove the Shs 70 billion.(Question put and negatived.)V ote 002: State HouseI put the question - listen, honourable members. I put the question that Shs 396,254,058,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 002: State House for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 003: Office of the Prime MinisterTHE CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, Hon. Ibrahim?MR SSEMUJJU:  Madam Chairperson, I move an amendment that we withhold this money for the whole V ote until the political action promised by the President has been taken.THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I said before that the Office of the Prime Minister is an office, not a person. We are not giving the money to the Prime Minister, Rt Hon. Nabbanja; we are giving the money to the office; it is not personal to holder.I put the question that Shs 90,911,448,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 003: Office of the Prime Minister for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)8734BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024V ote 004: Ministry of DefenceTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the Question that Shs 2,034,554,366,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 004: Ministry of Defence for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 005: Ministry of Public ServiceTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs – honourable members, I do not want any disruption. For those who want to talk, please, go to the corridors and help yourselves from there.I put the question that Shs 27,046,873,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 005: Ministry of Public Service for Financial Tear 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 006: Ministry of Foreign AffairsTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 26,287,620,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 006: the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agree to.)V ote 007: Ministry of Justice and Constitutional AffairsTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 145,043,526,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 007 for the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agree to.)V ote 008: Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development THE CHAIRPERSON:  Procedure on?MR SSEMUJJU:  Madam Chairperson, why are our colleagues on the Government side - the NRM - saying “Aye” even before you have put the question to the item, as if they are voting machines?THE CHAIRPERSON:  The Members on the NRM side are not voting machines; they are just very alert. THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 1,925,004,443,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 008: the Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 009: Ministry of Internal AffairsTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 63,470,223,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 009: the Ministry of Internal Affairs for the Financial Fear 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 010: Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and FisheriesTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 28,605,990,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 010: the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)MS CECILIA OGWAL:  Madam Chairperson, you waited for people to say “Aye” before giving me attention. The point I wanted to raise is that there are very many issues that were raised around the sector of agriculture. I just want to be assured that those areas have been catered for. There are very critical issues that were raised in our debate -THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable mem -bers, I would like to allay your fears - recurrent is basically about salaries and utilities; it is not about tractors, hoes, or seeds. When we get to development expenditures, we will handle that.8735THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023MR OGUZU:  Madam Chairperson, you have rightly elaborated that we are dealing with expenses, which are coming from the previous years -THE CHAIRPERSON:  And I would like you to look at the ministerial policy statements; these figures are there.MR OGUZU:  Yes, Madam Chairperson; one of such expenditures would be money that we borrowed for the agricultural cluster project. As far as I know, these projects have stalled in a number of communities, including my own. So I would want to -THE CHAIRPERSON:   Let us first look at the salaries.V ote 011: Ministry of Local Government\THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 34,889,072,000 be provided for as the current expenditure for V ote 011: the Ministry of Local Government for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 012: Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban DevelopmentTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 48,918,678,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 012: the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 013: Ministry of Education and SportsTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 286,271,277,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 013 for the Ministry of Education and Sports for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 014: Ministry of HealthTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that – Hon. Dr Batuwa, please, do not switch on the microphone to speak. Sit down, please. Can you sit down? Let us learn discipline. Sit down!  Clerk, please, read V ote 014.V ote 014: Ministry of HealthTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that – yes, Hon. Odur. Can I have Hon. Odur?MR ODUR:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want the minister and the committee chairperson -THE CHAIRPERSON:  When a Member is submitting, you must sit down.MR ODUR:  Madam Chairperson, I would like the minister and the committee chairperson, in light of the debate we have had - and this is recurrent expenditure as submitted by the Minister of Health, that there was a funding gap required here - this would be the right time for the minister to clarify whether it is possible or the Executive is saying they do not have that -THE CHAIRPERSON:  The information I have is that the money is going to be released. When I was there, the senior minister called on the same. First of all, on the arrears, they are going to give what is required. They are going to give it. Yes, LOP.MR MPUUGA:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Certainly, we are aware of the arrears of Shs 22 billion and the requirement of Shs 80 billion. Now that we are handling appropriation, will the minister clarify where the source of the Shs 80 billion will be since it is not indicated here, so that we do not subject this House to some gambling exercise?Secondly, there was a debate on subventions, for the not-for-profit and the Uganda Red Cross. We did not hear a response from the 8736BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024minister as to whether these subventions have been vacated. In any case, the bearers of these entities would know how to survive because part of the subvention goes to the payment of wages – the not-for-profit and Uganda Red Cross.MR MUSASIZI:  Madam Chairperson, the issue of provision for private not-for-profit hospitals was raised by Hon. Acuti. In the Corrigenda, which I laid yesterday, we provided an amount of Shs 12 billion to cater for this. These are subventions; so it is catered for.THE CHAIRPERSON:  It is catered for under the subvention. I put the question that Shs 113,029,592,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 014: Ministry of Health for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 015: Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 103,609,702,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 015: Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 016: Ministry of Works and Transport THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 192,565,876,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 016: Ministry of Works and Transport for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 017: Ministry of Energy and Mineral DevelopmentTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 89,938,603,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 017: Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 018: Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social DevelopmentTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 202,288,607,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 018: Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 019: Ministry of Water and Environment THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 26,085,434,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 019: Ministry of Water and Environment for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, say “Aye.” Do not just sit here and – V ote 020: Ministry of Information and Communications TechnologyTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 42,129,992,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 020: Ministry of Information and Communications Technology for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 021: Ministry of East African Affairs THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 35,654,489,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 021: Ministry of East African Affairs for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 022: Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and HeritageMR ODUR:  Madam Chairperson, during debate, I had put you on notice that I would [Mr Mpuuga]8737THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023seek to move that the total sum of Shs 45,311,048,000 provided in the Corrigenda and described in activities as money for making adverts and public relations for eight domestic tourism promotions be removed and the Shs 45,311,048,000 – (Interjections)-  the activities listed include adverts, public relations for eight domestic tourism promotion activities, advertisement and promotion of videos; all the activities listed under the Corrigenda are like that. I had proposed that this amount be deducted from this V ote, which is under recurrent expenditure and be added to areas we have identified, including health and agriculture.MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI:  Madam Chairperson, this is where we always argue that we invest in productive sectors that can generate revenue. Tourism is paramount and the major activity there is adverts – that is just the chart of accounts, which has – so, I pray that we maintain that money for that purpose. MS CECILIA OGWAL:  The reason this proposal is being made is that the same activity has been mentioned in two different places. We do appreciate that tourism is very important. Personally, I am very passionate about increasing its expenditure. Unfortunately, there is duplication in the – Can I propose that we crosscheck that? If there is duplication, we should remove one and leave the other. I beg to move.THE CHAIRPERSON : Honourable mem -bers, it is not on adverts but on the chart of ac -counts.MR MWINE MPAKA:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The Shs 33 billion was to increase the ceiling for Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) but not to give it more money. The Shs 33 billion that was given to UWA was for fencing, recruitment of UWA rangers and construction of houses for rangers. Madam Speaker, Parliament has always had issues with electric fencing.THE CHAIRPERSON:  I have said it is a chart of accounts. Finance minister?MR MUSASIZI:  Madam Chairperson, I want to comfort Members that sometimes in the chart of accounts, misposting happens. When it happens within a chart of accounts, we correct it. Therefore, I move that we pass the money and the correction within the chart of accounts will be done.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable mem -bers, we equally wrote to the finance ministry because we had a problem with Parliament’s chart of accounts. Our chart of accounts for committee money was coded differently. That is what should be corrected.I put the question that a total sum of Shs 172,528,190,000 be provided for under V ote 022: Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 023: Ministry of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan AffairsTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 7,801,500,000 be provided for under V ote 023: Ministry of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024.  (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 109: Uganda National Meteorological AuthorityTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 13,612,832,000 be provided for under V ote 109: Uganda National Meteorological Authority as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 110: Uganda Industrial Research InstituteTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 10,912,400,000 be provided for under V ote 110: Uganda Industrial Research Institute as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024.  8738BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 111: National Curriculum Development CentreTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 20,144,615,000 be provided for under V ote 111: National Curriculum Development Centre as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 112: Directorate of Ethics and IntegrityTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 22,686,859,000 be provided for under V ote 112: Directorate of Ethics and Integrity as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 113: Uganda National Roads AuthorityTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 108,506,087,000 be provided for under V ote 113: Uganda National Roads Authority as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 114: Uganda Cancer InstituteMS CECILIA OGWAL:  Madam Chairperson, in view of the fact that the committee recommended early detection and treatment of cervical cancer be decongested and that the referral hospitals be equipped with those machines, that will attract recurrent expenditure. So, can I be assured, if that has been catered for in this figure of Shs 40 billion? THE CHAIRPERSON:  She wants an assurance on the anticipated recruitment.MR MUSASIZI:  Madam Chairperson, since the recruitment is anticipated, we have room to go back and plan for it well. THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs for 40,517,693,000 be provided for under V ote 114: Uganda Cancer Institute as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 115: Uganda Heart InstituteTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 42,162,517,000 be provided for under V ote 115: Uganda Heart Institute as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 116: Uganda National Medical StoresTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the equation that Shs 581,042,988,000 be provided for under V ote 116: Uganda National Medical Stores as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 117: Uganda Tourism Board THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 25,745,756,000 be provided for under V ote 117: Uganda Tourism Board as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 118: Uganda Road FundTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 401,285,560,000 be provided for under V ote 118: Uganda Road Fund as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 119: Uganda Registration Services BureauTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 36,733,154,000 be provided for under V ote 119: Uganda Registration Services Bureau as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024. 8739THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 120: National Citizenship and Immigration ControlTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 154,141,479,000 be provided for under V ote 120: National Citizenship and Immigration Control as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 121: Dairy Development AuthorityTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 11,861,513,000 be provided for under V ote 121: Dairy Development Authority for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 122: Kampala Capital City AuthorityTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 201,468,154,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 122: Kampala Capital City Authority for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 123: National Lotteries and Gaming Regulatory Board THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 12,969,604,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 123: National Lotteries and Gaming Regulatory Board for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 124: Equal Opportunities CommissionTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 16,104,054,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 124: Equal Opportunities Commission for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 125: National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and Data BankTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 4,675,512,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 125: National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and Data Bank for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 126: National Information Technology AuthorityTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 42,772,491,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 126: National Information Technology Authority for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 127: Uganda Virus Research InstituteTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 6,785,496,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 127: Uganda Virus Research Institute for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question out and agree to.)V ote 128: Uganda National Examinations BoardTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 114,658,450,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 128: Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 129: Financial Intelligence AuthorityTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 28,065,863,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 129: Financial Intelligence Authority for Financial Year 2023/2024.8740BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 132: Education Service CommissionTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 7,898,919,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 132: Education Service Commission for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.) V ote 133: Directorate of Public ProsecutionsTHE CHAIRPERSON : I put the question that Shs 72,990,294,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 133: Directorate of Public Prosecutions for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 134: Health Service CommissionTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 11,069,429,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 134: Health Service Commission for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 135: Directorate of Government Analytical LaboratoryTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 19,150,773,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 135: Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 136: Uganda Export Promotion BoardTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 7,739,870,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 136: Uganda Export Promotion Board for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 137: National Identification and Registration AuthorityTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 51,652,188,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 137: National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 138: Uganda Investment AuthorityTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 12,968,634,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 138: Uganda Investment Authority for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 139: Petroleum Authority of UgandaTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 55,552,411,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 139: Petroleum Authority of Uganda for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 140: Capital Markets AuthorityTHE CHAIRPERSON:  Capital Markets Authority does not have any allocation. The V ote was withdrawn.V ote 141: Uganda Revenue AuthorityTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 572,451,376,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 141: Uganda Revenue Authority for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)8741THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023V ote 142: National Agricultural Research OrganisationTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 74,651,682,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 142: National Agricultural Research Organisation for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 143: Uganda Bureau of StatisticsTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 238,972,323,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 143: Uganda Bureau of Statistics for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 144: Uganda Police ForceTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 637,079,691,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 144 for the Uganda Police Force for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 145: Uganda Prisons ServiceTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 287,975,951,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 145: the Uganda Prisons Service for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 146: Public Service CommissionTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 10,520,421,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 146 for Public Service Commission for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 147: Local Government Finance CommissionTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 10,387,741,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 147: Local Government Finance Commission for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 148: Judicial Service Commission THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 16,388,462,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 148: Judicial Service Commission for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 149: National Population CouncilTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 10,660,538,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 149: National Population Council for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 150: National Environment Management AuthorityTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the equation that Shs 28,243,967,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 150: National Environment Management Authority for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable ministers and Members, you are not going to go away and leave us here. Please, do not go and leave us here. I want the cameras to capture; these are the only people who are taking care of your budget. Those ones outside, who are loitering, are not mindful of the population out there. Members should come to the House and appropriate money for the people they 8742BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024represent. You are here as the voice of the voiceless.V ote 151: Uganda Blood Transfusion ServicesTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 20,384,310,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 151: Uganda Blood Transfusion Services for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 152: National Agricultural Advisory ServicesTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 41,109,708,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 152: National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 153: Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets AuthorityTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 18,195,543,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 153: Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 154: Uganda National Bureau of StandardsTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 47,567,420,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 154: Uganda National Bureau of Standards for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 155: Cotton Development OrganisationTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 4,498,819,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 155 for the Cotton Development Organisation for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 156: Uganda Land CommissionTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 8,165,182,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 156 for Uganda Land Commission for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 157: National Forestry AuthorityTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 19,614,938,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 157 for National Forestry Authority for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 158: Internal Security OrganisationTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 180,161,185,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 158: Internal Security Organisation for Financial Year 2023/2024 (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 159: External Security OrganisationTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 107,989,655,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 159: External Security Organisation for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 160: Uganda Coffee Development AuthorityTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 39,192,597,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 160: Uganda Coffee Development Authority for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)[The Chairperson]8743THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023V ote 161: Uganda Free Zones AuthorityTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 5,572,502,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 161: Uganda Free Zones Authority for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 162: Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 10,063,420,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 162: Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 163: Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory AuthorityTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 14,587,057,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 163: Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 164: National Council for Higher EducationTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 13,399,857,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 164: National Council for Higher Education for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 165: Uganda Business and Technical Examinations BoardTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 26,214,802,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 165: Uganda Business and Technical Examinations Board for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 166: National Council of SportsTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 46,966,514,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 166: National Council of Sports for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 167: Science, Technology and InnovationTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 160,162,439,000 be provided for as a recurrent expenditure for V ote 167: Science, Technology and Innovation for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 301: Makerere UniversityTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 336,469,558,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 301: Makerere University for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 302: Mbarara University THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 55,763,353,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 302: Mbarara University for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 303: Makerere University Business SchoolTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 103,103,575,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 303: Makerere University Business School for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)8744BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024V ote 304: Kyambogo UniversityTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 131,291,738,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 304: Kyambogo University for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 305: Busitema UniversityTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 49,213,920,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 305: Busitema University for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 306: Muni UniversityTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 26,590,089,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for Muni University under V ote 306 for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 307: Kabale UniversityTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 56,011,281,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 307: Kabale University for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 308: Soroti UniversityTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 25,125,972,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 308: Soroti University for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 309: Gulu UniversityTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 61,529,303,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 309: Gulu University for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 310: Lira UniversityTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 30,475,685,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 310: Lira University for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 311: Law Development CentreTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 24,565,354,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 311: Law Development Centre for Financial Year 2023/2024.  (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 312: Uganda Management InstituteTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 35,594,074,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 312: Uganda Management Institute for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 313: Mountains of the Moon UniversityTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 35,473,438,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 313: Mountains of the Moon University for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 401: Mulago National Referral HospitalTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 95,159,247,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 401: Mulago National Referral Hospital for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)8745THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023V ote 402: Butabika HospitalTHE CHAIRPERSON: We are now on Butabika Hospital. (Laughter)  I am simply reminding Members that there is a Butabika Hospital somewhere – mental health. I put the question that Shs 18,305,348,000 be provided for under V ote 402: Butabika Hospital as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 403: Arua Regional Referral HospitalTHE CHAIRPERSON : I put the question that Shs 10,397,689,000 be provided for under V ote 403: Arua Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 404: Fort Portal Regional Referral HospitalTHE CHAIRPERSON : I put the question that Shs 11,825,481,000 be provided for under V ote 404: Fort Portal Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 405: Gulu Regional Referral HospitalTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 13,600,351,000 be provided for under V ote 405: Gulu Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 406: Hoima Regional Referral HospitalTHE CHAIRPERSON : I put the question that Shs 11,385,655,000 be provided for under V ote 406: Hoima Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 407: Jinja Regional Referral HospitalTHE CHAIRPERSON : I put the question that Shs 15,378,259,000 be provided for under V ote 407: Jinja Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 408: Kabale Regional Referral HospitalTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 11,465,196,000 be provided for under V ote 408: Kabale Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 409: Masaka Regional Referral Hospital THE CHAIRPERSON : I put the question that Shs 10,577,567,000 be provided for under V ote 409: Masaka Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 410: Mbale Regional Referral HospitalTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 15,648,364,000 be provided for under V ote 410: Mbale Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 411: Soroti Regional Referral HospitalTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 9,890,170,000 be provided for under V ote 411: Soroti Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024.8746BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 412: Lira Regional Referral HospitalTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 16,180,493,000 be provided for under V ote 412: Lira Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 413: Mbarara Regional Referral HospitalTHE CHAIRPERSON : I put the question that Shs 12,104,715,000 be provided for under V ote 413: Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 414: Mubende Regional Referral HospitalTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 12,325,254,000 be provided for under V ote 414: Mubende Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.) V ote 415: Moroto Regional Referral HospitalTHE CHAIRPERSON : I put the question that Shs 11,218,897,000 be provided for under V ote 415: Moroto Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 416: Naguru Referral HospitalTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 11,828,505,000 be provided for under V ote 416: Naguru Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.) V ote 417: Kiruddu Referral HospitalMR OTIMGIW:  Under the expenditure for Kiruddu Referral Hospital, you earlier directed that we get some money and reallocate to health. Kiruddu Referral Hospital lacks Shs 4 billion for decentralisation of dialysis services to Mbale, Kabale and Arua; so I think the recurrent expenditure may be affected. Once the services are decentralised, it means new recruitment will be needed for dialysis.THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 25,585,007,000 be provided for under V ote 417: Kiruddu Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 418: Kawempe Referral HospitalTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 21,247,624,000 be provided for under V ote 418: Kawempe Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 419: Entebbe Regional Referral HospitalTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 10,159,175,000 be provided for under V ote 419: Entebbe Regional Referral Hospital as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 420: Mulago Specialised Women and Neonatal HospitalTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 28,608,597,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 420: Mulago Specialised Women and Neonatal Hospital for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to .)[The Chairperson]8747THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023V ote 421: Kayunga Referral HospitalTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 11,926,771,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 421: Kayunga Referral Hospital for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 422: Yumbe Referral HospitalTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 10,888,459,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 422: Yumbe Referral Hospital for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 501: Uganda Mission at the United Nations, New YorkMR WAMAKUYU:  Madam Chairperson, there are a number of Missions abroad and local governments. I beg your indulgence that since the totals are known per V ote, we could just deal with the grand totals.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable mem -bers, what do you think? LOP, do we do the omnibus?MR ODUR:  Madam Chairperson, we are supplying and the interpretation is that we supply in figures and those figures are supplied per V ote. The correct procedure is what we have been doing. If any Member is - it can be challenged. These V otes are actually like clauses of the Bill that we are dealing with. It has to be supplied that way. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable mem -bers, we had a scenario in the last financial year that we do not wish to repeat. Let us endure and supply V ote by V ote. For local govern -ments, we can do it, but these ones are only 39.MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO:  Madam Chairperson, our mission is right near the United Nations headquarters and it has one of the best locations. Even if this money is in recurrent expenditure, the mission is not in a good state. Secondly, the late Idi Amin Dada secured money for Missions – most of our Missions are in a dire state. I would like to put this House on notice that, in future, we will have to come up with a motion to urge Government to appropriate more monies for our Missions. For example, the minister knows what is happening with the one in London. They run out of gas during winter and use funny heaters, which might even burn the entire mission.THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 16,706,699,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 501: Uganda Mission at the United Nations, New York for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 502: Uganda High Commission in the United KingdomTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 5,887,534,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 502: Uganda High Commission in the United Kingdom for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)THE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Avur, help me to mobilise the Members. We need all Members in the House. We are going to go to the Bill.V ote 503: Uganda High Commission in Canada, OttawaTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 5,223,859,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 503: Uganda High Commission in Canada, Ottawa for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 504: Uganda High Commission in India, New DelhiTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 3,582,777,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 504: Uganda 8748BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024High Commission in India, New Delhi for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 505: Uganda High Commission in Kenya, NairobiTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 5,041,493,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 505: Uganda High Commission in Kenya, Nairobi for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 506: Uganda High Commission in Tanzania, Dar es SalaamTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 8,055,141,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 506: Uganda High Commission in Tanzania, Dar es Salaam for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 507: Uganda High Commission in Nigeria, AbujaTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 3,199,770,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 507: Uganda High Commission in Nigeria, Abuja for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 508: Uganda High Commission in South Africa, PretoriaTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 3,578,576,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 508: Uganda High Commission in South Africa, Pretoria for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 509: Uganda High Commission in Rwanda, KigaliTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 2,760,780,000 be provided for as recurrent Expenditure for V ote 509: Uganda High Commission in Rwanda, Kigali for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 510: Uganda Embassy in the United States, WashingtonTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 8,491,682,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 510: Uganda Embassy in the United States, Washington for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 511: Uganda Embassy in Egypt, CairoTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 3,451,000,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 511: Uganda Embassy in Egypt, Cairo, for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 512: Uganda Embassy in Ethiopia, Addis Ababa THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 3,457,435,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 512: Uganda Embassy in Ethiopia, Addis Ababa for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 513: Uganda Embassy in China, Beijing THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 4,247,006,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 513 for the Uganda Embassy in China, Beijing, for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)[The Chairperson]8749THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023V ote 514: Uganda Embassy in Switzerland, GenevaTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 7,172,560,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 514: Uganda Embassy in Switzerland, Geneva, for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 515: Uganda Embassy in Japan, Tokyo THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 5,343,851,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 515: Uganda Embassy in Japan, Tokyo for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 516: Uganda Embassy in Saudi Arabia, RiyadhTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 6,461,718,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 516: Uganda Embassy in Saudi Arabia, Riyadh, for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 517: Uganda Embassy in Denmark, CopenhagenTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 5,809,314,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 517 for the Uganda Embassy in Denmark, Copenhagen for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 518: Uganda Embassy in Belgium, BrusselsTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 4,469,280,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 518: Uganda Embassy in Belgium, Brussels, for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 519: Uganda Embassy in Italy, RomeTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 4,551,733,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 519: Uganda Embassy in Italy, Rome, for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 520: Uganda Embassy in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Kinshasa THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 4,115,623,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 520: Uganda Embassy in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Kinshasa, for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 521: Uganda Embassy in Sudan, KhartoumTHE CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, Hon. Cecilia? MS CECILIA OGWAL:  Madam Chairperson, I would like to draw the attention of the committee chairperson to the fact that Khartoum right now is not stable and I think some of the Ugandans have already been evacuated from Khartoum, and Sudan generally.Is it right that the House should appropriate this money and supply when we are aware that the embassy is not operational? I am just seeking guidance. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe a clarification - has the Ministry of Foreign Affairs closed that embassy? If it still exists, then I put the question that Shs 3,998,009,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 521 for the Uganda Embassy in Sudan, Khartoum, for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)8750BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024V ote 522: Uganda Embassy in France, Paris THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 7,457,520,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 522 for the Uganda Embassy in France, Paris, for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 523: Uganda Embassy in Germany, Berlin THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 8,050,468,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 523 for the Uganda embassy in Germany, Berlin, for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 524: Uganda embassy in Iran, Tehran THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question at Shs 3,034,254,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 524: Uganda Embassy in Iran, Tehran, for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)THE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Akamba, please come back. We need to finish this process. And we are going for appropriation. We have an Appropriation Bill. So, when all of you start going out, then what shall I do? Members, let us finish this process and we close it.And maybe for the NRM team, you are supposed to go to town on the 27th. (Laughter) V ote 525: Uganda Embassy in Russia, Moscow THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 3,748,792,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 525: Uganda Embassy in Russia, Moscow, for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)V ote 526: Uganda Embassy in Australia, CanberraTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 4,962,683,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 526: Uganda Embassy in Australia, Canberra for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 527: Uganda Embassy in South Sudan, JubaTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 3,968,816,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 527: Uganda Embassy in South Sudan, Juba for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 528: Uganda Embassy in United Arab Emirates, Abu Dhabi THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 6,248,125,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 528: Uganda Embassy in United Arab Emirates, Abu Dhabi for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 529: Uganda Embassy in Burundi, BujumburaTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 2,831,816,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 529: Uganda Embassy in Burundi, Bujumbura for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 530: Uganda Consulate in China, GuangzhouTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 3,700,000,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 530: Uganda Consulate in China, Guangzhou for Financial Year 2023/2024.8751THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 531: Uganda Embassy in Turkey, AnkaraTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 6,777,949,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 531: Uganda Embassy in Turkey, Ankara for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 532: Uganda Embassy in Somalia, MogadishuTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 2,693,276,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 532: Uganda Embassy in Somalia, Mogadishu for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 533: Uganda Embassy in Malaysia, Kuala LumpurTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 3,277,632,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 533: Uganda Embassy in Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 534: Uganda Consulate in Kenya, MombasaTHE CHAIRPERSON : I put the question that Shs 4,706,488,000 be provided for us as recurrent expenditure for V ote 534: Uganda Consulate in Kenya, Mombasa for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 535: Uganda Embassy in Algiers, Algeria THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 3,886,550,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 535: Uganda Embassy in Algeria, Algiers for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 536: Uganda Embassy in Qatar, DohaTHE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 2,748,639,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 536: Uganda Embassy in Qatar, Doha for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 537: Uganda Mission in Havana, CubaTHE CHAIRPERSON : I put the question that Shs 3,000,000,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 537: Uganda Mission in Havana, Cuba for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 538: Uganda Mission in Luanda, AngolaTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 3,000,000,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for V ote 538: Uganda Mission in Luanda, Angola for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V otes 601-610, 701-731, 801-935: Local GovernmentsMR ODUR:  Madam Chairperson, I am questioning the procedure adopted by our clerk because our voters who are watching us must see the exact figures that are going to them and why certain districts are given less and others more. It must be read figure by figure so that our people can see.MR MUSASIZI:  Madam Chairperson, there is a practice, which we have adopted in this House. Over the years, we have been – [Mr Odur: “Order.”] - The Chairperson has not allowed you.MR ODUR:  No, with a point of order, I do not need the Chairperson’s permission. Sit down, you have been here before.Madam Chairperson, the point of order I am raising is, where the rules are explicit, practice 8752BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024cannot overthrow the provision of the rules. Rule 154 is very clear that V otes must be called, the figure to be supplied mentioned and we take a vote on it. Is my honourable colleague, who has been here and is the one who has supplied these figures in a way that is not balanced to the country where Rubanda is getting more and other districts less, in order to hide all his allocations?THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, listen.1) V ote 601: Arua City - Shs 36,948,486,0002) V ote 602: Fort Portal City - Shs 21,749,696,0003) V ote 603: Gulu City – Shs 26,555,638,0004) V ote 604: Hoima City - Shs 14,982,706,0005) V ote 605: Jinja City - Shs 38,446,052,0006) V ote 606: Lira City - Shs 25,298,264,0007) V ote 607: Masaka City - Shs 28,740,158,0008) V ote 608: Mbale City - Shs 36,977,607,0009) V ote 609: Mbarara City - Shs 33,853,374,00010) V ote 610: Soroti City - Shs 18,894,719,000 11) V ote 701: Apac Municipal Council – Shs 8,494,655,000 12) V ote 702: Bugiri Municipal Council – Shs 5,045,364,000 13) V ote 703: Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipal Council - Shs 10,811,439,000 14) V ote 704: Busia Municipal Council - Shs 6,584,841,000 15) V ote 705: Entebbe Municipal Council – Shs 14,974,279,000 16) V ote 706: Ibanda Municipal Council – Shs 12,652,788,000 17) V ote 707: Iganga Municipal Council - Shs 6,354,604,000 18) V ote 708: Kabale Municipal Council – Shs 15,642,752,000 19) V ote 709: Kamuli Municipal Council – Shs 6,980,978,000 20) V ote 710: Kapchorwa Municipal Council – Shs 8,378,122,000 21) V ote 711: Kasese Municipal Council – Shs 14,834,120,000 22) V ote 712: Kira Municipal Council – Shs 20,650,861,000 23) V ote 713: Kisoro Municipal Council – Shs 3,648,099,000 24) V ote 714: Kitgum Municipal Council – Shs 6,670,002,000 25) V ote 715: Koboko Municipal Council – Shs 7,501,016,000 26) V ote 716: Kotido Municipal Council – Shs 7,454,417,000 27) V ote 717: Kumi Municipal Council – Shs 6,938,873,000 28) V ote 718: Lugazi Municipal Council – Shs 7,853,940,000 29) V ote 719: Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipal Council – Shs 13,864,172,000 THE CHAIRPERSON:  Please, mark where you have stopped.  [Mr Odur]8753THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023MS AMERO:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have looked at this list and to my dismay, the areas that are making money do not have money. Money has been awarded to members of the Committee on Budget. There is no equal distribution here yet objective No. 12 -  THE CHAIRPERSON:  Why don’t we listen to the whole list? You said we should read the list and we are reading it. Honourable members, listen to the figures. I do not think any of these Members will take this money into their pockets. 30) V ote 720: Masindi Municipal Council – Shs 11,172,470,00031) V ote 721: Mityana Municipal Council – Shs 10,365,633,000 32) V ote 722: Moroto Municipal Council – Shs 5,143,627,000 33) V ote 723: Mubende Municipal Council – Shs 10,465,947,000 34) V ote 724: Mukono Municipal Council – Shs 19,829,177,000 35) V ote 725: Nansana Municipal Council – Shs 24,351,761,000 36) V ote 726: Nebbi Municipal Council – Shs 6,907,898,000 37) V ote 727: Njeru Municipal Council – Shs 13,394,572,000 38) V ote 728: Ntungamo Municipal Council – Shs 4,845,867,000 39) V ote 729: Rukungiri Municipal Council – Shs 9,415,996,000 40) V ote 730: Sheema Municipal Council – Shs 14,106,079,000 41) V ote 731: Tororo Municipal Council – Shs 9,365,323,00042) V ote 801: Abim District – Shs 18,295,895,000 43) V ote 802: Adjumani District – Shs 31,965,889,000 44) V ote 803: Agago District – Shs 31,061,514,000 45) V ote 804: Alebtong District – Shs 23,689,489,000 46) V ote 805: Amolatar District – Shs 19,357,798,000 47) V ote 806: Amudat District – Shs 10,632,904,000 48) V ote 807: Amuria District – Shs 22,290,290,000 49) V ote 808: Amuru District - Shs 22,428,999,000 50) V ote 809: Apac District – Shs 20,739,922,000 51) V ote 810: Arua District – Shs 16,085,370,000 52) V ote 811: Budaka District – Shs 25,157,873,000 53) V ote 812: Bududa District – Shs 26,411,933,000 54) V ote 813: Bugiri District – Shs 34,828,388,000 55) V ote 814: Bugweri District – Shs 19,367,086,000 56) V ote 815: Buhweju District – Shs 15,085,933,000 57) V ote 816: Buikwe District – Shs 24,383,139,000 58) V ote 817: Bukedea District – Shs 26,466,423,000 59) V ote 818: Bukomansimbi District – Shs 18,428,274,0008754BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/202460) V ote 819: Bukwo District – Shs 22,102,420,00061) V ote 820: Bulambuli District – Shs 22,999,426,00062) V ote 821: Buliisa District – Shs 14,874,929,00063) V ote 822: Bundibugyo District – Shs 33,203,487,00064) V ote 823: Bunyangabu District - Shs 19,891,642,00065) V ote 824: Bushenyi District – Shs 28,896,953,00066) V otes 825: Busia District - Shs 32,967,494,00067) V otes 826: Butaleja District - Shs 33,927,473,00068) V ote 827: Butambala District – Shs 23,446,766,00069) V ote 828: Butebo District - Shs 16,607,616,00070) V ote 829: Buvuma District – Shs 13,321,617,00071) V ote 830: Buyende District – Shs 22,651,177,00072) V ote 831: Dokolo District – Shs 21,223,707,00073) V ote 832: Gomba District – Shs 21,231,932,000\74) V ote 720: Masindi Municipal Council – Shs 11,172,470,00075) V ote 721: Mityana Municipal Council – Shs 10,365,633,000 76) V ote 722: Moroto Municipal Council – Shs 5,143,627,000 77) V ote 723: Mubende Municipal Council – Shs 10,465,947,000 78) V ote 724: Mukono Municipal Council – Shs 19,829,177,000 79) V ote 725: Nansana Municipal Council – Shs 24,351,761,000 80) V ote 726: Nebbi Municipal Council – Shs 6,907,898,000 81) V ote 727: Njeru Municipal Council – Shs 13,394,572,000 82) V ote 728: Ntungamo Municipal Council – Shs 4,845,867,000 83) V ote 729: Rukungiri Municipal Council – Shs 9,415,996,000 84) V ote 730: Sheema Municipal Council – Shs 14,106,079,000 85) V ote 731: Tororo Municipal Council – Shs 9,365,323,00086) V ote 801: Abim District – Shs 18,295,895,000 87) V ote 802: Adjumani District – Shs 31,965,889,000 88) V ote 803: Agago District – Shs 31,061,514,000 89) V ote 804: Alebtong District – Shs 23,689,489,000 90) V ote 805: Amolatar District – Shs 19,357,798,000 91) V ote 806: Amudat District – Shs 10,632,904,000 92) V ote 807: Amuria District – Shs 22,290,290,000 93) V ote 808: Amuru District - Shs 22,428,999,000 [The Chairperson]8755THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 202394) V ote 809: Apac District – Shs 20,739,922,000 95) V ote 810: Arua District – Shs 16,085,370,000 96) V ote 811: Budaka District – Shs 25,157,873,000 97) V ote 812: Bududa District – Shs 26,411,933,000 98) V ote 813: Bugiri District – Shs 34,828,388,000 99) V ote 814: Bugweri District – Shs 19,367,086,000 100) V ote 815: Buhweju District – Shs 15,085,933,000 101) V ote 816: Buikwe District – Shs 24,383,139,000 102) V ote 817: Bukedea District – Shs 26,466,423,000 103) V ote 818: Bukomansimbi District – Shs 18,428,274,000104) V ote 819: Bukwo District – Shs 22,102,420,000105) V ote 820: Bulambuli District – Shs 22,999,426,000106) V ote 821: Buliisa District – Shs 14,874,929,000107) V ote 822: Bundibugyo District – Shs 33,203,487,000108) V ote 823: Bunyangabu District - Shs 19,891,642,000109) V ote 824: Bushenyi District – Shs 28,896,953,000110) V otes 825: Busia District - Shs 32,967,494,000111) V otes 826: Butaleja District - Shs 33,927,473,000112) V ote 827: Butambala District – Shs 23,446,766,000113) V ote 828: Butebo District - Shs 16,607,616,000114) V ote 829: Buvuma District – Shs 13,321,617,000115) V ote 830: Buyende District – Shs 22,651,177,000116) V ote 831: Dokolo District – Shs 21,223,707,000117) V ote 832: Gomba District – Shs 21,231,932,000118) V ote 833: Gulu District – Shs 21,678,185,000119) V ote 834: Hoima District – Shs 20,331,850,000120) V ote 835: Ibanda District - Shs 21,754,328,000121) V ote 836: Iganga District – Shs 38,124,629,000122) V ote 837: Isingiro District – Shs 43,369,358,000123) V ote 838: Jinja District - Shs 37,285,315,000124) V ote 839: Kaabong District - Shs 16,287,466,000125) V ote 840: Kabale District – Shs 32,609,628,000126) V ote 841: Kabarole District - Shs 20,343,712,000127) V ote 842: Kaberamaido District – Shs 14,913,324,000128) V ote 843: Kagadi District - Shs 35,348,272,0008756BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024129) V ote 844: Kakumiro District – Shs 25,000,313,000130) V ote 845: Kalaki District - Shs 15,868,505,000131) V ote 846: Kalangala District – Shs 14,894,914,000132) V ote 847: Kaliro District – Shs 28,487,386,000133) V ote 848: Kalungu District - Shs 25,170,989,000134) V ote 849: Kamuli District – Shs 46,518,428,000135) V ote 850: Kamwenge District - Shs 29,011,951,000136) V ote 851: Kanungu District - Shs 41,511,765,000137) V ote 852: Kapchorwa District – Shs 18,548,597,000138) V ote 853: Kapelebyong District – Shs 12,049,109,000139) V ote 854: Karenga District - Shs 10,726,827,000140) V ote 855: Kassanda District - Shs 22,543,695,000141) V ote 856: Kasese District - Shs 73,970,823,000THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable mem -bers, none of the Members from Kasese Dis -trict is on the Committee on Budget and Kasese is a very big district. So, we should stop saying, “Members who are on the Committee on Bud -get”. Hon. Atkins is a poor man. (Laughter)  He is not a member of the Committee on Budget.142) V ote 857: Katakwi District - Shs 25,335,675,000143) V ote 858: Kayunga District - Shs 37,361,049,000144) V ote 859: Kazo District – Shs 18,099,602,000145) V ote 860: Kibaale District - Shs 17,514,216,000146) V ote 861: Kiboga District – Shs 25,621,222,000147) V ote 862: Kibuku District – Shs 21,510,868,000148) V ote 863: Kikuube District – Shs 22,027,669,000149) V ote 864: Kiruhura District – Shs 18,214,354,000150) V ote 865: Kiryandongo District - Shs 28,181,672,000151) V ote 866: Kisoro District - Shs 41,251,167,000152) V ote 867: Kitagwenda District – Shs 19,274,549,000153) V ote 868: Kitgum District - Shs 28,277,064,000154) V ote 869: Koboko District - Shs 19,175,066,000155) V ote 870: Kole District – Shs 24,145,853,000156) V ote 871: Kotido District – Shs 11,301,208,000157) V ote 872: Kumi District - Shs 25,388,394,000158) V ote 873: Kwania District – Shs 22,753,848,000159) V ote 874: Kween District – Shs 19,391,073,000160) V ote 875: Kyankwanzi District – Shs 24,244,929,000[The Chairperson]8757THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023161) V ote 876: Kyegegwa District – Shs 23,846,624,000162) V ote 877: Kyenjojo District – Shs 35,581,507,000163) V ote 878: Kyotera District – Shs 35,036,531,000164) V ote 879: Lamwo District – Shs 18,485,759,000165) V ote 880: Lira District – Shs 27,100,374,000166) V ote 881: Luuka District – Shs 25,440,932,000167) V ote 882: Luweero District – Shs 63,300,117,000168) V ote 883: Lwengo District – Shs 27,153,735,000169) V ote 884: Lyantonde District – Shs 18,276,836,000170) V ote 885: Madi-Okollo District – Shs 17,665,819,000171) V ote 886: Manafwa District – Shs 25,992,671,000172) V ote 887: Maracha District – Shs 25,235,124,000173) V ote 888: Masaka District – Shs 13,315,598,000 174) V ote 889: Masindi District – Shs 23,520,737,000175) V ote 890: Mayuge District – Shs 42,544,940,000176) V ote 891: Mbale District – Shs 36,346,216,000177) V ote 892: Mbarara District – Shs 23,774,583,000 178) V ote 893: Mitooma District – Shs 27,230,403,000179) V ote 894: Mityana District – Shs 31,132,617,000180) V ote 895: Moroto District – Shs 13,533,113,000181) V ote 896: Moyo District – Shs 20,493,308,000182) V ote 897: Mpigi District – Shs 30,334,080,000183) V ote 898: Mubende District – Shs 25,717,019,000184) V ote 899: Mukono District – Shs 49,808,239,000185) V ote 900: Nabilatuk District – Shs 8,965,015,000186) V ote 857: Katakwi District - Shs 25,335,675,000187) V ote 858: Kayunga District - Shs 37,361,049,000188) V ote 859: Kazo District – Shs 18,099,602,000189) V ote 860: Kibaale District - Shs 17,514,216,000190) V ote 861: Kiboga District – Shs 25,621,222,000191) V ote 862: Kibuku District – Shs 21,510,868,000192) V ote 863: Kikuube District – Shs 22,027,669,000193) V ote 864: Kiruhura District – Shs 18,214,354,000194) V ote 865: Kiryandongo District - Shs 28,181,672,0008758BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024195) V ote 866: Kisoro District - Shs 41,251,167,000196) V ote 867: Kitagwenda District – Shs 19,274,549,000197) V ote 868: Kitgum District - Shs 28,277,064,000198) V ote 869: Koboko District - Shs 19,175,066,000199) V ote 870: Kole District – Shs 24,145,853,000200) V ote 871: Kotido District – Shs 11,301,208,000201) V ote 872: Kumi District - Shs 25,388,394,000202) V ote 873: Kwania District – Shs 22,753,848,000203) V ote 874: Kween District – Shs 19,391,073,000204) V ote 875: Kyankwanzi District – Shs 24,244,929,000205) V ote 876: Kyegegwa District – Shs 23,846,624,000206) V ote 877: Kyenjojo District – Shs 35,581,507,000207) V ote 878: Kyotera District – Shs 35,036,531,000208) V ote 879: Lamwo District – Shs 18,485,759,000209) V ote 880: Lira District – Shs 27,100,374,000210) V ote 881: Luuka District – Shs 25,440,932,000211) V ote 882: Luweero District – Shs 63,300,117,000212) V ote 883: Lwengo District – Shs 27,153,735,000213) V ote 884: Lyantonde District – Shs 18,276,836,000214) V ote 885: Madi-Okollo District – Shs 17,665,819,000215) V ote 886: Manafwa District – Shs 25,992,671,000216) V ote 887: Maracha District – Shs 25,235,124,000217) V ote 888: Masaka District – Shs 13,315,598,000 218) V ote 889: Masindi District – Shs 23,520,737,000219) V ote 890: Mayuge District – Shs 42,544,940,000220) V ote 891: Mbale District – Shs 36,346,216,000221) V ote 892: Mbarara District – Shs 23,774,583,000 222) V ote 893: Mitooma District – Shs 27,230,403,000223) V ote 894: Mityana District – Shs 31,132,617,000224) V ote 895: Moroto District – Shs 13,533,113,000225) V ote 896: Moyo District – Shs 20,493,308,000226) V ote 897: Mpigi District – Shs 30,334,080,000227) V ote 898: Mubende District – Shs 25,717,019,000228) V ote 899: Mukono District – Shs 49,808,239,0008759THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023229) V ote 900: Nabilatuk District – Shs 8,965,015,000230) V ote 901: Nakapiripirt District – Shs 11,039,255,000231) V ote 902: Nakaseke District – Shs 33,609,209,000232) V ote 903: Nakasongola District – Shs 29,199,461,000233) V ote 904: Namayingo District – Shs 24,345,537,000234) V ote 905: Namisindwa District – Shs 25,757,056,000235) V ote 906: Namutumba District – Shs 29,395,177,000 236) V ote 907: Napak District – Shs 14,554,931,000237) V ote 908: Nebbi District – Shs 28,393,138,000238) V ote 909: Ngora District – Shs 20,015,428,000 239) V ote 910: Ntoroko District – Shs 17,856,009,000240) V ote 911: Ntungamo District – Shs 52,482,302,000241) V ote 912: Nwoya District – Shs 19,818,194,000242) V ote 913: Obongi District – Shs 11,259,732,000243) V ote 914: Omoro District – Shs 23,623,072,000244) V ote 915: Otuke District – Shs 17,308,500,000245) V ote 916: Oyam District – Shs 36,647,321,000246) V ote 917: Pader District – Shs 28,538,070,000247) V ote 918: Pakwach District – Shs 20,416,756,000248) V ote 919: Pallisa District – Shs 32,319,522,000249) V ote 920: Rakai District – Shs 35,470,398,000 250) V ote 921: Rubanda District – Shs 26,781,538,000 251) V ote 922: Rubirizi District – Shs 17,650,350,000 252) V ote 923: Rukiga District – Shs 21,557,840,000 253) V ote 924: Rukungiri District – Shs 40,111,677,000254) V ote 925: Rwampara District - Shs 21,241,513,000 255) V ote 926: Ssembabule District – Shs 29,341,783,000256) V ote 927: Serere District – Shs 32,000,876,000 257) V ote 928: Sheema District – Shs 26,927,219,000258) V ote 929: Sironko District – Shs 32,016,598,000259) V ote 930: Soroti District – Shs 22,110,246,000260) V ote 931: Terego District – Shs 25,198,993,000261) V ote 932: Tororo District – Shs 57,785,129,000262) V ote 933: Wakiso District – Shs 78,280,713,0008760BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024263) V ote 934: Yumbe District – Shs 42,937,851,000264) V ote 935: Zombo District – Shs 22,920,039,000THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that Shs 4,154,732,317,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the V otes that have been read under local government for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)Total recurrent expenditure THE CHAIRPERSON : I put the question that Shs 16,832,467,678,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2023/2024THE CHAIRPERSON: Under development expenditure:1) V ote 001: Office of the President - Shs 22,360,000,000 2) V ote 002: State House – Shs 21,722,000,0003) V ote 003: Office of the Prime Minister – Shs 138,267,997,0004) V ote 004: Ministry of Defence – Shs 1,830,737,715,0005) V ote 005: Ministry of Public Service - Shs 3,200,000,0006) V ote 006: Ministry of Foreign Affairs – Shs 120,000,000 7) V ote 007: Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs – Shs 20,000,000,0008) V ote 008: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – Shs 503,571,226,000 9) V ote 009: Ministry of Internal Affairs - Shs 1,600,000,00010) V ote 010: Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries – Shs 988,196,640,000 11) V ote 011: Ministry of Local Government - Shs 125,375,644,000 12) V ote 012: Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development – Shs 112,453,840,00013) V ote 013: Ministry of Education and Sports – Shs 354,000,446,00014) V ote 014: Ministry of Health – Shs 1,567,092,495,00015) V ote 015: Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives – Shs 10,825,623,00016) V ote 016: Ministry of Works and Transport - Shs 1,050,507,358,000 17) V ote 017: Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development -MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, it is in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development where I proposed to restore the Shs 100 billion for rural electrification. (Applause)  Committee chairperson, give me my list, it is budget-neutral. I proposed that this time, let agencies which we have consistently supplied in re-allocation suffer a little bit and we restore money for rural electrification. (Applause)  I have given the list of agencies to the committee chairperson. Give me the list that you have. I have made a list of agencies where money has been reallocated. These agencies are not directly in service delivery. They include:[The Chairperson]8761THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023V ote 112: Directorate of Ethics and Integrity - Shs 14 billion;V ote 125: National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and Data Bank. For the last five years, this centre has been getting money. This year, we can do away with it and have Shs 5 billion;V ote 129: Financial Intelligence Authority – Shs 3 billion;V ote 131: Office of the Auditor-General - Shs 15 billion;V ote 135: Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory – Shs 2.8 billion;V ote 144: Uganda Police Force - Shs 51 billion. I have excluded the agriculture ministry - I had put it on the list – because in the opinion of the House, they still want their tractors.V ote 017: Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development; still within the same ministry, we restore Shs 8 billion;I have also excluded the V ote 019: Ministry of Water and Environment because some people wanted their water;V ote 153: Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets – Shs 3 billion;V ote 022: Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage – Shs 3 billion; andV ote 018: Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development – Shs 9.7 billion.Among these agencies I have identified, the money is already taken and the Budget Committee redistributed it. Therefore, it is not money within those agencies; it is within the money that the Budget Committee redistributed. It will balance it up and not affect the budget, and we shall have good coverage and deepening of rural electrification. I beg that we restore Shs 100 billion for those agencies. (Applause)THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister of Energy and Mineral Development - maybe he has an option.MR OKAASAI: I agree with what the honourable member is submitting because the requests in my office are insurmountable. We need electricity, especially for rural electrification. (Applause)THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, part of the money we are talking about is what we have supplied in recurrent expenditure. Rural Electrification Authority (REA), first clean your House. Do not just come here and say you want money. You are even giving out money for gold. Give us a proper plan. When REA was removed, it went with Shs 500 plus billion. Where is that money? You are here crying for Shs 100 billion yet you have not accounted for Shs 500 billion. V ote 017: Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development - Shs 1,386,370,757,000V ote 018:  Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development - Shs 117,697,065,000V ote 019: Ministry of Water and Environment - Shs 1,113,675,033,000V ote 020: Ministry of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance - Shs 781,046,000V ote 021: Ministry of East African Community Affairs - Shs 215,180,000V ote 022: Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage - Shs 47,840,000,000V ote 023: Ministry of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs - Shs 79,282,610,000;V ote 101:  Judiciary - Shs 63,009,500,000V otes 102: Electoral Commission - Shs 3,720,000,0008762BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024V ote 103: Inspector General of Government’s   Office (IGG) – Shs 23,396,868,000V ote 104: Parliamentary Commission - Shs 67,491,000,000V ote 105: Law Reform Commission - Shs 420,012,000V ote 106: Uganda Human Rights Commission - Shs 531,078,000V ote 107: Uganda AIDS Commission - Shs 619,300,000V ote 108: National Planning Authority - Shs 2,014,500,000V ote 109: Uganda National Metrological Authority - Shs 604,755,000V ote 110: Uganda Industrial Research Institute – NilV ote 111: National Curriculum Development Centre - Shs 3,074,000,000V ote 112: Directorate of Ethics and Integrity -     Shs 150,000,000V ote 113: Uganda National Roads Authority -    Shs 2,367,318,611,000V ote 114: Uganda Cancer Institute - Shs    60,677,401,000V ote 115: Uganda Heart Institute - Shs       25,827,186,000V ote 116: Uganda National Medical Stores -    Shs 6,651,984,000 V ote 117: Uganda Tourism Board - Shs    100,000,000V ote 118: Uganda Road Fund - NilTHE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, we are talking about development expenditure. There is a difference between development expenditure and recurrent expenditure. Also, there is a difference between listening and shouting.V ote 119: Uganda Registration Services Bureau - Shs 4,756,000,000V ote 120: National Citizenship and Immigration Control - Shs 3,838,583,000V ote 121: Dairy Development Authority - Shs 5,760,000,000V ote 122: Kampala Capital City Authority - Shs 166,913,187,000V ote 123: National Lotteries and Gaming Regulatory Board - Nil V ote 124: Equal Opportunities Commission - Shs 216,000,000V ote 125: National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and Databank Shs 66,765,607,000V ote 126: National Information Technologies Authority – Shs 96,043,970,000V ote 127: Uganda Virus Research Institute - NilV ote 128: Uganda National Examinations Board - Shs 11,544,000,000V ote 129: Financial Intelligence Authority - Shs 729,000,000V ote 130:  Treasury Operations - NilV ote 131:  Office of the Auditor-General - Shs 1,760,000,000V ote 132:  Education Service Commission - Shs 2,436,410,000V ote 133: Directorate of Public Prosecutions - Shs 17,040,832,000V ote 134: Health Service Commission - Shs 52,800,000[The Chairperson]8763THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023V ote 135: Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory - Shs 22,734,546,000V ote 136: Uganda Export Promotion Board - Shs 37,000,000V ote 137: National Identification and Registration Authority – Shs 3,000,000,000V ote 138:  Uganda Investment Authority - Shs 114,378,884,000V ote 139:  Petroleum Authority of Uganda - Shs 26,824,097,000V ote 140:  Capital Markets Authority - NilV ote 141:  Uganda Revenue Authority - Shs 45,320,000,000V ote 142: National Agricultural Research Organisation - Shs 80,970,000,000V ote 143: Uganda Bureau of Statistics - Shs 9,200,000,000V ote 144: Uganda Police - Shs 163,628,425,000V ote 145: Uganda Prisons - Shs 27,387,707,000V ote 146: Public Service Commission - Shs 100,000V ote 147: Local Government Finance Commission – Shs 100,000,000V ote 148: Judicial Service Commission – Shs 2,773,678,000V ote 149: National Population Council – Shs 241,200,000V ote 150: National Environment Management Authority – Shs 9,320,000,0000V ote 151: Uganda Blood Transfusion Service – Shs 1,234,200,000V ote 152: National Agricultural Advisory Services – Shs 1,480,000,000V ote 153: Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Authority – Shs 3,000,000,000V ote 154: Uganda National Bureau of Standards – Shs 6,651,000,000V ote 155: Cotton Development Organisation – Shs 300,000,000V ote 156: Uganda Land Commission – Shs 18,811,960,000V ote 157: National Forestry Authority – Shs 4,594,000,000V ote 158: Internal Security Organisation – Shs 10,680,000,000V ote 159: External Security Organisation – Shs 1,002,960,000V ote 160: Uganda Coffee Development Authority – Shs 2,020,000,000V ote 161: Uganda Free Zones Authority – Shs 5,409,000,000V ote 162: Uganda Micro Finance Regulatory Authority – Shs 500,000,000V ote 163: Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority – NilV ote 164: National Council for Higher Education – NilV ote 165: Uganda Business and Technical Examination Board – Shs 2,800,000,000V ote 166: National Council of Sports – Shs 1,500,000,000V ote 167: Science, Technology and Innovation – Shs 80,171,646,000V ote 301: Makerere University – Shs 15,372,698,0008764BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024V ote 302: Mbarara University – Shs 3,954,706,000V ote 303: Makerere University Business School – Shs 2,125,530,000V ote 304: Kyambogo University – Shs 3,710,496,000V ote 305: Busitema University – Shs 5,892,464,000V ote 306: Muni University Shs – 4,752,000,000V ote 307: Kabale University Shs – 2,586,568,000V ote 308: Soroti University – Shs 1,257,362,000V ote 309: Gulu University Shs 5,671,020,000V ote 310: Lira University – Shs 5,000,000,000V ote 311: Law Development Centre – Shs 4,782,560,000V ote 312: Uganda Management Institute – Shs 1,320,000,000V ote 313: Mountains of the Moon University – Shs 2,229,372,000V ote 401: Mulago National Referral Hospital – Shs 16,528,858,000V ote 402: Butabika Hospital – Shs 2,513,373,000THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members -MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI:  Madam Chairperson, this is where I come to amend the other figure of Shs 100 billion. My amended figure for the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development comes to Shs 1,486,370,756,000 to take care of the Shs 100 billion for rural electrification.THE CHAIRPERSON:  How much is it?MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI:  The total amended figure now becomes Shs 1,48 –THE CHAIRPERSON:  How much are you saying we should deduct from this development expenditure?MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI:  The figure I have moved, Madam Chairperson, is budget-neutral and I should be understood. I have not created any new entry. I have moved money that was deducted from the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. During the budget re-allocation process, these monies were spread over –THE CHAIRPERSON:  Spread over, including recurrent?MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI:  Even if it is recurrent, Madam Chairperson, I will be in a position to recommit -THE CHAIRPERSON : I am just seeking clarification.MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI:  Yes, including the recurrent – and I will be in position to recommit the recurrent figures for easy balance. I am not distorting the budget in anyway. I am only making a case that if we increase this figure by Shs 100 billion, we will be able to do rural electrification. MPs, including myself are under threat in my constituency because of poles that were put there without wires and generators. It is a huge crisis in the country. (Applause)THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, it is not a matter of clapping but logic. I want to ask the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to first bring accountability for the Shs 500 billion that they transferred REA with. We cannot give you money when you are just going to waste it. First, give us accountability for that money. Moreover the money was a loan.Secondly, we need a report on the exemptions. That is where we should be able to get the money, but you are giving exemptions at will. [The Chairperson]8765THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023Give us a report on the exemptions before we give you money. Can we hear from the committee chairperson? MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI:  Madam Chairperson, we have been allocating a lot of money to energy – we have been getting loans – but absorption is a problem. (Interjection)  Let me get information from Hon. Mudimi.MR WAMAKUYU:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In the last Parliament, the Government procured money from the EXIM Bank of China, through a project called TBEA, to extend power to all rural administrative units in the country. That project has stalled for many years. The money allocated has been lying there and after the end of Financial Year, they take and later re-V ote it. The minister should give us a status report on the TBEA project.MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI:  Madam Chairperson – (Interruption)MR EKANYA:  Madam Chairperson, Members need to note and be very careful so that the public do not think that we are the ones who do not want rural electrification. There is a challenge which the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development needs to handle. They have the problem of owner’s contractor that they need to sort out. They also need to sort out the issue of TBEA.Therefore, it should not be seen in the public that MPs are the ones refusing to give you money. What happened last year and the other year? This issue needs to be made very clear to the voters; that the Ministry of Energy needs to solve the problem of TBEA and owners’ contractors’ issue; they are legal issues.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Have you heard of that issue, honourable minister? On Tuesday, we need to debate it in this House. We also need accountability for the loan that we gave. (Applause)  We are not going to give you more money before you give an account to this country . (Applause)MR OKAASAI:  Most obliged, Madam Speaker.THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, on the development figures that have been read -MR OGUZU:  Madam Chairperson, we are allocating money when education and health do not have titles for those resources they want us to commit. You have set a good precedent that there must be accountability. I sought clarification from the Ministry of Education and Sports - they want to construct seed schools and health facilities in many places but those areas they want to put this money in do not have land titles. Where are those land titles? You are not answering that question, why?THE CHAIRPERSON: No money should be released until you have a title for the school. MR OGUZU:  Because we may commit the same mistake.MR OGWANG:  Madam Chairperson, I would like you to get us right here. First of all, when we say that no money should be released until we secure land, question number one is, who is meant to provide us with the land? Isn’t it you? Isn’t the local government? Two, I would like to tell you that we will be able to get land for all seed secondary schools in the country, in line with the policy of the Government that there should be a secondary school in every sub-county and parish. What we need is the money to construct. Thank you.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.MR OGUZU:  Madam Chairperson, what is happening is - I sit on the Education Committee -THE CHAIRPERSON:  The way you are grabbing the microphone -MR OGUZU:  I am sorry but this is an issue passionate to my heart.THE CHAIRPERSON:  You are not the only one who wants to use the microphone. Kindly have respect. The minister has said he will 8766BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024make sure we have land, MoUs in place and ownership. It is ownership – Hon. Tinkasiimire, first sit down. Honourable members, do not come and just lose - You know when you lose your head in this House, nobody will pick it. For me, when I get out of that door, I go a happy girl. These are things that - let us debate with calmness. If we disagree, let us disagree respectfully. The minister has said that everything will be provided for and that is it. Now, I want you people - Hon. Tinkasiimire, first wait. You all have been outside while I have been seated with my brother Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi. All of you have been out.Honourable members, order in the House. Listen to the question. Honourable members, I want to advise that next time you have issues that concern the Budget, go to your sectoral committee and follow it up with the Budget Committee. You are all ex-officio members of the Budget Committee. Do not wait for things to come on the Floor and you begin asking, “Why didn’t you give me also?” Make a follow-up from the House sectoral committee and the Budget Committee.Based on the V otes that have been read –  (Member rose _) - you are a Member, first sit down. I am going to report this one to my husband; he wants to touch me. (Laughter)Honourable members, based on the V otes of the central government that have been read on development expenditure, I put the question that Shs 13,223,122,671,000 be provided for as development expenditure for the V otes that have been read for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)V ote 403: Arua Hospital - Shs 2,620,000,000V ote 404: Fort Portal Hospital - Shs 120,000,000THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable mem -bers, Hon. Tinkasiimire has a very valid point - I am the one communicating. There are re -settlement camps where we would like to con -struct schools, but it is not easy to secure a land title. What you need to do is to enter into an MoU. It is not a land title per se. You need an agreement that gives the Government powers to be in charge of - including where churches are; I mean church land - I see how – Yes, Hon. Tinkasiimire.MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have four secondary schools that have been proposed for construction in my constituency under UGIFT - (Interjection)-  please, they are done over a number of years. In my constituency, half of the land belongs to a government resettlement scheme called Ruteete Resettlement Scheme. You cannot get a land title on a government resettlement scheme. We have seen the Ministry of Education and Sports insisting on land titles.  That is why I wanted this matter to go on record that in some instances, the land where schools are being proposed to be put ordinarily belongs to the Government where one cannot get a land title and so, the land title should not be the major factor for constructing a Government school.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable mem -bers, the point has been taken. Let us proceed with referral hospitals.1. Vote 405: Gulu Hospital - Shs 120,000,0002. V ote 406: Hoima Hospital - Shs 2,620,000,0003. V ote 407: Jinja Hospital - Shs 3,642,471,0004. V ote 408: Kabale Hospital - Shs 120,000,0005. V ote 409: Masaka Hospital - Shs 120,000,0006. V ote 410: Mbale Hospital - Shs 120,000,0007. V ote 411: Soroti Hospital - Shs 4,120,000,000[The Chairperson]8767THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 20238. V ote 412: Lira Hospital - Shs 120,000,0009. V ote 413: Mbarara Regional Hospital - Shs 5,230,000,00010. V ote 414: Mubende Regional Referral Hospital – 150,000,000 11. V ote 415: Moroto Regional Referral Hospital - Shs 120,000,00012. V ote 416: Naguru Referral Hospital - Shs 240,000,00013. V ote 417: Kiruddu Referral Hospital - Shs 1,530,000,00014. V ote 418: Kawempe Referral Hospital - Shs 900,000,00015. V ote 419: Entebbe Regional Referral Hospital - Shs 900,000,00016. V ote 420: Mulago Specialised Women and Neonatal Hospital - Shs 2,268,000,00017. V ote 421: Kayunga Referral Hospital - Nil18. V ote 422: Yumbe Referral Hospital  - NilTHE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, I put the question that Shs 25,060,471,000 be provided for as development expenditure for V otes 403 to 422: Referral Hospitals for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)1. V ote 501: Uganda Mission at the United Nations, New York - Nil2. V ote 502: Uganda High Commission in the United Kingdom - Shs 2,113,704,0003. V ote 503: Uganda High Commission in Canada, Ottawa - Shs 6,000,000,0004. V ote 504: Uganda High Commission in India, New Delhi - Shs 270,000,0005. V ote 505: Uganda High Commission in Kenya, Nairobi - Shs 7,200,000,0006. V ote 506: Uganda High Commission in Tanzania, Dar-es-Salam - Nil7. V ote 507: Uganda High Commission in Nigeria, Abuja - Shs 16,200,000,0008. V ote 508: Uganda High Commission in South Africa, Pretoria - Shs 390,000,0009. V ote 509: Uganda High Commission in Rwanda, Kigali - Shs 700,000,00010. V ote 510: Uganda Embassy in the United States, Washington - Shs 540,000,00011. V ote 511: Uganda Embassy in Egypt, Cairo - Shs 170,000,00012. V ote 512: Uganda Embassy in Ethiopia, Addis Ababa - Shs 370,000,00013. V ote 513: Uganda Embassy in China, Beijing - Shs 100,000,00014. V ote 514: Uganda Embassy in Switzerland, Geneva - Shs 330,000,00015. V ote 515: Uganda Embassy in Japan, Tokyo - Nil16. V ote 516: Uganda Embassy in Saudi Arabia, Riyadh - Nil17. V ote 517: Uganda Embassy in Denmark, Copenhagen - Shs 100,000,00018. V ote 518: Uganda Embassy in Belgium, Brussels - Shs 3,380,000,00019. V ote 519: Uganda Embassy in Italy, Rome - Nil20. V ote 520: Uganda Embassy in DRC, Kinshasa - Shs 2,856,380,00021. V ote 521: Uganda Embassy in Sudan, Khartoum - Shs 647,916,0008768BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/202422. V ote 522: Uganda Embassy in France, Paris - Nil23. V ote 523: Uganda Embassy in Germany, Berlin - Nil24. V ote 524: Uganda Embassy in Iran, Tehran - Shs 100,000,00025. V ote 525: Uganda Embassy in Russia, Moscow - Shs 172,000,00026. V ote 526: Uganda Embassy in Australia, Canberra - Shs 150,000,00027. V ote 527: Uganda Embassy in South Sudan, Juba - Nil28. V ote 528: Uganda Embassy in the United Arab Emirates, Abu Dhabi - Nil29. V ote 529: Uganda Embassy in Burundi, Bujumbura - Shs 150,000,00030. V ote 530: Uganda Consulate in China, Guangzhou - Shs 7,500,000,00031. V ote 531: Uganda Embassy in Turkey, Ankara - Shs 800,000,00032. V ote 532: Uganda Embassy in Somalia, Mogadishu - Shs 2,810,000,00033. V ote 533: Uganda Embassy in Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur - Shs 100,000,00034. V ote 534: Uganda Consulate in Kenya, Mombasa - Shs 4,650,000,00035. V ote 535: Uganda Embassy in Algeria, Algiers - Shs 390,000,00036. V ote 536: Uganda Embassy in Qatar, Doha  - Shs 198,000,00037. V ote 537: Uganda Mission in Havana, Cuba   -  Nil38. V ote 538: Uganda Mission in Luanda, Angola  -  NilTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that Shs 58,388,000,000 be provided for development expenditure for V otes 501 to 538: Missions abroad for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)THE CHAIRPERSON:  The Local Governments are V otes 601-610, 701-731, and 801-935. That is for development expenditure. I now put the question that Shs 1,124,667,065,000 be provided for as development expenditure for local governments under the V otes that have been mentioned for Financial Year 2023/2024.(Question put and agreed to.)THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable mem -bers, I now put the question to the total de -velopment expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024 as Shs 14,431,238,208,000(Question put and agreed to.)MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME3.21THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House does resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, I put the question that the House does resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.(Question put and agreed to.)(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)[The Chairperson]8769THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY3.22THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for Financial Year 2023/2024 and has duly supplied without amendments. MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSETHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, what we gave were directives on what should be done by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. There were no amendments in terms of the figures. 3.23THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi) : Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.THE SPEAKER:  I put the question that the House adopts the report from the Committee of the whole House. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted. 3.24THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a re-committal in order to allow us to consider Statutory votes. THE SPEAKER:  I put the question that the House considers re-committal of statutory votes. (Question put and agreed to.)COMMITTEE OF SUPPLYV ote 001: Office of the President1. Specified officers; President - Shs 96,000,0002. Specified officers; Vice President – Shs 96,000,0003. V ote 007: Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs (Justice Court awards) – Shs 38,389,580,0004. V ote 130: Treasury Operations – Shs 18,951,153,591,000 5. V ote 101: Judiciary – Shs 329,535,835,000 6. V ote 102: Electoral Commission – Shs 145,169,948,000 7. V ote 103: Inspectorate of Government – Shs 63,074,932,000 8. V ote 104: Parliamentary Commission – Shs 878,063,581,000 9. V ote 105: Uganda Law Reform Commission – Shs 18,038,042,000 10. V ote 106: Uganda Human Rights Commission – Shs 19,040,586,000 11. V ote 107: Uganda AIDS Commission – Shs 15,980,208,000 12. V ote 108: National Planning Authority – Shs 47,787,651,000 13. V ote 131: Auditor-General – Shs 109,810,294,000 14. V ote 133: Directorate of Public Prosecutions – Shs 270,000,000 15. V ote 144: Uganda Police (Inspector and Deputy Inspector General) – Shs 163,708,000 16. V ote 145: Uganda Prisons (Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner) – Shs 163,708,000.8770BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, you have heard the statutory votes. However, pension and gratuity for non-statutory V otes is Shs 856,245,706,000.  MR MPUUGA:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have heard the figure for Treasury Operations and I looked at the breakdown but I saw no provision for key obligations including promissory notes for Lubowa and others. I do not know whether it is part of the Treasury Operations. Or does the minister have elsewhere to pick up the money? Probably, the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget could rectify that. MR ISIAGI:  Madam Chairperson, the Leader of the Opposition used to say Lubowa is a non-entity. I am surprised today that he is interested in allocating money for that. The Government has not yet brought that in the expenditure estimates. So, we cannot create it here.MR MPUUGA:  The problem is that I am both a lawyer and an economist. I am aware of the commitments in form of a promissory note. Do you want to clarify that those obligations do not obtain?THE CHAIRPERSON:  Finance? Of course, if we have an obligation, we should provide for it. You cannot run away from it. You entered into an obligation.MR MUSASIZI:  Madam Chairperson, at this stage, I expect us to deal with what I have provided. (Laughter)THE CHAIRPERSON:  Meaning he has not provided for Lubowa Hospital. MR MPUUGA:  Madam Chairperson, I want him to state that it is an unfunded priority It is a very simple answer.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable minister?MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI:  Let me help the Leader of the Opposition. Madam Chairperson, I think we better understand how we are being played. When these items are left unfunded, it is the first justification, to invoke the provision of 3 per cent by the 1st of July. The reason they ballooned the budget to Shs 52 billion, knowing it will never be realised, is to increase the lower portion of the 3 per cent, which they will do on discretion. Madam Chairperson, these matters are very critical to the extent that we are even failing to meet our obligation of Shs 2.1 trillion to the Bank of Uganda this financial year. Saying that you will not provide those expenditures is a clear sign that you are going to invoke the 3 per cent and reallocate money the way you want.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Committee on Na -tional Economy, together with the Committee on Health, I want you to do an oversight on that – now that the minister has denied it. We cannot legislate on what is not there. If it is not there, it is not there. So, let the Committee on Health, together with the Committee on National Economy, make a follow-up on that matter and report back to the House. Honourable members, we have the statutory charges that have been read. I put the question that Shs 21,473,079,372,000 be appropriated for statutory V otes for Financial Year 2023/2024. (Question put and agreed to.)MOTION FROM THE HOUSE TO RESUMETHE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable minister?3.35THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.8771THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023(Question put and agreed to.)(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY3.36THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has supplied statutory expenditure without amendments.THE SPEAKER:  It has supplied the statutory expenditure without amendment, but with instructions for the Committee of Health, together with the Committee on National Economy, to make a follow-up on the issues of Lubowa Hospital – and the report is on recommittal; we are restricting to recommittal.MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLYTHE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister?3.36THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.THE SPEAKER:  I put the question that the House adopts the report from the Committee of Supply.(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I thank you for finishing the supply. We are going to come back for the most important part. However, before we do that, I asked the honourable minister to lay on the Table the terms of borrowing. Part of this budget is going to be supported by borrowing. We need to see those terms such that when they come here seeking permission to go and borrow, we will refer to what has been laid here – that is what the law says.3.39THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the terms of borrowing for Budget Support for Financial Year 2023/2024. THE SPEAKER:  Please, lay it. I want the Committee on National Economy to scrutinise the terms.MR MUSASIZI:  Madam Speaker, on the list of accounting officers that we laid on the Table, there was one accounting officer missing – for V ote 167: Science, Technology and Innovations. I beg to lay on the Table the name of the accounting officer for V ote 167.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. What is the V ote number?MR MUSASIZI:  It is V ote 167: Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. THE SPEAKER:  Who is the accounting officer? MR MUSASIZI:  The accounting officer is Ms Jane Barekye, the State House Comptroller.THE SPEAKER:  I will also require the Leader of the Opposition to come with his report on the accounting officers that we referred to the Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprise) before you give out money to any entities.MR MUSASIZI:  Madam Speaker, there is another important document, which was asked for during the debate; I hereby lay the Poverty Status Report for Financial Year 2021. (Laughter)8772BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we are coming back for the Appropriation Bill, which is very important and I am suspending the House for 10 minutes.(The House was suspended at 3.41 p.m.) (On resumption at 4.09 p.m., the Speaker, presiding_)THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, can we have everybody come into the Chamber?BILLSSECOND READINGTHE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2023THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, Section 14(1) of the Public Finance Management Act requires the House to pass any budget-related Bills by the 31st Day of May. The Appropriation Bill 2023, which was tabled on the 30th Day of March 2023, was referred to the Committee on Budget and is now ready for a second reading. I now invite the Minister of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development to move a motion to that effect.4.10THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Appropriations Bill, 2023, be read for the second time.THE SPEAKER:  Is the motion seconded? (Members rose _) Okay, it is seconded by the Minister of State for Bunyoro Affairs, Hajjat, Hon. Obigah, the honourable Member for Ntoroko, Hon. Avur, the Member for Army, Rose, Hon. Odur Jonathan, Hon. Aogan, Budu, Nsereko –(Laughter)  - Wilson, Zombo, Xavier – okay, seconded by the Whole House and the honourable Woman Member for Masindi; also known as the Queen Dancer. (Laughter)  Would you like to speak to your Bill?MR MUSASIZI:  Madam Speaker, the object of this Bill is to provide for the authorisation of the public expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund a sum of Shs 29,715,517,110,000 only, to meet the expenditure for the year ending 30th June 2024 and to appropriate the supplies granted. Madam Speaker, this Bill has been considered by the committee and they have made some observations. With your permission, the committee can present those observations.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you.4.13THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Ignatius Wamakuyu):  Madam Speaker, permit me to present a report of the Committee on Budget on the Appropriation Bill, 2023.On 30 March 2023, the Appropriation Bill, 2023, was read for the first time and subsequently referred to the Committee on Budget for consideration, in accordance with rule 151(1) and (2). The committee considered the Bill and would like to report back to the House.Methodology The committee held consultative meetings with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and examined the Appropriation Bill to ascertain the consistency and accuracy of the estimates as indicated in the schedule to Appropriation Bill, against the resolution of Parliament on the same.The object of the Bill is to provide for the authorisation of public expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund, a sum of Shs 29,715,517,110,000 only, to meet the expenditure for Financial Year ending 30th June 2024, and to appropriate supplies granted.The legal framework: Article 156(1) of the Constitution provides as follows: “The heads of expenditure contained THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 20238773THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023in the estimates, other than expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund by this Constitution or any Act of Parliament, shall be included in a Bill to be known as an Appropriation Bill which shall be introduced into Parliament to provide for the issue from the Consolidated Fund of the sums necessary to meet that expenditure and the appropriation of those sums for the purpose specified in the Bill.” Additionally, Section 14(1) of the Public Finance and Management Act states: “Parliament shall by the 31st of May of each year, consider and approve the annual budget and workplans of Government for the next financial year, the Appropriation Bill and any other Bills that may be necessary to implement the annual budget.”ObservationsMadam Speaker, Parliament, on the 18th of May 2023, considered and approved the estimate of expenditure of the Government for Financial Year 2023/2024.Subsequently, in accordance with Rule 152(1) of our Rules of Procedure, the committee examined each V ote together with its corresponding figures as indicated in the Schedule to the Bill and identified several inconsistencies. The committee, therefore, recommends that the figures as indicated per V ote in the Schedule to the Bill be replaced with the figures, per V ote, as supplied by Parliament and contained in the resolution of Parliament, dated 18th May 2023, as attached.In conclusion, the committee recommends that the Appropriation Bill, 2023 be passed into law, subject to the proposed amendments.Madam Speaker, I beg to report.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Chairperson of the Committee on Budget. You have also heard from the minister. Yes shadow minister.4.17THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING, AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Muhammad Muwanga Kivumbi):  Madam Speaker, I have no comments because I agree with the committee’s position.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. 4.18MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi):  Madam Speaker, mine is to thank the committee. Yesterday, they left the House - Madam Speaker, thank you, first of all, and thanks to the committee for the work they have done. Sometimes we over-complain, but we do not know what those people go through and so, I want to thank them. I have one concern. Next year, remember to include the road from Kumi to Ngora and Serere to Kagwara.Secondly, municipalities do not have security lights. There is darkness throughout. There are very many robberies taking place. There are many cases of rape; there are very many crimes being committed. We need to be supported. Come to Kampala, go to Kumi, Mbale, to Jinja and everywhere; these places are in darkness. We need to drive away the darkness from these urban centres. I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I believe Parliament has done a good job. Remember that something can be done in this House. Thank you.4.19MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for the report. I request that where the boat is not very balanced, they balance it well next time. I hereby move a motion that the committee report be adopted.THE SPEAKER: Are you moving a motion that we read the Appropriation Bill for the second time?8774BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024MR ANGURA: Yes.THE SPEAKER: We do not consider a report -MR ANGURA: Yes, Madam Speaker. I move that the Bill be read for a second time.THE SPEAKER: I am happy that Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi is in agreement. 4.20MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Madam Speaker, we thank you for the attention you have given to this Appropriation Bill. I have about three observations to make. First, I propose that in future, when we are considering a similar Bill, we indeed provide for all statutory requirements. As we speak now, the Tree Fund was not provided for. The Environment Fund was also supposed to be provided for but it was not catered for. What this means is that we are violating the law. This House may be enjoined and equally accused of violating the law.Secondly, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Bank of Uganda and the tax collector, Uganda Revenue Authority, need to have a system that speaks. It would seem to me that we often fail to meet our tax targets because there are leakages along the way. So, when Uganda Revenue Authority is collecting money and it is being deposited in the revenue collection account, the finance ministry and Bank of Uganda must have a system where they are able to know. Thirdly, we seem to make all our tax Bills and decisions relating to tax on the basis of speculation. They are not qualified and are not based on cost-benefit analysis. We have double tax agreements that are supposed to be laid here, but this matter has been dodged, even when you directed it. I would, therefore, Madam Speaker, like to invite you to at least ensure there is a clear pronouncement on these matters. THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2023Lastly, as the finance ministry goes to release these resources, you should bear in mind that under the Physical Planning Act, 2010, as amended, the local governments are supposed to comply with approved physical development plans. Right now, a number of developments are taking place but the local governments are not complying with that. The law provides that sometimes, you are supposed to halt their resources if they do not comply. We asked the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to bring here a report on the annual performance of these entities but that report has not come here. The Deputy Speaker then directed that the report must be brought but up to now, it is not there. Therefore, Madam Speaker, as we pass this Bill, these are matters I really want to draw your attention to, such that they are enforced and we are in agreement with the law. You made a pronouncement on tobacco money. I still want to emphasise that the farmers need that money. I do not know if it is going to come from the 3 per cent but the issue is at large. It would also be important for us to get a clear pronouncement on that matter. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. You need to take up the issue of tobacco money. I also request Members that in the next budgeting process, kindly be involved. Do not come at the last minute. This is one of your roles of a Member of Parliament. You should be able to know what is happening in the sectoral committee. When these reports are brought to the House and referred to sectoral committees, you need to make a follow-up. From the sectoral committees, they come back to the House and go back to the Budget Committee. You need to go to the Budget Committee and follow up on what is happening with the Budget; not specifically with your district but with the National Budget. Do not come and do lamentations on the Floor on the last day. Leader of the Opposition? 8775THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 20234.24THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are three issues from me: First is to appreciate the effort of the committee over the last couple of weeks. I know it has been intense and sometimes frustrating. I implore the finance ministry to clean up its act. Parliament is not your houseboy to toss around. When you are bringing documents, plan and bring them at once and we work properly -THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, that is a very hard word. I can never be a houseboy or housegirl. No! I cannot be that; I cannot even be referred to as that. Use another word.MR MPUUGA: Exactly my point. THE SPEAKER: You can use another hard word, but not that one.MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, we can use a much fairer word, but I wanted it to get to the bottom of the finance ministry to take Parliament seriously. Bringing documents in piecemeal to make us work in circles makes us look a bit shabby - THE SPEAKER: You do not give a houseboy items in piecemeal. I only want that word removed - because we are not house boys or house girls.MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry. The Queen’s language is my second language; it is not my mother tongue. THE SPEAKER: You can say it in Luganda. (Laughter)  Anyway, let us remove the word “houseboy”. We can use a harder word. You cannot use it like that.MR MPUUGA: They should not really take Parliament for granted. THE SPEAKER: Okay.  Have you withdrawn the word “houseboy?”MR MPUUGA: Yes. It is seriously withdrawn, but he has gotten it. (Laughter)  THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. MR MPUUGA: That said; we have been jostling with the figures here and doing last-minute considerations. They speak volumes about the troubles of our planning framework. There was a migration from sector-based budgeting to programme-based budgeting. What has been happening over this budget cycle is organised chaos. The ministries have been submitting sector budgets. If you give the chairperson of the Budget Committee time, he will tell you how they have suffered in reconciling whether they are budgeting for programmes or sectors. In fact, the discovery is that some ministers - not the ones here today - do not even understand the whole context of programme-based budgeting. The ones here understand it. (Laughter)  This renders the House to work in a haphazard manner, Madam Speaker. I hope that over the subsequent cycles of operations, there will be an opportunity for a better understanding of what programme-based budgeting is about. If it does not work and impairs the way you work, please, go back to whoever rammed it down your throats and say, “We can go back to what we know and work better”.Finally, Madam Speaker, unfortunately, for me and you, honourable colleagues, this Budget may not change the situation of our people. You have got to go, clear your throats and start explaining why the Presidency has more money than the Parish Development Model. I hope you will be able to explain to the people, and then, you will know why only 25 per cent of you will come back in the 12th Parliament.It is about the people. We need to understand our obligation to people, and Members of Parliament, let us summon the courage to say; “what is the transaction cost of sustaining the President and the presidency? Is it sustainable?” I am using pronouns and not nouns; not even a name. Is it sustainable? Should we carry this on for the cycles remaining for our budgeting as the 11th Parliament? I leave that to you 8776BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024honourable Members of Parliament. Hopefully, you will be able to explain to your voters. At least the voters in Masaka City are aware that the budget is skewed and therefore, we need to work better.Finally, Madam Speaker, you heard murmurs when figures were being flushed on the screens about the regional inequalities in sharing of resources. The Committee on Budget needs to take a look at these figures next time around. When the Budget Framework Paper is laid here, there is a need for urgent work to figure out and throw light on the regional inequalities in the sharing of national resources so that this country is a nation for everyone and its attendant resources. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the Leader of the Opposition is talking about the issue of bringing documents late. The finance ministry has taken us for granted. You have made us sit here past midnight almost every day, in the name of having the budget completed. For the first time, let us respect each other; respect the Parliament and we will respect you as finance ministry.The issue of appropriation, under Article 156 of the Constitution is the role of Parliament. Allow us to do the appropriation. Do not come with figures that say “This one must not be moved.” Give us time so we can exercise our role. That is the only thing we have as Parliament. Honourable ministers, you have been there. By the way, you are only a minister up to midnight. You may wake up the next day and find out that you are not a minister. So, let us protect the integrity of this House. When you come back, you will find the House intact the way you left it. If we distort it, we will have lost it. So let us protect our role of appropriation. Honourable members, what has been appropriated may not be much but let us get involved in oversight. Let us get involved to see what has been given to our districts and ensure we do the oversight. MR AOGON:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to move a motion. Considering the fact that this House has done a lot of work. Madam Speaker, those who wanted to submit on the principles of the Bill have already spoken. I, therefore, move that you put the question for the House to resolve itself into a Committee of the whole House. I beg to move.THE SPEAKER:  Is it seconded? We want the Bill to be read for the second time. Move the motion well. MR AOGON:  I move a motion that the question be put for the Bill to be read for the second time.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Is it seconded? Seconded by Hon. John Bosco, Hon. Afidra, Hon. Max. Hon. Jane, Hon. Aza, Hon. Oboth, Gen. Elwelu, Hon. Linda, Hon. Solomon and Hon. Sanon.Honourable members, just to correct the record on issues of quorum, we have 188 Members attending physically and nine Members attending virtually. The total is 197 Members as opposed to 177. (Applause)I now put the question that the Appropriation Bill, 2023 be read the second time.(Question put and agreed to.)BILLSCOMMITTEE STAGETHE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2023Clause 1 THE CHAIRPERSON : I put the question that clause 1 stands part of the Bill.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 1, agreed to.[Mr Mpuuga] THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 20238777THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023Clause 24.13THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COM -MITTEE ON BUDGET (MR IGNATIUS WAMAKUYU): Madam Chairperson, the headnote is: Issue of money out of the Consol -idated Fund. We propose to substitute for the entire clause the following:“(ii) Issue of money out of the Consolidated FundThe Treasury may issue out of the Consolidated Fund and apply towards the supply granted to the Government for the service for the year ending on 30 June 2024, the sum of Shs 31,263,705,886,000 .MR MUSASIZI:  Madam Chairperson, I agree with the committee proposal. THE CHAIRPERSON : I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.Clause 3, agreed to.Clause 4, agreed to. Schedule MR WAMAKUYU:  Madam Chairperson, replace the amount in Column 2 of the Schedule of the Bill with the following Schedules A and B, for recurrent expenditure and development expenditure respectively. Schedule A: Recurrent Budget Estimates for the Appropriation for Financial Year 2023/2024It has the votes, description and amount – it runs up to page 13. Schedule B: Development Budget Estimates for Appropriation for Financial Year 2023/2024 – runs from page 14 up to page 23.MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I have no objection to the proposed amendment. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, we talked about the schedules; the recurrent and development budget. We are just looking at the figures we passed.MR PETER OKOT:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to clarify that during supply, we looked at the figures under development expenditure, and some of them do not match with those that we supplied. So, I want to know if -THE CHAIRPERSON:  Which figures?MR PETER OKOT: For example, let us look at V ote 914. During supply, we had Shs 3.063 billion under development expenditure, but here we have Shs 2.063 billion.MR MUSASIZI:  Madam Chairperson, V ote 914 is Omoro District. The figure I have, under development expenditure, is Shs 3,064,586,000.MR PETER OKOT:  Now, check under the appropriation expenditure.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Do not read the Bill – actually, it has been amended. Members, I am also going to raise an issue on Bukedea. (Laughter)I put the question that the schedule be amended.(Question put and agreed to.)The schedule, as amended, agreed to.The title, agreed to.MOTION FOR RESUMPTION OF THE HOUSE4.40THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.8778BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.(Question put and agreed to.)The House resumed, the Speaker Presiding.REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE4.40THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Appropriation Bill, 2023” and passed it with amendments.MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE4.41THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.THE SPEAKER : I put the question that the House adopts the report from the Committee of the whole House.(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.BILLSTHIRD READINGTHE APPROPRIATION BILL, 20234.43THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2023” be read for the third time and do pass.THE SPEAKER : I put the question that “The Appropriation Bill, 2023” be read the third time and do pass.(Question put and agreed to.)A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE APPROPRIATION ACT, 2023”THE SPEAKER:  The Bill is passed and title settled. (Applause)Honourable members, from the bottom of my heart, I thank you so much. (Applause)  From 8.00 a.m., you have been here. Yesterday, you were here. Even on Tuesday, you were here. You deserve to be taken out. (Applause)  Honourable members we are going to arrange that and communicate about the Speaker’s dinner. (Applause)I also want to inform Members of NRM that I got a letter written to me, as the Speaker, that the NRM Party is inviting you for a retreat from the 27th of this month to the 5th of next month.Two, I am also reminding you that the Address on the State of the Nation is on 7 June 2023 and the budget reading is on 15 June 2023. The House is still going to sit because we have very important reports that we must adopt. One of the most important reports that we must sort out is on exemptions under the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. Clerk put the Ministry of Energy and Mineral THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 20238779THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023Development on the Order Paper of Tuesday. We also need to handle the issues of the Mabaati  – and we are going to have Action-Taken-Reports.On the issue of Katonga, we also need a report. So, we will sit the whole of next week. Can I hear from the chairperson of the budget committee?4.46THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Patrick Opolot-Isiagi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the Committee on Budget, I would like to thank all Members of Parliament for concluding the budget. (Applause) I would also like to thank the chairpersons of the sector committees for joining the budget committee and guiding the committee – including the chairperson of the Business Committee, the Speaker, who was part of our meetings.In a special way, I thank members of the budget committee for their tireless effort amidst – even the LoP observed it – very tight and critical situations. Thank you very much. (Applause)I also thank members of our technical team who at one time worked trans-night to ensure that our report comes out. Thank you very much. (Applause)  I have no other words. I rest my case – I started by thanking all Members of Parliament –(Interjection)-  LoP? Yes, the LoP has been with us; he attended our meetings and submitted – at times physically and at times through other means. I also thank ministers from the Opposition – we call them “Ministers of the incoming government or future government.” There is the Minister of Finance in the Shadow Cabinet Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, I thank you for the work you are doing for this country and all of you colleagues. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you.MR PATRICK OPOLOT:  I also would like, in a very special way, to thank my deputy chairperson –(Applause)-  he has been a very useful vice or deputy chairperson. Thank you very much.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. For me, I want to especially thank Hon. David Bahati, for mobilising Members; he did it very effectively, and Hon. Musasizi. Now, I know why the House loves you. But in a special way, Hon. Mpuuga and his team are very instrumental to this country; thank you. The issues Hon. Kivumbi raises are very critical matters to this country. And when you look at Hon. Odur; he is keen on the detail. Thank you so much. Yes, honourable minister - where is Hon. Ssemujju? (Laughter)  4.50THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. In a special way, and on behalf of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I would like to thank you most sincerely, for your commitment to this Budget process. I have worked with you for quite a number of years ever since you found me on the Finance Committee as the chairperson. However, for the last two days, I realised a special attribute in you – (Interjection)  - please.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, why don’t you allow somebody to appreciate?  You heard Fr Onen appreciating, allow him also appreciate to.MR MUSASIZI:  Honourable colleagues, the Speaker has a special and unique attribute called commitment. I want to believe this is the reason she is the Speaker of this House, and this is why this House has been able to achieve all it has achieved since she assumed leadership. (Applause) Madam Speaker, let me also take this opportunity to appreciate the Leader of Government Business represented by the Rt 8780BUDGETARY PROPOSALS & ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023/2024Hon. Rukia Nakadama. We started this process way back in September, we would not have arrived here or reached this stage without the support of the entire Government, led in this Parliament by the Leader of Government Business, and constitutionally guided by His Excellency, the President, who is by Constitution, the Minister of Finance. I want to really appreciate them most sincerely. In a special way, I want to thank, Hon. Bahati. In the last two days, I needed someone to help me whip the members and he has been there for me, the committee and the House. Let us really appreciate him. I want to thank the leadership of the budget committee led by Hon. Opolot Isiagi, the MP of Kachumbala County whom I was with in the Finance Committee for five years. Hon. Isiagi is a unique chairperson. His reasoning, his approach and his style of work really fit in my approach. I want to thank you together with your vice chairperson and the entire Committee on Budget. Thank you so much for supporting this process. Finally, let me appreciate the finance committee for handling the revenue side; the Bills were well handled by the finance committee. I want to appreciate Hon. Dr Keefa Kiwanuka and Madam Vice Chair, Hon. Jane Pacuto, and the entire finance committee for the job well done. Let me finish by thanking the Leader of the Opposition, Hon. Mathias Mpuuga and his team. We have really managed this process in a consultative manner. I really want to appreciate you; I feel proud and I enjoy working with you, colleagues. Lastly, let me thank the House, without you, the Appropriation Act would not have passed. You have really put in your time and everything -THE SPEAKER:  It is still a Bill.MR MUSASIZI:  Without you, the Appropriation Bill would not have passed. I want to thank you most sincerely.THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2023 [Mr Musasizi]Madam Speaker, the last point - at the Ministry of Finance, we are not angels; it is a complex job to do and I want to thank you, colleagues, for your indulgence. Even where we have fallen short by bringing you documents late, you have not hesitated to handle our business. And on behalf of my senior minister, I would like to appreciate you for understanding the situation we work with. Thank you so much and God bless you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you so much. Yes, Government.5.56THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you, first, because you have been there for all of us. You have kept the time and commitment to see that we pass this Bill. I would like to thank the Committee on Budget and all the other committees that fit into the budget committee. I thank you so much for the job well done.I thank all the Members of Parliament and in particular, in particular, the LoP and his team because their input has contributed a lot to our Budget. So, I thank you so much. The Shadow Finance Minister, Hon. Kivumbi we thank you so much for the job done. (Applause)  Madam Speaker, as I thank the Members of Parliament, I would like to thank the Committee on Budget for using the resources that are available at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to appropriate for the whole country. For the priorities that we have appropriated, we thank you. Let us hope we are going to use that to see our country go forward. I thank you, Hon. Bahati, for being here in the absence of Hon. Obua because he is on other State duties. Finance minister with your team, we thank you. We continue working hard for this country.8781THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 18 MAY 2023THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable members and the ministers. How I wish we could have our Appropriation Bill signed so that it becomes an Act before we go for the budget reading. I, therefore, adjourn the House to 10 O’clock on Tuesday.(The House rose at 4.59 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 23 May 2023 at 10.00 a.m.)