PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - THIRD MEETINGWEDNESDAY , 17 MAY 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA8673Wednesday, 17 May 2023cally to make revisions to the budget that has been laid. So, can we request that the Corri -genda be laid on the Table and then we refer to it. Honourable minister? (Member rose_)  Yes?10.02MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso):  Madam Speaker, I sit on the Committee on Budget. Yesterday, you nearly allowed us to make a presentation but we are not yet ready because a Corrigenda was just a few days ago laid. Are they revising the other Corrigenda or bringing a fresh one? Do we still have a Government, Madam Speaker, that they are going to be throwing documents at us every hour? As the Committee on Budget, we were waiting for an opportunity to present. So, is there no limit that they can, every two hours, walk out and come back with a revision? So, I am wondering, Madam Speaker, if we still have a Government. THE SPEAKER:  That is a procedural matter under which rule? I will give that to Hon. Macho to respond. (Laughter)10.04MR GOEFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia):  Madam Speaker, Hon. Ssemujju always checks the steadiness of Government and I think he is trying to put the Government on alert to always be on standby and prepared to bring documents to the required committees. IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 38TH SITTING - THIRD MEETINGParliament met at 9.59 a.m., at Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Annet Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I want to sincerely welcome you to this morning’s sitting.Honourable members, the Parliamentary Pension Scheme has organised a half-day training for Members of Parliament on investment and retirement planning on 21 June 2023, in the Conference Hall. You are all notified and urged to attend. It will start at 9.00 a.m.; please, attend. That is where your money is; you need to understand what they want to invest in and know what the Pension Fund is doing.Honourable members, in furtherance to Reg -ulation 12 of the Public Finance Management Regulations, which operationalises Section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act, I here -by invoke Rule 25(1) of the Rules of Procedure on the Order Paper and accommodate the lay -ing of the Corrigenda for the Budget Estimates 2023/2024 Financial Year. Corrigenda is basi -8674COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER:  Anyway, we have a Government in place, but also, it is a strong warning – let us work in a systematic way. Let us have whatever documents you want this House to consider, in time. He has a legitimate issue. The concern he is bringing is that we should always have everything that you want us to handle in time. This should be the last time you are bringing the Corrigenda when we are two hours to the Committee of Supply. I have looked at the Corrigenda myself; there is not even much. It is just a correction. Honourable minister, the House wants you to apologise but since it is not your problem, just lay the Corrigenda and we do our work. 10.05THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your indulgence. I appreciate your guidance and I also take note of the circumstances under which this Corrigenda comes. We live in a world of continuous improvement and I personally believe in continuous improvement. I promise that in future, we will do better than now. (Applause)Madam Speaker, with this-THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the minister is remorseful - (Interjection)-  Hon. Goretti, the minister is remorseful; be a lady. MR MUSASIZI:  Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Addendum to the Corrigenda for the Draft Budget Estimates for the Financial Year 2023/2024. I beg to lay. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. The Corrigenda stands referred to the Committee on Budget where Hon. Sssemujju sits. Hon. Ssemujju, can you now go to the budget committee? There is a procedural matter. 10.08THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga):  Thank you, Madam Speaker-THE SPEAKER:  Maybe before you come in with procedure, Leader of the Opposition, in the VIP Gallery this morning, we have a delegation of Members of Parliament and staff of the Committee on Local Governance, Housing and Chiefs Affairs from the National Assembly of Zambia. They include: 1. Hon. Newton Samakayi - the chairperson. 2. Hon. Maureen Mabonga - the vice chairperson.3. Hon. Tyson Simuzingili4. Hon. Mwene Luhamba5. Hon. Elvis Twambo Mutinta 6. Hon. Christopher Shakafuswa7. Hon. Simon Mwale8. Hon. Kenny Siachisumo9. Hon. Menyani Zulu10. Mr Darius Kunda; and 11. Ms Rachel Mumba. You are very welcome.They are here on a benchmarking visit and they have come to witness our proceedings today. We welcome you to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)  Yes, Leader of the Opposition.MR MPUUGA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. We take the considered remorsefulness of the Honourable Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (General Duties). I rise to remind him of the provisions of Section 13(11)(C) of the Public Finance Management Act. Now that his documents are increasingly unreliable and incomplete, will he lay a statement attesting to their reliability because incompetence and unreliability are now becoming an art form of sorts for the finance ministry. Can we now say this is the last one by way of laying that statement signed by himself 8675THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 17 MAY 2023or his senior attesting that this time around, this is complete; that it is reliable?  Right now, before we really get out of the corridors, there could be another Corrigenda arriving. I saw the senior minister sauntering in the corridors. Is this complete now, with a certificate?THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister -MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, as far as the Budget for the Financial Year 2023/2024 is concerned, I confirm that this is the last document we are laying on the Table.THE SPEAKER: Hon. Musasizi, will it cause any harm for you to go and make a commitment in writing to this House that this is the last document you are laying on the Table? Thereafter, you can come back and lay it. We do not want to be seen to be forcing the finance ministry.The other time, we passed a law here and the Attorney-General said we forced him. I am going to suspend the House until midday. We will wait for the letter from the minister, as we also wait for the Committee on Budget to come and present its report. (Applause)(The House was suspended at 10.10 a.m.) (On resumption at 12.09 p.m., the Speaker presiding _)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you back from lunch. (Laughter)  I have heard your concerns in the corridors. However, do not do what you are doing. This is not how we handle parliamentary matters.As the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Commission, I am mindful of my Members -(Applause)- but issues of Members are not handled in public. Honourable members, as we supply today, we must be mindful of the public. The interns are demonstrating - we stand for the people; we are pro-poor; we are for the people outside of here. We are a people-centred Parliament. Let us first legislate for them. Ours is a sorted deal. I do not want anyone to misbehave; I am warning you. We want decorum and we must behave as honourable Members of Parliament; not in a dishonourable manner. Can we hear from the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget? [ Mr Ssemujju rose_]  Hon. Ssemujju has an outstanding procedure. I am happy Hon. Alobo is seated this side today. (Laughter)  Honourable members, it is free sitting today.MR SSEMUJJU:  Madam Speaker, you said you do not want Members to misbehave - I am shocked. I do not know the Members that want to misbehave, and over what? Can we be told which Members want to misbehave and what the matter is? THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have students and co-ordinators from Mbale City Secretariat of the Uganda National Students Association (UNSA) Executive Council. They are here to observe the proceedings. Join me in welcoming them. Thank you for coming. We still have our honourable members from the Parliament of Zambia. Can we hear from the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget?12.12THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Ignatius Wamakuyu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Today, we dedicated the day to supply and completion of the budget process for the Financial Year 2023/2024. However, you recall that this morning, an addendum to the Corrigenda was laid on the Table. Madam Speaker, Rule 32(5) of the Rules of Procedure states; “ A Paper laid on the Table may be referred to the relevant committee ”. When the addendum to the Corrigenda was laid on the Table, it was referred to the Committee on Budget. The Committee on Budget is looking at the document. Therefore, I beg that you give us two and a half hours from now to have the work properly done.8676COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRThe essence of the Corrigenda is to make corrections to the budget; and there are a number of local governments and so, we have to be careful with shifting figures for local governments and this requires enough time. Madam Speaker, on behalf of the committee, I beg that you allow us two and a half hours from now so that we bring the document. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER:  Members, you have heard from the chairperson.12.14MR BOSCO OKIROR (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The chairperson is proposing something, which is a bit technical. I am wondering, whether working under the timeline of two and a half hours is sufficient. I do not know whether it is a disservice if this issue is handled tomorrow so that we do not have anything about delay. That is my proposal.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Okiror, are you now designing for me what to handle and when? (Laughter)  We are going to handle the budget today and finish it. We must supply and finish the budget today regardless of the time. If we continue holding this budget estimate, many things will come in; let us supply. If we do not supply today, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will come tomorrow with another addendum, and remember, we have a constitutional deadline. It does not cost us anything and this is our office; we are paid to be in Parliament. We can actually sit here trans-night. 12.16MR GEOFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia):  Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with you that the further we postpone this, the more it pulls us down, yet we have other items on the Order Paper. This is a legislative task. Therefore, I request colleagues to be patient today and we handle this very important matter so Parliament’s calendar can move. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, one of our most important roles is appropriation and this is what we are going to do today. We either handle it today or not. In the meantime, chairperson, can you go and work on the budget and bring it here? We are going to handle matters of national importance. 12.17MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I read the cover letter of the Corrigenda. In paragraph 2, it says that the corrigendum is a result of the observations of the Committee on Budget, meaning that the Executive went back and addressed the concerns of the Committee on Budget. Although I had issues with that statement alone because the Committee on Budget has not come back and presented any report to us, it seems they have a way of communicating and by-passing Parliament without bringing their report for approval. This means they undermine the powers of the sectoral committee that made the recommendations. If you communicated and your matters are being addressed, why do you need the two hours? The Corrigendum is addressing the observations you sent. Why do you need the two hours? Or do you want to come very late so that Members of Parliament do not examine what the Committee on Budget is doing?MR WAMAKUYU:  Madam Speaker, three weeks ago, when we are considering the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, Hon. Odur raised an issue. He said that whenever we discuss issues of the budget, we should have reports from the sectoral committee. He indicated that the House normally adopts issues but the Committee on Budget sits and does the contrary. This House adopted the reports of the sectoral committees and most of them were requiring additional funding. So, we wrote to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to address the issues raised by the committees. The ministry has responded to the [Mr Wamakuyu] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR8677THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 17 MAY 2023issues in the corrigendum. I will come along with a list of all the items that were listed and how they have been addressed by the ministry. They have addressed some and left others.That is why the Corrigendum was referring to the letter. We extracted all those recommendations and that is the basis of that. It is something which should not worry Members of Parliament.MR OGUZU:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have observed that the Corrigendum has resulted in variations in the total budget figures.  THE SPEAKER:  Have you already seen the budget figures?MR OGUZU:  I saw what was laid in the ministerial statements and that is what we have been proceeding on.  THE SPEAKER:  Now, we are debating in anticipation.MR OGUZU:  No, I am not debating in anticipation. Madam Speaker, we had a figure of Shs 50 trillion and, now, the Corrigendum has resulted in the variations. I want to know if that is supported by a Certificate of Financial Implications from the finance ministry because what was laid here did not have a supporting commitment from the ministry. So, you may need to help us understand that.If it is the case that, indeed, there are variations, would it not be appropriate that sectoral committees examine the particular issues that are going to be affected by the Corrigendum? Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Minister for finance -12.21THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker –(Interjection)MR SSEMUJJU:  Madam Speaker, this is a very serious process. We have been dealing, mainly, with Hon. Musasizi – and I speak as a member of the Committee on Budget. Hon. Lugoloobi was granted bail by Court to do two things – first, to seek medical attention and secondly, to defend himself. THE SPEAKER:  There is a point of order.MR SSEMUJJU:  I am on a point of procedure, Madam Speaker –THE SPEAKER:  No, even if it is a procedural matter. Honourable members, let us have respect for each other. Hon. Musasizi is not here and there is also the presumption of innocence. I know you just do not want Hon. Lugoloobi but please, finish.MR SSEMUJJU:  Madam Speaker, the point I am raising – and honourable colleagues are laughing. All of us, at one time, will need bail. If Court grants you temporary freedom and then they see you very active, representing the same Government that took you to Court and accused you, your colleagues are going to be denied bail on medical grounds. They will say that immediately after they grant you bail, you will run to Parliament and begin transacting business. (Laughter)  So, the procedural issue – you see, I have been in Court myself. Court cannot grant you temporary freedom for medical reasons and to defend yourself and the next day, they see you in Parliament. What will the others who appear in Court do? They are going to say: “You Members come here and lie to Court.” So, can we advise Hon. Lugoloobi to go to hospital and we transact this business, Madam Speaker, without him? (Laughter)THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, if Hon. Lugoloobi was sick, he would not have come here and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not person to holder to Hon. Musasizi. We have five ministers in the finance ministry; Hon. Kasaija, who is the senior minister, Hon. 8678COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRLugoloobi – actually, Hon. Lugoloobi is the one who is supposed to be doing all these budgeting issues. However, let us have respect for each other. What has happened to Hon. Lugoloobi today will happen to another person tomorrow.MR ENOSI ASIIMWE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rule 72(1) of our Rules of Procedure says: “A speech of a Member must have reference to the subject matter under discussion.”  On several occasions, our honourable colleague keeps taking us back either to a matter that is under investigation or to a matter that has not been brought to the attention of the House to deal with and he diverts us. Is it procedurally right for Hon. Ssemujju to keep referring us to a matter that is not under discussion in the House? (Interjections)THE SPEAKER:  So, whom are you raising the point of order against? The issue that we are discussing is sub judice. Let us not discuss it. MR TINKASIIMIRE:  Madam Speaker, the procedural matter I want to raise touches on Hon. Lugoloobi and the practice in the Public Service – THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Tinkasiimire, just a minute – first sit down. Honourable members, I have made a ruling on the issue of Hon. Lugoloobi. He is still innocent until proven guilty. In addition, what we are discussing is a sub judice matter.  Can we raise matters of national importance? Hon. Musasizi, whom you wanted, is here. (Laughter)  Let us hear from Hon. Chemonges.12.26MR WILLIAM CHEMONGES (NRM, Kween County, Kween):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance -THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Musasizi, we want the budget here at 2.00 p.m. Please, go to the committee. Hon. Chemonges –MR CHEMONGES:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Between the 24th and 28th of April, we had a very serious problem in my constituency, where Uganda Wildlife Authority carried out an illegal eviction at the boundary of Mount Elgon National Park. They broke down houses, uprooted crops such as Irish potatoes, maize and even started beating people. I have almost 30 families without houses; they sleep in the open, and yet up to now, no one has come to their rescue. I managed to go to the head office in Mbale and talked to Mr Kiiza who heads Mount Elgon National Park and is not aware of what was going on. Madam Speaker, we have been talking about madness but what those people did; they really need to be checked because you can imagine trained officers breaking houses. These houses had been there for the last 30 years.THE SPEAKER:  Did you confirm that they were mad? MR CHEMONGES:  We need to do it, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER : No, if you have not done it, then you do not say that they are mad.MR CHEMONGES:  Okay, I withdraw that, Madam Speaker. These people were allowed by Government to stay around the boundary. When it decided to change that place into a national park, the Government was aware that they left people who were not resettled. They told them to wait there until they are permanently resettled. These are the people whose houses are being broken yet they now have nowhere to go. Secondly, in 2005, after the forest was turned into a national park, the community themselves took the Government to Court and the Government consented; there is a consent judgement, where the Government consented that they would resettle them before they are evicted. [The Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR8679THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 17 MAY 2023Therefore, as I stand here, the whole Sebei is looking at me. They are aware of what is going on. This problem has taken over 35 years. These people have no schools, roads, health centres; and they have nobody to help them at all. Thank you. Now, my prayers, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  What are your prayers?MR CHEMONGES:   Prayer number one – THE SPEAKER:  You have information from Hon. Solomon Chelangat.MR CHEMONGES:  Let me take the information.MR CHELANGAT:  Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, Hon. Chemonges is talking about is really a thorn in the flesh of the Members of Parliament from Sebei. The issue of the Ndorobos cuts across the Sebei Subregion. As we speak now, we have two resettlement camps in Bukwo District. There is Yatui Resettlement Camp in Chesower Subcounty and Teriet Resettlement Camp in Kapkoros  Subcounty. Madam Speaker, we were moving up and down and talking to the Prime Minister. The President and the Prime Minister have made communications about the resettlement of these people. However, up to now, these people are just stranded. They were given some support as a resettlement package in their camps but for the last five years or so, this support has failed to come through. Therefore, Madam Speaker, these people are looking at us as if we have abandoned them yet we have made a lot of noise; these people have been killed. While their source of livelihood is through cattle keeping, they do not have land where they can graze their cattle on. And when they try to take their cattle to the forest for grazing, they collide with UWA rangers and many of them have been killed. It is my prayer that we see how best to support these people. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add that this issue has taken a very long time. It was raised here in the Seventh and Eighth Parliaments and up to now, it is being raised. I pray that during your good leadership, Madam Speaker, why don’t you put this issue to rest? May your leadership help the people of Sebei to settle down. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  What is the order about? And whom are you putting to order?MR MACHO:  Madam Speaker, I was requesting her to give me way to ask you to order the Government. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)  THE SPEAKER:  What do you order? MR MACHO:  Madam Speaker, that you order the Government to allow those people to stay there. MR CHEMONGES: Madam Speaker, what my colleagues have said is exactly what I have been explaining. As leaders of Sebei Subregion, we are looked at as those who are not representing the interests of the people. This is a matter that we cannot explain in an hour; it is a very serious issue. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Can we hear from the Government? MR CHEMONGES: Madam Speaker, I just want to summarise the prayers. Prayer one is that UWA officers should immediately stop the eviction that is going on, and help them to rebuild those houses that they demolished last week such that these people can have shelter. The second prayer is that the Attorney-General and the Government should tell us the status of the consent judgement of 2005. 8680COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [Mr Bahati]Finally, Madam Speaker, these people are not encroachers. They are simply staying in their ancestral land; this is where these people were born. So, my last prayer is that the Government should permanently resettle these people, and also compensate them for all the lives lost. Very many people have been killed, as Hon. Chelangat has said; others have been injured. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. Even if these people are encroaching, they do not deserve to be killed. They do not deserve to be displaced. You cannot evict people in the name of “This is a forest.” That kind of thing; you cannot. Those are your voters. Can we have the status quo maintained? Can Government order these people not to evict anybody? Those people who have been evicted should be supported by the Office of the Prime Minister. Can we hear from the Government?12.41THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Madam Speaker, it is not acceptable to evict people when we know that they have nowhere to go and the Government has not worked on their resettlement.THE SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Nakadama - before you evict, do you have a court order for eviction?MS NAKADAMA:  Yes, that is what I am coming to talk about, Madam Speaker. I request honourable members to have a meeting with us on Friday in addition to a report from the district – because when they went to the headquarters, they were told that they were not aware. Please, help me and get a report so that we can have a meeting together with those people. I am calling the Ministry of Tourism and we shall have our meeting in the Cabinet Library with all the area Members of Parliament to talk about this and we see how it can be concluded. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, what we want is a solution to this and because she has committed herself to convene a meeting. After that meeting on Friday, please, report to me on the outcome. However, in the meantime, what is Government doing?MS NAKADAMA:  Madam Speaker, I had requested the MP to get me a report because they were saying that they are not aware. So – THE SPEAKER:  What we are saying is that people are being evicted. What we would like you to do – MS NAKADAMA:  To resettle them. THE SPEAKER:  No, first stop the eviction; first stop the eviction. MS NAKADAMA:  Okay, Madam Speaker. We are going to stop the eviction as we resolve the problem. The eviction should be stopped with immediate effect. THE SPEAKER:  I am going to allow you, Prime Minister, to go and make a call and order those people to stop the eviction. I am giving you time to go out and make that call.12.39MR CHARLES TEBANDEKE (NUP, Bbaale County, Kayunga):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rose on an urgent matter of national importance last week concerning insecurity in Kayunga District.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, listen to your colleague.MR TEBANDEKE:  I informed this House of the rampant robbery within the two trading centres and the murder of a Nalongo , the wife of a one Mr Monday in Kayonza. Even in Busana, Mr Samanya – a parish councillor for the youth in Wantente Parish was also murdered in broad daylight. The day before yesterday, we also received the same case where one Ms Namukwaya of Kamusabi was robbed at night. One Ms COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR8681THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 17 MAY 2023Namata, also of Kamusabi, was murdered the same night. The same day, a taxi with passengers was robbed on the highway between Kayunga and Kitimbwa. The matter is becoming unbearable for our people and I seek the indulgence of Government.I am also worried; my heart is telling me after Kayunga, maybe, they are proceeding to Bukedea but I pray it does not happen. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER:  In Jesus’ name, it will not come to Bukedea. (Laughter)  Bukedea is too far.  Government, the issue of what was happening in Masaka has now gone to Kayunga and the next day, it will go to your constituency.MS NAKADAMA:  Madam Speaker, I am calling upon the Ministry of Internal Affairs to immediately get in touch with that area to find out why this is happening. Later, they will bring us a report here but we need that problem to be solved immediately. The ministry is directed to handle that.THE SPEAKER:  I do not see them here. You may need to communicate. 12.42MR OJARA MAPENDUZI (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City):  Madam Speaker, last financial year, according to the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, Hon. Hilary Onek, Shs 54 billion was given to help resettle people in the areas of Mount Elgon. Recently, when he appeared before the Committee on Presidential Affairs, he stated that he did not know what was done with the Shs 54 billion. It would be in our best interest to get to understand more about this Shs 54 billion and how it was used. This is because every time, we keep hearing about the problem affecting the areas of Mount Elgon; Shs 54 billion is not little money that we should just ignore. These are public funds – taxpayers’ money. We need it to be accounted for. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Can I hear from the chairperson, Committee on Presidential Affairs? Let us get the information on the Shs 54 billion for Mount Elgon. It is not for Karamoja - first sit down. You will talk on Karamoja. 12.43THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Ms Jesca Ababiku):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to inform the House. It is true that the honourable minister appeared before us and talked about the Shs 54 billion. He said some people submitted a proposal to Cabinet to get more Shs 54 billion and he disassociated himself from that request. However, he did not tell the committee that that money was released and spent; so we did not confirm its release. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Is it still hearsay? MS ABABIKU:  Madam Speaker, yes, it is subject to verification. What we all know about the money, which was requested for and appropriated by this House, was the Shs 135 billion for relief to support Karamoja Subregion and other parts of the country. That was an attempt, which was not actualised, according to the honourable minister. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  You may need to establish the truth about it, as a committee. MS ABABIKU:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. We shall do that. 12.45MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance about the tribal attacks involving the Kuku of South Sudan, the Madi of Uganda and Aringa of Yumbe. It resulted into the displacement of some people. The issue is about fighting over land and the boundary in Gwere West in Moyo District. Some South Sudanese attacked Gobiri Trading Centre, Embe, Linyamiro and Etia in Gwere 8682COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [Mr Aza]West Parish in Lefori Subcounty. They also went ahead and attacked Goboro, Feya, Fitina Mbaya and Mgburugburuchu in Kochi Subcounty in Yumbe District. Most of the homes that were attacked and torched belong to the Aringa of Yumbe, Kakwa of Koboko and people from Maracha and Terego, who are settled near the border with South Sudan. Over 400 grass-thatched houses were torched.The Ugandans retaliated by attacking the Kuku tribe in Gwere West in Moyo District where over 100 head of cattle were driven away towards Yumbe and 20 houses were torched. This has resulted into tension, displacement of people, destruction of property, looting of domestic animals, bicycles, motorcycles, clothes, foodstuffs and torture. (Interruption)  MS A V AKO:  Thank you, Hon. Tom, for giving way. The matter that my honourable colleague, Hon. Tom, is raising is a serious disaster that has happened in our region in the districts that he has mentioned. Right now, 2,000 people are displaced and they have been confined in a transit centre called Goboro waiting for Government intervention. Their property is destroyed. The communities live in fear and there is no hope for people in that region. This has emerged typically because the region has been crying for border demarcations and security road clearances. My colleague will summarise the prayers. Thank you.MR AZA:  Thank you very much, my colleague. Madam Speaker, our prayers are as follows:1. The Government should expedite the demarcation of the border between Uganda and South Sudan.2. We need urgent relief items and food for the displaced people. 3. There must be increased surveillance and protection of the refugees. Not only that, there should be increased patrol by the police and the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF). 4. Can we have more police and military detaches constructed along the border? Thank you.12.49THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Madam Speaker, food has to be taken to those people because it is one of the urgent issues that has to be handled. Also, the demarcation of the land should be hastened. Madam Speaker, we cannot discuss some security issues here because this is between South Sudan and Uganda. I request that we do not discuss matters of security on the Floor of Parliament. However, we are going to handle that matter together with the Ministry of Security.MS AMERO:  The clarification I would like to seek from the Deputy Prime Minister is, in the Ninth Parliament, members of a committee of Parliament were put on gunpoint. When we reported this to the august House, money was given to handle boundaries. What has happened to the boundaries? These Kuku are in Uganda and they now own the land that was given to train South Sudanese soldiers. Why don’t we open our borders so our people know where they belong? Madam Speaker, we went through a painful ordeal. In fact, for 45 minutes, committee members were on gunpoint and we could not move. What is happening? You do not know where the border ends yet you want us to push this under the carpet. When will people know what is going on? We would like to ask Government to come out clearly and tell us where the boundary is so that our people are secure. Otherwise, asking for police and UPDF - Madam Speaker, we were surrounded by the police and UPDF accompanied us to the border. So, the issue of police and UPDF may not help. We want to know where the border is so that Uganda, COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR8683THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 17 MAY 2023as a sovereign State knows where its people belong. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  That takes us to the issue of the famous Tororo border. Tell us what you found out from the United Kingdom and the maps.12.51MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very unfortunate that the people of Yumbe are facing a crisis arising from border tensions. How I wish the Government could fast-track that since it involves an international border. The solutions to border challenges, internally and externally, were resolved by the Addis Ababa Resolution when independence was granted to nations after the partitioning of the continent in a meeting that agreed that there would be no alterations of borders or boundaries within different countries. This leads us to the situation we have been having in Tororo. We were sent to London to verify the boundaries between Tororo County and West Budama. Madam Speaker, I want to inform the House that we are waiting for the release of that report that is expected to be done by His Excellency the President.In London, details regarding all border disputes are in the Commonwealth archives. We got maps dating before independence and the partitioning of Africa. Also, all boundaries can be verified in London, if what is locally available is not authentic. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable member, you have made your point. MR ANGURA:  I would like to conclude by saying that where there is an internal or external boundary disagreement, the Commonwealth archives are open. Since I requested to raise a matter of national importance, which is important to all of us here, may I be granted the opportunity to proceed as the people of Tororo -THE SPEAKER: How do we conclude on the issue of borders?  We want a response from the Government. Before you bring another issue, let us have this one responded to. MR ANGURA: As the Government comes, they should communicate when they are bringing the Tororo report. If that Tororo report was laid here, it would sort out the confusion within the country internally and otherwise; that report will put all our minds to rest.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Before Government comes in, honourable members, we are here to legislate for our people. I sent my team to the Committee on Budget but I think they have challenges. I have told Members of Parliament to stop being mercenaries. When you insist too much, you end up disorganising a particular entity. This business of being mercenaries - If I do not get a report by 2.30 p.m., I will name and shame the Members who are disorganising the committee and we will disband the committee. We are not going to continue working that way. Some few Members cannot go and start disorganising a committee. Disorganising a committee means disorganising Parliament. Honourable members, in the VIP Gallery this afternoon, we have His Worship the Mayor of Soroti City, Hon. Joshua Edogu. He has come to observe the proceedings. He is represented by Hon. Jonathan Ebwalu, Hon. Ariko, Hon. Joan Acom and Hon. Adeke. You are most welcome. You have very good Members of Parliament. Thank you. Government?  (Mr Ebwalu rose_ ) Hon. Ebwalu, do you want your mayor to see that you can speak? (Laughter)MR EBWALU: That is not  correct. (Laughter) That mayor knows me.  Madam Speaker, following a matter raised by a team from West Nile, the Prime Minister  mentioned that they are going to deliver food to West Nile. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that the Prime Minister gives a timeline when they are going to deliver food? It should not be a blanket statement that they will deliver. Otherwise, we have seen ministers make statements to this Parliament that they do not follow up.8684COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Mayor, have you heard your Member of Parliament speak? (Laughter) We need a timeline when the food will be delivered.12.57THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, first of all, I have to go and check. The moment I make a statement here that food will be delivered today and it is not delivered, I will be taken as a liar. What I am going to do is to instruct that food be taken.THE SPEAKER:  Do not request for a point of order when the microphone is switched on. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister is being sincere; she cannot commit when she does not know whether there is food in the store or not. Yes, Rt Hon. Prime Minister -MS NAKADAMA:  Madam Speaker, regarding the Tororo report, the Government is handling it. I request the Member of Parliament to give us time so that this report can be handled to its conclusion. We have to look for the people concerned and get information from them so that we come here with a conclusive report. THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Nakadama, that report is ready; a team of Members of Parliament was sent to London to verify the boundaries. They came back and the Government prepared a report. It is only that the Government is not comfortable to go on the ground and tell people where the boundaries are.What you need to do is to engage the leaders from both sides, show them the boundaries and see how to reconcile them. At the end of the day, you will have to show them the boundaries.MR ANGURA:  Madam Speaker, the request to go to London arose from a very big meeting that was attended by all the stakeholders. THE SPEAKER:  I have already made a ruling to that effect.MR ANGURA: There is no need for further consultation  because it was an agreement – THE SPEAKER:  Can you go to your other matter of national importance?MR ANGURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are waiting for the report. (Interruption)  MR SILWANY:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Angura is one of the most senior legislators in this Parliament and he knows the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. Is Hon. Angura in order to continue disregarding your ruling yet you have already guided that he should proceed to raise his matter of national importance?THE SPEAKER:  Of course, Hon. Angura is not in order. We all want that report on the Floor and I know it is political; you are only impressing your voters in the gallery. Raise your matter of national importance.MR ANGURA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. You will recall that the world faced a very big crisis when COVID-19 hit and the borders were closed. Malaba Border, which is our main artery as far as the movement of imports and exports is concerned, equally faced the same problem. However, when the opening of the borders started, drivers were requested to test for COVID-19. This led to a strike by, among others, drivers of fuel tankers, which led to a rise in fuel prices. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister went to Malaba Border to try and resolve that crisis and indeed, it was resolved. However, to ease the congestion that had been occasioned by the strike, the Prime Minister directed that empty trucks leaving the country for Kenya should go through Lwakhakha Border. The problem of congestion was solved and the movement of trucks normalised. Madam Speaker, those who were surviving on the clearance of empty trucks and drivers who have families in Malaba but could not stay there because of the movement of goods to the centre were all affected. Efforts to have this border issue resolved took a bit of time. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR8685THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 17 MAY 2023On 20th of last month, the First Deputy Prime Minister, Rebecca Kadaga, travelled to Malaba and held a meeting with the stakeholders. They agreed, among others, that the community gate that had been closed be opened and the empty trucks start to exit and enter through Malaba. The blocking of the empty trucks had caused problems. For example, trucks coming to Tororo  Cement Industry were taking a longer route of about 200 kilometres. However, they allowed empty trucks to exit for one day only. Yesterday, another directive was given that empty trucks should not exit, leading to a strike. As I speak, there is paralysis at the border which has affected both inward and outward movement of trucks and it will continue if we do not resolve it. Madam Speaker, the matter of national importance that I am raising is, let the Government grant the request of the people for the drivers to cross to and from Kenya at a point convenient to them. Those who want to use Busia Border should use Busia Border and those who want to use Malaba, Lwakhakha or any other border should be allowed to use them. My prayer is for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to direct Uganda Revenue Authority – For the survival of the people of Malaba and Tororo County at large, we need freedom of entry and exit for trucks and persons because it is the livelihood of the community. The central business district  of Malaba is now collapsing and we need movement to resume as directed by Rt Hon. Kadaga. I beg to submit, thank you very much.THE SPEAKER:  Government?  1.06THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Madam Speaker, I have the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives here. Allow me to call him to give us some information about the movement of trucks at the border.THE SPEAKER:  Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives? 1.06THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati):  Madam Speaker, we are going to work with Uganda Revenue Authority to address this situation and see that it comes to normality. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Can I hear from the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget? I am told some ministers have also gone to the committee to lobby as Members of Parliament. I am going to that committee myself. (Laughter) Hon. Opolot Isiagi -1.07THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Patrick Opolot Isiagi):   Thank you, Madam Speaker. As per the Constitution, the submissions from sectoral committees were referred to the Committee on Budget. The committee started the scrutiny, as per the Constitution, to do analysis and make some reviews in order to present a consolidated statement to the House. However, the Government has continued to submit addenda and Corrigenda to the estimates. Two hours ago, an addendum to the Corrigenda was laid on this Floor and referred to the Committee on Budget. It would be magical science for the committee to be able to meet the directive to prepare and consolidate the report today. Therefore, we request the House to allow us have the whole of today to interrogate and do the right casting and report to this House tomorrow. THE SPEAKER:  Tell us the challenges you are facing in the committee; I do not want us to cover up things. Is it true that there are mercenaries who are there advocating for particular entities; people who are disorganising the committee? Let us run these committees in a free and fair way, in a professional way. Members should not go to disorganise committee work. If you want to debate or you 8686COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [The Speaker]want any change in figures, the report will be debated here. MR ISIAGI:  Madam Speaker, aware that we run a democratic system, the committee is open to every Member of Parliament. (Interruption)MR AMOS OKOT:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are here because you gave some little time - about two hours – to the Committee on Budget to finish the work before they can present it here. Again, Madam Speaker, you clearly communicated that there are some Members - and the word “mafias” featured in that communication -  THE SPEAKER: Mercenaries, not mafia. MR AMOS OKOT:  Mercenaries are trying to disorganise the committee and you have asked the honourable member to name them -THE SPEAKER:  I have not said he should mention names.MR AMOS OKOT : Now that the statement is very clear to the honourable members and a request has been placed to him, can he go straight – Is he in order to keep meandering instead of answering what we want to hear about the timeline given to them?THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, you have heard from the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget on the challenges that he has. As a chairperson, he may fear to speak but I will say it. I have mentioned the challenges, which are there and I am coming to monitor the process myself. (Applause) I am adjourning this House to 8.00 a.m. tomorrow. (The House rose at 1.10 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 18 May 2023 at 08.00 a.m.)  