Thursday, 15 May 2014

Parliament met at 2.48 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala 

PRAYERS
 
(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting and I want you to join me in welcoming students of Victoria University in Kampala District represented by hon. Naggayi and hon. Nsereko. They are here to observe the proceedings. (Applause) There are also some young people the other side; I do not yet know who they are but I will let you know.

Secondly, hon. Members, as we come to the close of the Third Session, I want to remind the Clerk of instructions I gave in the First Session, repeated in the Second Session, repeated in the Third Session that the decisions made by the House, should be summarised on a daily basis so that both the presiding officers are aware what has transpired – this is not being done on a regular basis.

I also want to remind the Clerk about compiling a compendium of the Speaker’s rulings. I have said this many times. I still have not seen any work along those lines. Please, in the Fourth Session, make sure that this is done.

We had asked the Minister for Finance to come and speak on the issue of the salaries. I have not seen the paper but if they are ready, I will amend the Order Paper when they come so that they can brief us on the issue of the salaries for the public servants.

Yesterday, we named the Members of the select committee on Public Service salaries; we were missing one person. We now add there hon. Latif Ssebaggala, MP Kawempe North. So, please, keep the ground running. We need to solve the issue of the civil servants’ salaries.

Thank you very much.

2.51
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me this opportunity to raise a matter of public national importance. 

This country has only one public marine vessel, which operates within the waters of Lake Victoria and this is MV Kalangala. It is the only ship, which works within the country.

This ship was taken to Tanzania, Mwanza, for an annual survey and service. (Interjections) “Survey” is the exercise which allows it to be given a class certificate. It is called an “annual survey” but in ordinary language it is called “service”. The other one is marine language. So, it was taken in January. 

When this ship was taken to Mwanza, for this exercise, the ministry gave the public information that the maximum time it was going to spend there was not more than 60 days. This is now May, so it is far beyond the estimated time and as you know, hon. Members, especially those who travel on water, June is a month when we get a lot of wind and storms on the lake. So, it is very dangerous for the travellers and sailors on the water.

We request that this House should prevail over the minister and the ministry to make sure that they give a positive answer, and return this ship to save the lives of the people. Madam Speaker, this is my humble request.

I contacted the two ministers, hon. Byandala and hon. Byabagambi, verbally. They have been promising that they are going to consult and find out what is happening but they have not given me any information. The information I am gathering is that the issue is about diversion of resources; they are not paying the company, which is maintaining the ship and they have been doing the same annually. Last year, it omitted the annual survey; the other year it was poorly serviced. So, we are really concerned and this is why I bring this matter for the House to prevail over the ministry. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of Government Business, the islanders do not have any other form of transport. If the ship is not available, it means they either remain on the mainland here or remain in the islands. So, can you please find the minister so that he can brief the House today before we go for recess?

2.55
MR MARTIN DRITO (NRM, Madi-Okollo County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Article 37 stipulates the right of Ugandan citizens as far as their culture, tradition, language and ethnicity are concerned.

It is a well-known fact that at the moment, we are undergoing the registration of citizens in this country. I have just been in my constituency and the exercise that is being undertaken now is being seriously avoided by people in my constituency. The exercise is being done in a way contrary to these articles of the Constitution; my people are being labeled Lugbara- the people of Madi-Okollo have never been Lugbara. The people of Madi-Okollo have always been Madi-Okollo. When you are labeling our people as Lugbara, you are not giving us the right identity that we belong to. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. This is a serious matter.

MR DRITO: This may sound like a laughing matter to some people but this is a very serious matter because since the citizens of this country from Madi-Okollo are refusing to be registered as Lugbara, we are going to be excluded from very many national programmmes.

Madam Speaker, I would like you and this House to prevail on the relevant minister to make sure that this is ideally corrected so that the people of Madi-Okollo are adequately identified as Madi-Okollo and not Lugbara –(Laughter)– and not as Kakwa.

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this time you have given me and I will request again that this House prevails on the recording of my people as Madi-Okollo and not as Lugbara. 

Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we do appreciate the rights of the people of Madi-Okollo to their citizenship and nationality. The minister is directed to rectify that error so that the people of Madi-Okollo are identified properly as Madi-Okollo.

2.58
MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank you for giving me an opportunity to raise a matter of national importance. A week ago, I stood here in this House and raised a matter of national importance regarding the spraying of teargas on supporters of hon. Brenda Nabukenya, who had just been nominated in Luweero. You ruled and asked the Minister of Internal Affairs to make a statement in this House; he has never made that statement. 

I now rise on another matter of national importance regarding the utterances made by the Assistant Inspector General of Police, Grace Turyagumanawe, saying that anybody who is not a resident of Luweero District will not be allowed on the voting day in Luweero. 

Madam Speaker, the candidate in Luweero, hon. Brenda Nabukenya, is a flag bearer of the Democratic Party, a party that is registered in this country, a party that is as old as 60 years. She is just a flag bearer.

A political party, according to the Political Parties and Organisations Act, is an entity, it has supporters. On a day like that, we do not only have to sponsor a candidate just by signing papers. We have to guard the votes. So, my issue is why should the Inspector General of Police, who is not even a member of the Electoral Commission, make such utterances? Madam Speaker, this also happened in the by- elections that brought me to this House. Members of Parliament and other supporters who came to support me were arrested and taken to prison in Masaka and they were not released until about 2.00 O’clock on the voting day.

So, I want Government to come out clearly and state whether non-residents of Luweero are not allowed to go to Luweero to support our candidate. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.00
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Speaker of the day, about three weeks ago, directed the Minister of Foreign Affairs to come and make a comprehensive statement about the state of the properties of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs abroad, and how the recruitment is done in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

Three weeks have passed and no minister has come to this House to make a statement and moreover, the state of Uganda’s properties abroad continue to deteriorate. So, we want the minister to come and tell this House about the situation, about the recruitment, about the officers in missions. As hon. Members have expressed here in this House, the situation in missions and the people in missions are not even fit to be in missions at all. So, we want the minister to come and make a statement on the Floor.

Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, if this House directed, you should present the statement early in the Fourth Session.

Hon. Government Chief Whip, the issues hon. Nsubuga raised are very serious. It means the chairman of the NRM will not be allowed to go to Luweero to campaign because he does not live in Luweero. So, I do not know. (Laughter)

3.02
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Madam Speaker, I thank my colleagues who have raised issues here but before I come to that, I am trying to look for the Minister of Works, as you have directed. 
The issue that has been raised by hon. Drito of Madi-Okollo County is an issue to do with the Constitution. You have given a directive that the minister should do the needful but when we looked at the Constitution, there is no tribe in the Schedule that is called Madi-Okollo; there is Madi and not Madi-Okollo. So, it is not an issue that the Minister of Internal Affairs can handle by creating a tribe without going through Parliament.

Thirdly, the issue that has been raised by hon. Mathius Nsubuga is a very important one. I would request to step out as I am calling the Minister of Works, I also call the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and explain because that means that even the chairman of my party will not be allowed to go to Luweero and that is not healthy in a multi-party dispensation.

I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We have directed him to come and report in the first week of the Fourth Session. About Madi-Okollo, maybe they were left out. I do not know. The important thing is how do they feel about how they are being labeled. If there is need for constitutional amendment, the minister will come and brief us.

3.04
MS RUTH LEMATIA (NRM, Women Representative, Maracha): Madam Speaker, I am speaking as a wife to a Madi. There are three types of Madi in West Nile: there is Madi-Moyo, Madi-Rhino Camp and then Madi-Okollo. But Madi-Okollo in Rhino Camp are in the same constituency but each time you refer to whether Okollo side, or Rhino Camp side, you distinguish by saying Madi-Okollo. That is what he is saying - the tribe is Madi. Otherwise, at times, we say Madi-Indri, which means Madi who kept more goats in West Nile. 

THE SPEAKER: The minister will come and brief us about which type of Madi these are. (Laughter)

3.05
MR RICHARD SSEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In a similar vein, the Minister of Local Government promised to bring a report regarding markets, one of Mbale and one of Kawempe rather than leaving matters to go to court.
I request that the hon. Minister of Local Government or the Chief Whip should give us a way forward. It is very unfortunate that Parliament is going to be prorogued. We need a report on the situation on the ground, Mbale and particularly on the market of Wandegeya, which area I represent.
Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We retaliate the decision of this House that the Minister of Local Government should come and report on the Mbale and Kawempe markets. 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: All markets.

THE SPEAKER: All markets - was it all markets?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes, all markets.

THE SPEAKER: We shall check that.

MS JUSTINE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, the issue on Mbale Market was raised here by the woman MP of Mbale. I committed myself before Parliament here that the Minister of Local Government would come and give a status report on markets. The minister came here and made a report –(Interjections)– Yes, he did. Then, the Members gave him information that the situation in Mbale was very bad and that he should intervene in Mbale and he went to Mbale. He requested for two weeks; the two weeks actually are supposed to end this week.  So, if that is according to your plan, Madam Speaker, the minister can come and make a statement about all markets.

Actually, he made a statement about all markets but the Members informed him that it was very bad in Mbale and it was worse than what he had told us here. So, if you allow that he makes a statement in the first week, after recess –

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it is so decided. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

    (A) RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE on BUDGET ON THE MEDIUM TERM MACRO-ECONOMIC PLAN AND PROGRAMME FOR SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT FOR FISCAL YEARS 2014/2015 TO 2018/2019, AND THE INDICATIVE PRELIMINARY REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FRAMEWORK FOR THE GOVERNMENT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

3.08
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, before I lay the report, allow me cite the relevant provisions in the law; section 7 (3) “The Budget Committee shall scrutinise the estimates and the reports of the sessional committees and submit its recommendations to the Speaker who shall send the recommendations to the President by the 15th day of May.” The Budget Committee complied with that provision this morning when we submitted the report.

Under section 8, “There shall be presented to Parliament by the Budget Committee recommendations submitted to the Speaker, under section 7 (3)”. It is within the framework of these provisions that I beg to lay the report of the recommendations of the Parliamentary Budget Committee on the Medium Term Macroeconomic Plan and Programme for Social and Economic Development for fiscal years 2014/2015 to 2018/2019 and the Indicative Preliminary Revenue and Expenditure Framework of the Government for the financial year 2014/2015. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson for fulfilling your obligations.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, if I heard very well, the law was saying “present”, not – and we do not know what the Budget Committee has submitted to the Speaker. That is why the law says he must present. So, the procedural issue I am raising is, under what law is the Chairperson of Budget Committee laying the papers, yet it is saying “present”?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Budget Committee is comprised of all the chairpersons of all the sectoral and standing committees. They are aware of what has happened. Next item.

    (B) REPORT OF THE DELEGATION TO THE UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON CLIMATE CHANGE (COP 19/CMP9) IN WARSAW, POLAND

3.11
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, procedure -

THE SPEAKER: Proceed with laying of papers?

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Delegation to the United Nations Conference on Climate Change (COP 19/CMP9) in Warsaw Poland. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, a date will be appointed for debate on that report. Thank you.

    (C) REPORT OF THE OUTCOME OF THE 5TH MEETING OF THE 2ND SESSION OF THE EAST AFRICAN LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY (26 MARCH - 1 APRIL 2014) IN ARUSHA, TANZANIA

THE SPEAKER: Minister East African Community - the minister is not here. Next item.

MR SEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I was still looking through the Order Paper but I realised that the directive from your Chair has not been honoured. Last Tuesday, on 13th, you directed that a statement about the ID registration exercise going on be presented today. We are going on recess and nothing is happening to that effect.

Similarly, the Chair directed that the question of salaries of workers also be presented. According to our rules, that should have been part of the Order Paper and now that we are on our way out and these are very critical issues - we are going on recess - the directive from the Chair cannot go in vain.

The Executive and the back benchers should not render the directives of the Chair in vain. Can we be told? Short of that, we fail to follow on the business of this House and more particularly on matters of national importance like those that were handled by this year. Are we procedurally right, Madam Speaker, for those responsible to keep quiet when their turn to respond to Ugandans has come at this point in time. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, when I was making my communication, I informed you that I had received information that the Minister for Finance is coming with the paper, which I had not yet received. By the time I was making the Order Paper I had not received it but she called me just before 2.00 p.m. that she has a statement. I told the House that I will be amending the Order Paper to include that statement - I did.

But for Internal Affairs, I think they can speak for themselves.

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: IDs as well.

THE SPEAKER: I am saying the Minister for Internal Affairs can speak about their issue. But Finance is here.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP BILL, 2012

3.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, yesterday, when we adjourned, you asked us to go and sleep over some of the contentious clauses. We exactly did that; we had a meeting this morning over some of the contentious clauses. I propose that we stay further consideration of the Bill until we resolve some of the policy issues that have risen as a result of the debate. (Applause)

So, I propose that we stay further consideration of the Bill and we come back to you as soon as the policy matters have been resolved. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the minister for being positive this morning. It is very good because yesterday, we were about to crush one another and that is why you saw us coming; we had come ready to continue with the debate.

So, in the same vein, yesterday hon. Amuriat raised some issues – the one of the consortium and the chairperson of the committee also talked about - that they were using the law from Kenya for comparison and others. So, at that time, I also never understood what hon. Engineer Amuriat was raising. So, I went and picked the Zambian law -

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Nandala, are you proceeding in luxury, on the Bill?

MR NANDALA: No, Madam Speaker, I was just seeking your indulgence because this is also one of the things, which we needed for consultation.

THE SPEAKER: You should bring it when we resume.

MR NANDALA: But I want-

THE SPEAKER: Because now you are speaking alone. There is no Bill. (Laughter) Hon. Nandala, you bring it at the right time.

MR NANDALA: But, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, we shall not operate like that. The mover of the Bill has said he would want a stay. Before we take a decision on that you are already moving onto other areas – 

MR EKANYA: Procedure, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his proposal. However, I would like to point out that this is a very serious Bill – now that the minister has requested for a stay, it means that it is only Government that is going to harmonize policy issues. 

So, don’t you think it would be appropriate that the minister hands over the Bill to the committee so that other Members with issues to raise can engage with that committee in order to save time? I am saying this because after the Government has harmonized policies, Members with issues will spend more time debating the same Bill. So, don’t you think it would have been better, after the minister has withdrawn the Bill, he sends it back to the committee so that any other Members with issues can present them there?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have copies of the Bill. If there are areas you want to amend, just get ready. When we resume the debate no one will stop you from raising them. 

But last night we had instructed the Government Chief Whip to take charge of that process – you know, I have been harassing the Committee on Finance to produce this Bill. They have done a lot of work under a lot of pressure because our plan was to have this Bill passed into law by today. Of course, I cannot direct Cabinet on when to meet, but can I stress that it is urgent that you sit and complete this matter so that when we commence the Fourth Session, it is put on the Order Paper?

MR AJEDRA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC FINANCE BILL, 2012

3.20
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Public Finance Bill, 2012, be read for the second time.

Madam Speaker, this Bill seeks to provide a tight limited legal framework right from budget planning, preparation, execution, accounting and oversight. It is intended to minimize areas of exploitation in interpretation and provide ease of reference and strong linkages within the public finance management cycle while at the same time preserving and enhancing parliamentary oversight.

It seeks to address the existing weaknesses in the public finance management particularly with regard to lack of credibility of budgets, predictability especially, minimum linkages and overlaps in the public finance management cycle; the non-alignment of budgets to the National Development Plan; the non-operational Contingencies Fund under Article 157 of the Constitution; the absence of a legal framework for petroleum revenue management; the fragmentation of public finance management legislations administered by the minister and Parliament; and the systematic linkages within the public finance management systems and management of supplementary appropriations, amongst others.

With regard to the budget, the Bill introduces the following measures:  charter fiscal responsibility and the new budget calendar; the establishment and operationalisation of the Contingencies Fund; a robust system of commitment based expenditure control; and a legal foundation for the management and sustainable utilization of petroleum revenues to act as a vehicle for investment of the public savings for the benefit of future generations, while at the same time financing the national budget subject to appropriation by Parliament.

This will ensure that no expenditure is incurred out of the petroleum fund without appropriation by Parliament.

Madam Speaker, this Bill significantly enhances the role of Parliament with regard to carrying out its oversight role in relation to public finance management.

I would like to thank all the stakeholders, Madam Speaker, who have given a lot of time and effort to scrutinize this Bill and I have no doubt in my mind that the numerous interactions have been very useful.

I am confident this legislation will set Uganda on a new path of solid public finance management by addressing all the major challenges that Parliament and the Executive seek to resolve.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

MR EKANYA: Point of procedure, Madam Speaker. Some of us are now in a very difficult situation because according to the calendar of Parliament, we thought today we would handle the PPP with the hope that the Public Finance Bill would follow another day. What I am saying is that this is an ambush because we have a minority report that has not been attached to the main report because we had been told the report would not come to the House today.

THE SPEAKER: Who told you?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, this is according to the Parliament calendar.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Ekanya, please! The Order Paper has reflected these items since Monday this week. So, you cannot say this is an ambush because they were on the Order Paper for yesterday and that of Tuesday.

MR EKANYA: Yes, Madam Speaker, I agree with you but because we had a Bill on PPP and we had been informed that House is to be prorogued today – I would like to seek your guidance that during committee stage, you allow us to bring in the necessary amendments because we need to move on with the legislation process.

THE SPEAKER: But why are you suggesting that the Speaker does not allow you to bring amendments? Why are you insinuating that you are not allowed to bring amendments to this House?

MR EKANYA: No, Madam Speaker, I am not saying that. What I am saying is that we intended to present a comprehensive minority report, which would have carried all these amendments. But because of the calendar –

THE SPEAKER: No, it cannot be because of the calendar. You are supposed to attach your minority report to the main report and this has – hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, if you have failed, just accept that you have failed.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, Members will agree that this is a very important Bill to handle with far reaching ramifications. I may not use the reasons advanced by my colleague, hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, but we knew we had a plateful of items from PPPs to the question of salaries to the ID registration – we knew the plate was full and that we would not be able to handle this items more or so now that we are going –

THE SPEAKER: Are you in charge of the Order Paper? Chairperson of the committee, please present your report.

3.25
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Ssebunya): Madam Speaker, thanks for your indulgence. We would like to thank you for having guided us. We worked under too much pressure and as Members have said, this is a very important Bill. We had a number of stakeholders lined up but we could not conclusively finish the work very fast. But now that we have completed it, we extend our sincere thanks to all those who contributed to its success. I now take the opportunity to present the report from the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Madam, Speaker, as you guided, we handled this Bill with two other committees: the Natural Resources Committee and the Budget Committee. Again as you guided, we have produced a joint report. So, this is work produced by not only the Committee on Finance but also those committees as mentioned.

Madam Speaker, before I read this report, I would like to say that this report like the previous one is about a technical Bill. We would like Members to read this report –(Interruption)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, we would like to ask the chairman of the committee to lay the minutes of all the meetings the committee held on Table before he begins to read the report.

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, we have all the minutes here and I am going to lay them on Table – (Interjections)– you would like me to read each minute? I seek your guidance on this.

THE SPEAKER: No, just lay them and they are now the property of the House. Members will have access to them in case they need them.

MR SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I now lay the minutes as per the guidance of the Speaker.

Madam Speaker, the Public Finance Bill was read for the first time on 8 May 2012 and in accordance with Rules 118 and 147 (a) of the Rules of Procedure, it was referred to the committees of Finance, Natural Resources and that of Budget for scrutiny and I beg to report on behalf of those committees.

The object of the Bill has been clearly stated by the minister. But also Members can read the justification of reforms at page 3 but before that, Madam Speaker, allow me to say that the committee analyzed the Bill and held meetings with the following stakeholders among whom were: the Minister of Finance, His Majesty the Omukama of Bunyoro, the Auditor-General, the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda, the Civil Society Coalition on Oil, Bank of Uganda, individual Members of Parliament, the former Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Order, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of order about?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the chairman of the committee is saying they met the former Leader of the Opposition. I went to that committee to represent the Office of the Leader of the Opposition when I was still the Leader of the Opposition. So, is the chairman of the committee in order to say that the committee met a former Leader of the Opposition when the committee met the Leader of the Opposition? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there was a possibility that the present Leader of the Opposition would deny having gone to that committee. That is why the chairman of the committee was being specific about which Leader of the Opposition they met. Please proceed.

MR SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was doing that respectfully. But we also met the Uganda Women’s Parliamentary Association (UWOPA), the Civil Society Budget Advocacy Group and the Bunyoro Parliamentary Caucus.

If I may be allowed, on the justification of the reforms and the salient issues in the legislative framework governing public finance management in Uganda, the committee observes that there are weaknesses in that sector. These include the lack of credibility, integrity and predictability of the budget, delayed approval of the national budget justifying the need for a vote-on-account, non-alignment of the annual budget to the National Development Plan, minimal linkages between the budget preparation, execution and oversight and also distortion of Government programs by frequent and unfunded supplementary budgets.

There is ineffective budget monitoring manifested in leakages, and poor value for money outcomes and increasing retention of revenue by entities of Government without appropriation. 

And lastly, there is a non-operational Contingencies Fund.

The committee notes that this Bill is a major step towards addressing the current weaknesses in the public finance management and thereby highlights reforms proposed by the Bill. The reforms include: the introduction principles and procedure for the sound management of the economy; introduction of a charter of fiscal responsibility to be approved by Parliament. The charter serves as a commitment by the minister guaranteeing that Government programmes will be managed effectively without exposing it to risks of unmanageable deficits and debts or lead to micro-economic instability, which may manifest through high levels of inflation; volatility in exchange rates and other economic indicators.

The reforms will also focus on the introduction of measures that will ensure credibility and predictability of the budget, for example, aligning the budget to the National Development Plan and the charter of fiscal responsibility. They will be basing the budget on the sound fiscal analysis and forecast of macroeconomic developments approved by Parliament and three, introducing a statement of budget, honestly attesting to the liability, completeness and consistence with the charter of fiscal responsibility. This is to be presented by the minister with the proposed budget, bringing forward the budget preparation and approval process so that the national budget is approved to become effective by 1st July. Please see the new budget calendar attached in the annexes. This will eliminate the need for a vote-on-account.

Hon. Members, you will recall that immediately after the budget has been read, we have been taking four months and during that time Government only relies on vote-on-account. This means we always spent money on the new budget before Parliament appropriated it officially. This will also ensure that the multi-year expenditure commitments are authorised by Parliament; requiring all commitments to be based on appropriations and cash releases.
It ensures the settlement of commitments to be made in accordance with the programmed annual cash flow issued by the Secretary to the Treasury based on their work plans approved by Parliament.  

Accounting officers will be required to submit their annual cash flow plans at the beginning of every financial year based on their work plans, procurement and recruitment plans that will be approved by Parliament. The cash flow plans will form the basis of release of the funds to a particular vote – see clause 13 of the Bill.

There will be a remedy to a re-occurring problem of unspent balances at the end of the financial year. Clause 15 (3) will provide that committed funds not spent by the end of the financial year shall be re-voted by Parliament.

On the establishment of strict criteria for supplementary budgets i.e. the supplementary expenditure:
    a) Must be urgent, unabsorbable, unavoidable and an unforeseeable.
    b) It should be limited on the funds available in the Contingencies Fund. And 
    c) Must not be 10 percent of a vote’s appropriated budget as supplementary through the Contingencies Fund.

About the operationalization of Article 157 of the Constitution by establishing a Contingencies Fund. Under Clause 22, the Bill establishes the Contingencies Fund as a vote and will be appropriated as part of the annual budget at 3.5 percent of the appropriated annual budget of the preceding fiscal year.

About improvements in the financial reporting to Parliament, we report that in addition to the usual financial reports, the Bill requires-
    1. a consolidation of all financial statements of the entire Government to ensure that Government effectively conducts oversight over all public finances of the central bank, local governments and all certified bodies and state enterprises;
    2. accounting officers to submit a statement of actions on previous recommendations of Parliament in relation to Auditor-General’s report;
    3. the minister to submit a Treasury Memoranda on actions by Government on Parliamentary recommendations.

There shall be new roles of Parliament in the public finance management cycle, and the integration of petroleum revenue into the national budget.

Observations and recommendations

The committees are convinced that:
(a)	Given the functionality of the economy, that is Macro Fiscal Planning – Budgeting – Treasury – Accounting - Auditing cycle, there is need to have a single law that addresses and integrates the timetable and strengthens the interactions between the elements of the public finance management cycle.

(b)	The integration of the public finance management calendar will enable the elements of the public finance cycle to enforce each other, and bolster the integrity and credibility of the system as a whole.

(c) 	Oil revenues pose a new set of challenges of macro fiscal policy making. The current public finance framework is ill-equipped to safeguard volatile and finite revenues.

The committees recommend to the House that this is an opportunity to strengthen parliamentary oversight over financial management, budget preparation, setting budget priorities and budget decisions and more specifically to ensure that the governance of oil revenues conforms to the highest standards of accountability.

The Role of Parliament

There has been concern that the proposed Bill undermines the role of Parliament in the public finance management. The committees take cognizance of the role of Parliament in public finance management, and have examined the various provisions of the Bill and hereby extract the role of Parliament as follows:

    1. Under macroeconomic and fiscal policies, Parliament shall -
    a) approve the charter of fiscal responsibility;
    b) consider minister’s reports on deviation from the objectives of the charter of fiscal responsibility; 
    c) approve the Budget Framework Paper for each financial year, under Clause 8 (4) and (5);
    d) analyse the policies and programmes affecting the economy, and the annual budget and make necessary recommendations on alternative approaches  - see Clause 10 (1); and
    e) ensure public resources are held and utilised in a transparent, accountable, efficient, effective and sustainable manner in accordance with the charter of fiscal responsibility and the Budget Framework Paper – see Clause 10 (2).

    2. Under the budget preparation, approval and management, Parliament shall-
    a) consider the annual budget, ministry votes, policy statements, which shall include a report on actions taken on recommendations from Parliament. See clauses 11 (2) and (10);
    b) approve the annual budget, work plan of Government and the Appropriation Bill and any other Bills that may be necessary to implement the national budget – see Clause 12(1);
    c) revote by appropriation any committed funds, which are not spent by the end of the financial year;
    d) consider reports on fiscal performance and the performance of the petroleum fund from the minister - see Clause 16 (1);
    e) approve the multi-year expenditure commitment and consider an annual report from the minister on the performance of multi-year commitments - see Clause 19; and
    f) approve the supplementary appropriations -see Clause 21.

    3. As regards the Contingencies Fund, Parliament shall -
    a) appropriate money to the Contingencies Fund in addition to the sums already provided, which is 3.5 percent of the appropriated budget for the previous year and that will be in Clause22 (3);
    b) revote the money committed but not spent by the end of the financial year from the Contingencies Fund;
    c) invalidate withdrawals from the Contingencies Fund, which will be inconsistent with the requirements - see Clause 22;
    d) consider the Auditor-General’s report on account of the Contingencies of Fund - see Clause 22 (17);
    e) approve withdrawals from the fund made by the minister. The minister will first seek parliamentary approval before withdrawing from the fund.

    4. Under the cash, asset and liability management, Parliament shall -
    a) approve revenue to be retained by a vote, state enterprises and any public corporation - See clause 25;
    b) approve estimates for incomes and expenditures as a special fund;
    c) approve loans raised by the minister;
    d) approve the authority to guarantee loans and consider reports on existing guarantees;
    e) consider the minister’s report on the government’s debts - see Clause 38;
    f) appropriate expenditure to be incurred on donor-fund projects. They have not been coming to Parliament on this;
    g) consider the minister’s reports on grants received by Government - see Clause 40;
    h) authorize accounting officers to pledge or to encumber assets of a vote. They shall seek Parliamentary approval - see Clause 41 (6); and
    i) approve the abandonment of claims and write offs of public money and stores above Shs 10 million and consider a report for loss authorised by the minister. If the minister has to write off public money, they shall first seek parliamentary approval.

    5. Under the accounting and audit, Parliament shall -
    a) consider the Auditor-General’s report on annual accounts including statements of action taken by the vote on the recommendations of Parliament on the report of the Auditor-General - see Clause 48 (3) (d); and
    b) The accounting officer shall be accountable to Parliament. See Clause 43 (5).

    6. Under the Petroleum Revenue Management, Parliament shall -
    a) appropriate transfers from the petroleum holding account to the Consolidated Fund. That is Clause 55 (1);
    b) consider the minister’s report on the petroleum revenue holding account. That is estimated revenues and accounts under Clause 57 (1);
    c) appropriate money from the petroleum revenue holding account to the petroleum revenue investment reserve. See Clause 58 (1);
    d) consider the minister’s direction to Bank of Uganda regarding the performance of the petroleum revenue investment reserve. See Clause 61 (2);
    e) consider the annual plan of the petroleum revenue investment reserve as part of the annual budget. See Clause 67 (3);
    f) consider the minister’s annual report on the petroleum revenue investment reserve. See Clause 68 (3);
    g) consider the audit report on the petroleum holding account and the petroleum revenue investment reserve. See Clause 69 (2);
    h) consider the report on exemption of taxes. This is a regular complaint in Parliament about the minister’s creation of exemption on taxes without Parliament’s approval; and
    i) approve a statement of resource for the annual budget for the next financial year. See Schedule 3 (5).

The committees recommend and emphasize that Parliament should be the appropriate locus of all financial accountabilities. Its role shall be to approve actions rather than rubber stamp decisions already taken. Therefore, in addition to the above functions, the committees propose to strengthen the parliamentary oversight role and further propose that amendments be made to ensure that Parliament also:-
    a) considers a report on consolidate expenditures – that is a commitment report. See Clause 14;
    b) considers the report on the fiscal performance and the performance of the petroleum fund in its entirety; 
    c) approve any conversion of a loan into any other loan. That will be under Clause 33; 
    d) examine and approve the investment of petroleum revenue policy and that will be under clause 59;
    e) extend the period for consideration or approval of the budget just in case it is necessary to extend;
    f)  examine the cost estimate of a Bill – that is Clause 72;
    g) examine the certificate of gender and equity presented with the budget framework paper, proposed budget and the policy statements;
    h)  authorise the minister to allocate funds from one vote to another where the functions have been transferred. For instance, if we transferred an activity to a different vote, then Parliament should be involved;
    i)  consider any deviation from the objectives of the charter of fiscal responsibility. I plead with Members to read and understand the charter of fiscal responsibility because that charter shall be the document that analyses what Government does in the next five years. So if there is any deviation, Parliament should be in the know. 

These proposals will strengthen parliamentary oversight in line with the role of Parliament as provided for even in the current Budget Act. 

The Role of Parliamentary Committees

The committees observed that in an attempt to carry on the provisions of the Budget Act, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented amendments to the committees proposing for the insertion of a new clause detailing specific functions of the committees of Budget, National Economy, Public Accounts and Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

The committees observe that Article 90 of the Constitution provides as follows:
Committees of Parliament: 
    1. Parliament shall appoint standing committees and other committees necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions. 
    2. Parliament shall by its Rules of Procedures prescribe the powers, composition and functions of the committees of Parliament. 

The committees, therefore, recommend that in accordance with Article 90(2), the functions of parliamentary committees are best housed in the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

The committees further recommend that Parliamentary Rules of Procedure should be reviewed with a view of strengthening the role of committees in the oversight of public resources, if deemed necessary. 

The Repeal of the Budget Act

Under Clause 7(a), the Bill seeks to repeal the Budget Act 2001. The Budget Act provides for and regulates the budgetary procedures to a systematic and efficient budgetary process wherein the Budget Committee and the Budget Office were provided for. The committee received several submissions for the inclusion of the provisions of the Budget Act, save for welcome amendments geared towards the betterment of the budget process. 

To this end, the committees has scrutinised the Budget Act and proposes that all provisions strengthening Parliament for the proper governance of public finance in Uganda be integrated in this Bill.

A mapping of the current Budget Act to the Bill and the proposed amendments to the committee is hereto attached in appendix B. 

Madam Speaker, we have mapped all the provisions in the Budget Act and we recommend that they should be included without exception in this new Act. 

The Parliamentary Budgetary Office

The committees observed that while the Bill seeks to repeal the Act, the Parliamentary Budget Office is not provided for in the Bill as it stands. 

The committees note that the importance of a Parliamentary Budget Office in strengthening the parliamentary oversight function over the budget office cannot be over emphasised. Parliament and its committees need access to independent expertise for proper budgetary scrutiny. 

The committees recommend, therefore, that the Budget Office be augmented within the public finance legislative framework in Uganda; for example, the Budget Office should have access to any information from the Ministry of Finance and line ministries that are relevant to its functions in order to strengthen the role of Parliament in oversight over the budget. 

The committees further recommend that the Budget Office would be institutionalised within the legislative framework governing the public financial management and in addition its functions as provided in the Budget Act. 

The committees propose the following additional functions to the Budget Office:
    1. Provide independent and objective and professional research, advice and analysis to Parliament on matters related to the budget and other revenue generating Bills. 
    2. The Budget Office should annually provide a review and analysis of documents tabled in Parliament by the Executive in terms of this Act. 
    3. The Budget Office should monitor and report on potential unfunded mandate arising out of the legislative policy or budgetary proposals. 
    4. Examine and advise Parliament on the certificate of gender and equity as presented with the budget framework paper, proposed budget and the policy statement. 
    5. Examine and advise on the Treasury Memorandum, because Parliament does not have a lot of time. 
    6. Prepare analysis of specific issues including financial risks posed by the government policies and activities to guide Parliament. 
    7. It should also consider the budget proposals and economic trends, and make recommendations to the relevant committees of Parliament. 
    8. Evaluate Government requests from deviations of the charter of responsibility.
    9. Report to the relevant committees of Parliament on any Bill economic and financial implications, making relevance to the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility; and also its principles to the financial objectives set out in the relevant budget framework paper.
    10. Report on any other matters relating to fiscal policy, performance requested by the committee and or initiated by the Budget Office. 

These functions seek to capacitate Parliament to carry out its oversight functions particularly on issues related to the budget, and also encourage fiscal discipline as well as prudent fiscal management which would lead to a reduction in government deficit and increased transparency. 

The committees will at an appropriate time move an amendment to this effect. I also want to say that the Budget Office was instrumental in drafting these functions. 

Internal Oversight over Budget

The committees observe that a lot of public sources have been embezzled as a result of weak internal audit functions. The committees recommend that there is need to improve oversight over the budget by strengthening the internal oversight function in line with international best practice. 

The committees propose that a new clause be introduced establishing the office of the internal auditor general who shall report directly to the Secretary to the Treasury, whose functions shall include developing an internal audit strategy, policies, rules, standards, manuals and guidelines on internal audit. 

The committees further propose that a general internal audit committee be established to review and approve the quarterly and annual summary internal audit reports, submitted by the internal audit general which are then submitted to the Minister of Finance as well as advise the minister in all aspects of internal audit, plans and operations. This arrangement will enhance the independence of the internal audit function. The committee will move an amendment to that effect. 

Supplementary Expenditure

The committees received several concerns about the abuse of the management of supplementary expenditures and have examined the Bill in great detail with the view of ensuring strict controls on the management of the supplementary budget. 

The committees observe as follows:
    1. Existing legal basis for supplementary expenditure. 
    • Article 156(3) of the Constitution allows government to seek prior approval of Parliament, or spend and request retrospective approval of Parliament within four months after the money is spent. 
    • Section 15 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act allows Government to spend and request retrospective supplementary budget approval of Parliament. 
    • Section 12(1) of the Budget Act allows the minister to grant supplementary budgets to a vote limited to three percent of the approved entire national budget.

Implications of the above and the current concerns are that there is no specific source of financing for supplementary budgets and these are often effected through budget cuts. I think Members understand that there is no specific financing of supplementary budgets and what Government goes to different sectors and cuts their budgets and then composes a supplementary.

Two, there is no ceiling on how much a single vote may be granted as a supplementary budget. It is therefore possible for a single vote like Agriculture or Defence to spend the entire three percent.

Another implication is that approved budgets can be interpreted differently to include supplementary budgets issued before. The next one is that it grossly undermines the credibility and the predictability of the budget.

(c) 	As an improvement to the current laws, Clause 21 of the Bill requires supplementary budgets to meet the following conditions:
1. 	The expenditure must be urgent, absorbable, unavoidable and unforeseeable and that will be in clauses 21 and 7.

2. 	Supplementary budgets by the minister are limited to only the funds available in the contingency fund. That means that there will be a budget for the supplementaries to avoid budget cuts and to limit distortion of government programmes.

3. 	No single vote can receive more than 10 percent of its appropriated budget as supplementary through the contingencies fund. This will be a requirement and we need to emphasise that. We have to note that it is 10 percent of the appropriated budget of a vote rather than three percent of the entire budget.

The committees recommend that the House adopts the proposals in the Bill as a way of strengthening the management of supplementary budgets.

On the principles for development of the fiscal policy, clause 5, which mandates the minister to develop and implement policies consistent with the national macro-economic framework, the committee observes that there is need to set principles, which shall form the basis for the development of the fiscal objectives within the macro-economic framework. These principles shall also be adhered to by Cabinet in taking decisions.

The committees recommend that Clause 5 be amended to provide for the following principles: Sufficiency in revenue mobilisation to finance Government programs; maintenance of prudent and sustainable levels of public debt; ensuring that the fiscal balance, when calculated without petroleum revenue, is maintained at a sustainable level over the medium term; management of revenues from petroleum resources and other finite natural resources for the benefit of current and future generations; that the management of fiscal risks should be done in a prudent manner; consistency of the medium term framework paper to the National Development Plan; efficiency, effectiveness and value for money in expenditure.

Deviations from the objective of Charter of Fiscal Responsibility: under clause 7, the Bill provides that the minister may, in exceptional circumstances, deviate from the objectives in the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. Among the grounds for deviation is the unanticipated severe economic shock or any other significant, unforeseen event that cannot be funded from the contingencies fund.

The committees recommend that any deviations should be made with the approval of Parliament.

Establishment of special funds

Clause 27 provides that the minister may, by statutory instrument, establish a special fund which shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund. The committees observe that whereas there are circumstances where special funds may be required, special funds have been a source of abuse and misuse of resources. That is in the past.

The committees recommend that there is need for strict control in the establishment of special funds.

Under clause 27, the statutory instrument should state the source of financing and the period for which the special fund will be in existence. We are proposing that under clause 27(9), the law should provide for certainty in financial reporting for special funds.

On number 4(11) on the matter of national treasury, clause 9 provides for the secretary to the treasury. In effect, the Bill assumes the existence of a treasury and a person designated as secretary to the treasury.

The committees received several proposals for the establishment of a treasury and a secretary to the treasury:

The Institute of Chartered Certified Public Accountants of Uganda submitted that whereas “Treasury” is referred to in the Bill, it is not clearly provided for. A treasury should be established consisting of a minister as the head, the secretary to the treasury, the accountant general and the directorate of a ministry responsible for economic and financial matters.

The Civil Society Coalition on Oil also submitted that the Act provides for an opportunity for Parliament to establish a treasury as the key government agency primarily responsible for public finance and management and accountability. The Act should also provide for the composition of the treasury office, its powers and the role of the minister responsible for Finance, its responsibilities with regard to national public funds, the appointment of the secretary to the treasury and the need to have such appointments approved by Parliament.

The office of the secretary to the treasury is central to public finance management, the budget and the budget process and therefore should be established by an Act just like Kenya and South Africa have done.

Establishing such an office would increase clarity between the Executive and the budget authority and the oversight functions vested in Parliament.

The committees observe that Section 7(2) of the Interpretation Act defines the Treasury as follows: “A reference to the Treasury shall be construed as a reference to the minister for the time being responsible for finance and any public officer deputised by him or her to exercise powers or perform functions or duties in relation to the matter in connection with which the reference is made.”

Therefore, the Treasury means the Minister of Finance. However overtime, the practice has shifted from the treasury being a person to an institutionalised entity.

The committees recommend that there is need to review the current status with a view of following international best practice. The committee will be moving an amendment to that effect.

On sharing of revenues from royalties, under clause 72, the Bill proposes that royalties from petroleum revenues shall be shared as such: Government shall retain 93 percent of revenue from petroleum and seven percent will be shared among districts located within the petroleum exploration and production areas as royalties. However, royalty allocations shall not exceed the non-oil revenue for the district in any year. The provision further states that a district may allocate part of its royalty share to the cultural institutions.

The committees met with the Omukama of Bunyoro who petitioned Parliament on these provisions. He is concerned that leaving cultural institutions at the mercy of local governments would reduce the kingdoms to beggars. 

The committees observed that:
    (a) Article 244(3) of the Constitution provides that minerals shall be exploited taking into consideration the interest of the individual land owners, local governments and the government.
    (b)  Restricting sharing to specific districts is likely to cause unnecessary tension and anxiety. 
    (c) Discretion given to a district to allocate part of its royalty to a cultural institution will create social conflict where a cultural institution has to beg for a share of the royalty.

The committees recommends that:
    (a) There should not be specific districts mentioned in the law, rather the minister responsible for petroleum, shall publish the local governments eligible to receive royalties.
    (b) Districts should be replaced with “local governments”, in accordance with Article 244(3), and more so, local governments would include town councils and municipalities because when you talk of districts, in essence, you have left out municipalities and the effects may be limited to municipalities or town councils.
    (c) A guaranteed one percent of the seven percent royalties due to local government/governments shall be granted to a cultural or traditional institution, wherever they exist, and that is a proposal - instead of us leaving it to the districts. 
    (d) Clause 11(11) be deleted because there is no genuine justification for denying royalty allocation on the basis of non-oil revenue to the districts.   

The committees looked at gender and equity considerations in the Public Finance Bill. The committees observe that, more often than not, gender and equity issues have been glossed over by Government, yet the process does not involve making separate budgets for men, women, or persons with disabilities, nor does it necessarily mean a radical reform of existing budgetary procedures.

The committees view this as an opportunity to ensure that there is efficient allocation of resources based on identified needs, and to restructure revenues and expenditures to strengthen gender equality and empowerment of PWDs.

The committees therefore recommend that; the Act should clearly compel the Minister to present together with the budget framework paper, proposed annual budget, and ministerial policy statement, a certificate issued by the Attorney-General certifying that the budget is gender and equity responsive and specifying measures taken to equalise opportunities for men, women, persons with disabilities and other marginalised groups.

Funding of the Auditor-General

The committee noted that the Office of the Auditor-General is facing constant challenges in funding. The committee was informed that the Auditor-General has not sufficiently fulfilled his mandate of auditing all public funds as required by the Constitution, because of lack of enough funding. The House will recall that the Auditor-General was directed to audit all schools and tertiary institutions.

The Auditor-General, has however, managed to audit only 200 schools out of 15,000 due to lack of funds. Hon. Members, you will note that Government funds these schools but at the end of the day, the schools charge more money as if Government does not fund them.

In line with the above, the Auditor-General also continuously faces challenges in conducting special audits that could help in pre-empting large sums of money that get misappropriated.
The committees propose that funding to the Office of Auditor-General be streamlined so that he is able to fulfil his constitutional mandate.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, hold on a bit. These children are from Budimo Child Development Centre in Busia represented by hon. Nekesa Oundo and hon. Julius Maganda. You are welcome. On this side, we have children from Kanandi Child Development Project in Kakuto, Rakia represented by hon. Kasamba and hon. Mutagamba. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: If I can continue, the funding to the Office of Auditor General should be streamlined so that he is able to fulfil his constitutional mandate.

At an appropriate time, the committees will move an amendment to the effect that the budget of the Office of Auditor-General be charged as one percent of the National Budget for every financial year. This charge should be made as automatic charge to the Consolidated Fund.

The committees hope that this will solve the problem of funding to the Office of the Auditor-General and strengthen accountability in the use of public funds. If I can remind Members, the Auditor-General is an office of Parliament.

On the matter of publication of pre and post elections economic and fiscal reports, the committees observed that there is public concern over pre and post-election economic and fiscal transparency. The committees recommend that the Bill should mandate the minister to publish a pre-election economic and fiscal update four months before the polling day for any general election and a post-election economic and fiscal update four months after the polling day of any general election.

The economic and fiscal update would detail all election related spending including, expenses of the Electoral Commission for costs of the general elections and any other expenses related to the election allocated to a vote.

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, I also beg to lay on Table some of the minutes as were considered by the committee. I beg to lay. Thank you, hon. Members, for listening.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this Bill has far reaching implications as it seeks to repeal the Budget Act, the Public Finance and Accountability Act, it touches on the powers the Bank of Uganda Act, the Income Tax Act, National Audit Act and most importantly, deals with the revenue management. So that is why it was handled by the three committees of Budget, Finance and Natural Resources. 

In the circumstances, I want to propose that members go and study this report exhaustively, get all those laws and when we resume for the fourth session, we will debate it. It is very important and you need to be very well armed. Thank you very much. (Applause)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE SPEAKER: The Minister for Finance.

4.10
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. During the debate in Parliament on Tuesday, 13 May 2014, hon. Members raised concerns on payment of salaries to public officers. My ministry was tasked to prepare a statement on what has caused a delay in paying April 2014 salaries for civil servants. I would, therefore, like to present an explanation to this august House on the reforms we have undertaken to streamline the salary payment system, provide an update on payment of salaries for April 2014, as well as the cause of the delayed payment of salaries for some public officers.

The old system was characterised by many challenges; for a very long time, various stakeholders, including Parliament, have raised concerns on irregularities in the management of the government payroll and salary payments. These included delayed payment and non-payment of salaries. For example, in the financial year 2012/2013 and the first half of financial year 2013/2014, salaries were paid after the end of the month, contrary to government policy of paying by the 28th day of the month –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, I understand the report was sent to the Members’ iPads.

THE SPEAKER: Is it there? Please, proceed. I hope you brought your iPads. (Laughter) Commission Oyeee! (Laughter)

MRS KIWANUKA: Secondly, many public officers were getting on and off the payroll without clear explanation either by the accounting officers or Ministry of Public Service. There were unexplained cases of under-payment and over-deductions. There were supplementary wage requests which could not be explained. There was further accumulation of salary arrears, which remained unpaid at the end of the financial year, arising out of the above anomalies.

The government payroll was characterised by existence of ghost staff as exemplified in the Auditor-General’s report. Accordingly, under the centralised salary payment system, none of the stakeholders was taking responsibility for these irregularities, hence the accusations and counter-accusations between my ministry, that of public service and the respective accounting officers. This was the most disturbing of all, Madam Speaker.

Therefore, in order to address these problems and to ensure proper identification and accountability by all stakeholders in the payroll management and salary payment process, a reform was undertaken to decentralise the public salary payment process. 

Decentralisation of salary payments

The key objectives of decentralising the salary payment system are to:
    1. Transfer responsibility for day-to-day management and final approval of payroll as well as salary payment from the Ministry of Public Service and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, respectively to the respective accounting officers. The two ministries would then focus on policy guidance, monitoring and supervision and provision of adequate funds for salaries among others.
    2. To hold accounting officers responsible and accountable for all salary and payroll transactions given that Parliament appropriates the wage bill to respective votes, each with its own accounting officer.
    3. To ensure timely payment of salaries in line with the government policy of paying all public servants’ salaries by the 28th of each month.
    4. To eliminate all forms of payroll irregularities, including ghost staff by holding the accounting officers responsible for the final approval of their payroll and salary payment.

Madam Speaker, this involves each accounting officer giving a hard copy to our ministry, signed by themselves.

Hon. Members, I wish to reiterate that the decentralised salary payment system does not alter the mandate of the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. While the Ministry Finance, Planning and Economic Development executes its mandate of effecting salary payment as stipulated by the Public Finance and Accountability Act, the Ministry of Public Service continues to execute its mandate for overall government payroll management that includes the access, exit and staff establishment controls on the payroll, amongst others.

The process chart showing the stages and different roles of the stakeholders for the centralised and decentralised salary payment systems are attached as Annex 1A and 1B respectively. 

Phasing of the decentralisation of salary payment reforms 

Madam Speaker, the decentralised salary payment system started in the month of January 2014 with selected votes and has now been rolled out to cover others as summarised below:

    (a) Phase I: January 2014 – covered 27 votes with payroll of less than 500 employees (mostly central government ministries).
    (b) Phase II: February 2014 – covered an additional 36 votes, including all referral hospitals and the two districts of Bushenyi and Wakiso.
    (c) Phase III: March 2014 – covered all public universities, Police, Prisons and KCCA.
    (d) Phase IV: April 2014 – has covered 37 IFMS tier I and II local governments under the integrated financial management system roll-out.
    (e) Phase V: which we will conclude at the end of this month of payment will cover all the 19 municipal councils.
    (f) Phase VI: By July 2014 or rather by the end of this financial year, we will cover all the remaining higher local government districts (75).

Achievements of the reform

It is now clear that an accounting officer takes full responsibility – 

THE SPEAKER: Order, please, order!

MRS KIWANUKA: An accounting officer takes full responsibility of all salary payments, including deductions and is accountable for any irregularities that arise.

Since this reform started in January – when an accounting officer promptly validates his payroll, I wish to report the decentralised salary payment system has resulted into timely payment of salaries by the 28th of each month for those votes in line with the government policy on salary payment.

Within the few months of implementation of this reform, we have already realised savings from a number of ministries as illustrated.

Uganda Police Force – Shs 8.5 billion
Ministry of Local Government – Shs 0.78 billion
Lira Hospital – 0.13 billion
Butabika – 0.25 billion
This gives a total of Shs 9.66 billion.

Furthermore, based on the preliminary information we have so far received, 9,000 invalid records have been deleted. This translates into a saving of Shs 3 million per month. Basing on the above revelation and when analysis of the wage performance for all decentralised votes is completed, the projected estimated saving on the wage bill for financial year 2013/2014 is Shs 70 billion as a result of the reform.

Madam Speaker, I am glad to report that under the decentralised system, accounting officers have submitted information and indeed all the votes under the decentralised system have already paid salary for the month of April 2014. As of close of business yesterday – the day before – 13 April 2014, salaries of all public officers under the centralised salary payment system, have been paid except for Kabale, Busia and Pader, which delayed to submit the required information. I also attach the schedule in Annex II.

Status of payment under the centralised votes

Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the House that all the 96 local governments still under the centralised system have been paid salaries for April 2014 as shown in the attached schedule III.

Also to facilitate timely payment of salaries, the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury requested that accounting officers of the Phase IV pilot votes to submit their final payrolls by 15 April 2014. The PS/ST again issued a press statement in the New Vision and Daily Monitor of 23 April 2014, reminding the accounting officers to submit their payrolls not later than 25 April 2014.

In order to avoid errors, we have implemented the interface between the integrated, personal and the payroll system (IPPS) under the ministry of public service and the integrated financial management system (IFMS) under the ministry of finance, planning and economic development to ensure that the seamless flow of information from IPPS to IFMS for payment.

The reasons for delayed and non-payment salaries in some cases; the major challenge has been accounting officers who are submitting partial payroll information, for instance, for Ministry of Education and Sports, Wakiso and Bushenyi districts. There has also been a delay in remitting statutory and non-statutory deductions by vote holders and delayed re-submissions of unapplied payments or those that have bounced.

Madam Speaker, there has been some confusing information that has been sown on this – and I will give you an example at the end of the statement.

For votes under the centralised system, the Ministry of Public Service has been delaying the final payrolls to my ministry for salary payment. Under this system, the Ministry of Public Service is required to submit the final payroll by the 23rd of the month to enable us effect salary payments by the 28th. The deadline for submission has not always been adhered to for various reasons.

Poor budgeting for salaries, leading to inadequate wage bill provisions for a number of votes has also caused delay in payment of salaries. And also because we begun the change of decentralisation half-way through the financial year. There is also of course some adaptation hiccups.

Payment of salary arrears

Madam Speaker, arising out of complaints for non-payment of salaries, the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury issued a circular dated 21 March 2014, requesting all accounting officers to submit details of outstanding salary arrears, properly signed off by the individual claimants by 4 April 2014. However, to-date, only 24 accounting officers have submitted details of salary arrears as shown in Annex 4 attached. These submissions are being compiled and will soon be submitted to the Ministry of Public Service and internal audit for verification. We are committed and will make sure that we have the resources to pay all salary arrears this financial year provided the information is properly verified. And this also accounts for those persons who say they are government officers but somehow are not on the various payrolls. This is all part of the harmonisation process.

I wish to call upon this House to appreciate the circumstances that necessitated the reform which makes accounting officers personally accountable for salary payments as part of public expenditure management. Indeed, the accounting officers themselves are the ones who have given us the information that has enabled us to make the savings I referred to earlier. We thank those accounting officers and we also ask you to help us call upon the other accounting officers to speedily fulfil that responsibility. I also assure the House that Government has sufficient funds to pay all certified salaries and salary arrears within the remaining two months of the financial year. However, the salary arrears must be audited and verified before they are paid.

I further request you to render maximum support to this reform and take a keen interest in monitoring payroll management and salary payments in your areas of jurisdiction and provide timely feedback. I pay special tribute to hon. Rosemary Seninde, the Woman Representative for Wakiso, who, on hearing the complaints of her constituents, took the initiative to organise a meeting of all stakeholders to understand the delayed and non-payment of public officers’ salaries in Wakiso District, especially for the primary school teachers.

I also pay special tribute to hon. Lubogo of Bulamogi District who came to my office this afternoon and spent time with my director of budget and commissioner of budget together with the CAO of Bulamogi on the line to sort out the various claims following salaries in his district. (Interjection) Madam Speaker, my office is open to all Members who wish to help their constituents to verify their positions. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. We will just have a few comments because we have established a select committee to follow up these matters. So we will just use the next 25 minutes to make a few comments.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance did mention something about the Ministry of Public Service. And even last time, when hon. Aston Kajara was on the Floor, he was suggesting that all this fraud seems to emanate from the Ministry of Public Service. And we intend to pronounce ourselves against the minister. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for her to make a response before we start the debate so that when we are debating we are aware of the level of culpability of the ministers involved in the public service ministry?

THE SPEAKER: If she is ready she will tell us. For now, let us respond to this which is available.

4.34
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I beseech you to support the Minister of Finance in this reform, which might be having shortcomings and might create some pain, but I want you to reflect on what happened in the past. In fact, the money that has been lost from the Ministry of Public Service is more than the money that was stolen in the Office of the Prime Minister by Kazinda and the group. But because it was not donor money, the focus remained on the Prime Minister’s office. But as a matter of fact, a lot more money was lost in the Ministry of Public Service.

I want to inform the Minister of Finance that we are not all going to flood your office. I, therefore, propose ways of improving the reforms. We have a budget office; please publish – you may not include the figures of the people you have paid salary, but put it on the website of Ministry of Finance, send it to Parliament’s budget office and MPs’ iPads; we do not need to know the amounts. That will enable us to go to the district and say, “You, so-and-so have been paid salary” and the locals will then say: “That person is a ghost.” 

I hope you are listening, hon. Minister. In that way, when you publish – including pensioners – then the media and everyone else can access those records and we shall do away with the issue of ghosts once and for all.

Secondly, to blame the Ministry of Public Service for delaying –let the accounting officers submit to you as well as give a copy to the Ministry of Public Service so that there is no delay. After all, the Constitution says that it is the accounting officer who shall be held personally liable. Why should you again wait for the public service ministry to do it? Let them submit directly to you and copy to public service ministry.

Honourable colleagues, I hope that since we are adjourning, by tomorrow, we shall have got all the information regarding the civil servants in our districts on the Internet – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, use half a minute to conclude.

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope that as the Minister of Finance leaves this place, she will send the details of all the civil servants in our districts and other government agencies because on my phone, I have received calls from people in Police and other government agencies that have not got their pay. Put everything on the Internet and we shall move the country forward. Thank you.

4.37
MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Ministers of finance tend to be merciless and I am not surprised that my colleague, hon. Ekanya, is in support of what is happening. You cannot administer collective punishment – that the CAO of, say, Wakiso delays in complying with the new regulation and then you do not pay everybody. For God’s sake, these people live in town; they have families to look after, including children to take to school. And they have bills to pick every day. 

This is not the first exercise to deal with ghost workers. There are other tested methods; if there is a problem in an area, the Ministry of Finance officials cannot just sit in their offices and begin swinging their chairs while waiting for CAOs to submit payrolls. Therefore, whether it takes a CAO even 100 years to do that, those officials will remain enjoying their comfortable offices.

Madam Speaker, we are talking about a crisis; in Wakiso all the teachers are not paid. The last time I spoke to the Secretary to the Treasury, he told me to blame the CAO. These individuals are rendering a service to this country by teaching our children – they are now about to resume school and you are proud that you have made a saving. That is ridiculous. You have not paid other people and you are celebrating for making a saving; a saving out of what? People have not accessed their money and there is jubilation in the Ministry of Finance because – and that is why I earlier said that people who deal with finance tend to be merciless; they look at the saving and not the suffering. And that is why her statement begins with achievements.

Madam Speaker, this Parliament – and I am happy that you have put in place a committee. We must not punish people who have made no errors. And I thought the minister would come here to apologise and not to celebrate that there are hundreds – the other day we were meeting Police; more than 3,000 police officers have not accessed their salaries. And they are all-over the place pleading with all the leaders that they can find. These individuals carry guns and you are now telling them that you are waiting for their CAOs for verification –(Member timed out_)

4.39
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am absolutely sure that you know the teachings of prophet Muhammad in respect to wages and salaries. And for the benefit of those who many not know, the instructions of prophet Muhammad on this particular subject, he decreed as follows: “Pay your workers their wages before their sweat dries.” That is the teaching in the Koran – an age-old teaching. And the Minister of Finance probably knows this. 

We appreciate the fact that you need to make reforms; you do not need to pay ghosts. But you need to pay those who work for you promptly. And the fact that you are putting in place measures that will safeguard public resources does not mean that those reforms should not have a human face. And the human face must only be one – that those who legitimately work for you must be paid in time.

Madam Speaker, if you look at the minister’s statement, it says, “We require the Ministry of Public Service to submit to my ministry a report every month before we effect payment. This report must be submitted by the 25th.” The records show that they have never done so. The records probably also show that they will never have the capacity to do so in the foreseeable future. And what does she decide to do? Halt the payment of salaries. (Member timed out.)

4.42
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka County, Luuka): Madam Speaker, I respect the Minister of Finance and I have been seriously following her statement; it was very good. But at the end of the statement, she almost spoiled it. She concluded by thanking two members of Parliament who went to her office to find out. I have been having this challenge in my constituency to the extent that a third of primary school teachers were not able to access their salaries for the month of March and April.

Madam Speaker, I also wanted to go to the minister’s office but my two committees were holding three meetings at ago and I think the minister should withdraw that statement. This is because if all members of Parliament went to her office for inquiries, I do not know whether her office can be able to handle. And I think we should not take it like that because the media will report that two members of Parliament went to a certain ministry and all ministries will be doing the same such that members of Parliament can go and plead with them.

This kind of decentralised payment of salaries may be good, as the minister is saying, but to some of us, our memories are still fresh regarding the story of Byakutaga who ran away with a lot of money from the Ministry of Defence several years ago. As we are doing this, we should be careful with what we are going to do –(Hon. Fungaroo rose_)– I can take the information.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, colleague and Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give you is that whereas the minister has reported here that there is some progress, especially as far as the Police is concerned and with the saving of Shs 8.5 billion, here in Parliament, some of our police officers have not been paid. So where do you begin measuring the efficiency of your reform if the police officers guarding you here have not been paid? Thank you.

MR BAGOOLE: Thank you, honourable colleague, for that beautiful information. Madam Speaker, the minister was saying that Shs 3 billion has been saved – if my memory serves me well. But ever since they started recovering that money, has anybody been reprimanded? How come that you are just recovering the money but you are not following up the reason as why you are saving that money. We need to follow up and find out whether we need to arrest somebody and question them how this money was being spent and how we are recovering it. (Member timed out.)

4.46
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Madam Speaker, I also stand up to speak for the voiceless people who are working for us but go unpaid. As late as yesterday evening, some 29 teachers from Lwemiyaga Sub-County had not been paid. I do not know whether the minister’s statement is updated. And health workers in Sembabule as well have been affected.

But without considering Sembabule alone, there is a widespread outcry. Now, when you talk about decentralising the salary payment policy and in phases – phasing means that you are taking lessons from the first phase. That is the essence of phasing – you start with one, study the shortcomings and you labour to improve on those before you move to the next. But what has happened is a mere roll-out full throttle meaning that whether there are any checks that needed to be taken, they have not been taken. And I want to challenge the minister; the so-called Shs 9.66 billion from ghosts is not true – it is money for the workers. And please do not use this money because there are people waiting for it. Stop celebrating that you saved money because you did not. (Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I want to inform the Minister of Finance that I have got here a very serious letter from a police constable from Mbarara Police Station. He is called Kamulegeya Robert – and I will lay it on Table. This man has never received his salary since December. The man has a wife and children and is simply crying like a child.

THE SPEAKER: That police constable should not be victimised for raising that issue because it is his right.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, let me painfully lay on Table the documents of this police constable called Kamulegeya Robert who has not received his salary since December 2013 as the money has been “saved” by the Ministry of Finance. (Laughter)

MRS KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, I wish to correct the misunderstanding created; when we say “saving”, we mean savings from ghosts.

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Minister, the Members are asking: If you have saved from the ghosts, why haven’t you paid the genuine workers?

MRS KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, that is the system we have just explained and I thank the Members for recognising the progress and recognising that there are challenges still ahead in making sure that every bonafide worker is paid. And we appreciate the assistance in going forward in this.

4.51
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for her statement, especially for telling us that they are making a reform by centralising payment of salaries. But I wish to inform this House that that is re-inventing the wheel because that is what existed before 2005 – when all payments were being made from the districts. By then, I was still working at the district. Then after restructuring, they decided to centralise the payment of salaries. And that is when all the problems started and they have now decided to go back to the old system.

I will appreciate if, as they are decentralising, they have tried to learn from the mistakes that were made by the local governments before so that whatever the accounting officers will implement will not bring any more ghosts or punish individual staff within the district.

Madam Speaker, I want the minister to assure us that we will never have this kind of salary payment hiccups again. There is nothing as painful as a teacher or a health worker who spends all the time serving government in return for finances that will help her fend for the family only to return home empty-handed. We who work here have tried it and know how painful it is. How do we expect them to deliver the services? So I want the minister to assure us. And I also want to caution those corrupt people who think they are the only ones who have intestines. (Laughter)

4.53
MR GEORGE EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last year, I stood here on a matter of national importance after my teachers were not paid for six months. The following day, all my teachers were paid – after I had walked to the Ministry of Public Service and they referred me to the Ministry of Finance. When I went to the Ministry of Finance, I realised that the public service ministry had played its part and the issue was the finance ministry. I am reluctant to accept what the Minister of Finance is saying – that it could be the public service ministry that is causing the delay. There is a problem in the finance ministry. 

Madam Speaker, I know that people resist change; I see here the minister saying that they now have integrated personnel payroll system from the public service ministry and then we have another system from the finance ministry. I would like to get a clarification from the Minister: Do these officials accept this system? This is because I know that new systems are often resisted because people who have been benefiting under the old system refuse to allow them. Are these new developments accepted by staff of the finance ministry? Our people are suffering; every financial year, all we are talking about is non-payment of salaries. What if your own salaries were not paid? Thank you.

4.54
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am one of the people who were formerly affected by non-payment of salaries. So I am debating from experience. Hon. Minister, when you were presenting the reasons for salary delay, you talked about poor budgeting for salaries. I do not know whether when you were budgeting, especially in the area of workers’ salaries that is when poor budgeting arises. The other clarification I will seek from you is whether the staff from your ministry are qualified. This is because if they are, they would be no poor budgeting.

In addition to that, yesterday, hon. Kajara was telling us that money was recovered from ghost workers. But we feel that if money was indeed recovered from ghost workers, we would not have people with arrears or those with pending pay.

Lastly, I have observed that some police officers, who interact with us when we are out of this place, have been given half-pay. So, hon. Minister, your ministry should collaborate with the public service ministry which promised to bring us a comprehensive report but it has never brought it. If you do this, the story of non-payment, arrears and delays will end. Thank you.

4.56
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. If it was that the Minister of Finance is a member of NRM, she would be forwarded to the disciplinary committee –(Laughter)– together with the Minister of Public Service because they are telling us that they are creating a surplus. In creating a surplus in their pockets in Ministry of Finance, they are creating a deficit in the people who have worked. So they are actually robbing the workers. So are they going to pay interest on the unpaid arrears?

Secondly, where the minister has gone wrong is to say that there is a policy shift in the payment – from centralised to decentralised. The way policy processes are made is clear. Where is that policy? The stakeholders should be involved; stakeholders like districts, Ministry of Finance and members of Parliament – they should have had an input in it. So to come and tell Parliament that there is a policy shift – from your head – it is unrealistic. So can you present to Parliament that policy shift where the Ministry of Public Service did not participate? That is why we are now having conflict.

Another thing is, if you can allow agencies and districts to generate their own payrolls instead of public service generating payrolls which also have ghosts – Madam Speaker, it is better for the Ministry of Finance to present a bank statement or financial statement showing that levy. And I know that the people in the Ministry of Justice, which is not a district, have not yet got their salaries for April and the ghosts are still there. So who are those ghosts and who created them? Where are the sanctions against those accounting officers who created the ghosts? Rwamafa and Obedi robbed money and they are in prison. But where are the persons who created the ghosts; are you a beneficiary to those ghosts?

4.58
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. To me the report given by the minister is polite acceptance that Government has failed to execute her mandate to pay civil servants their meager wages and salaries. 

In this report, you see that the Ministry of Finance is still playing hide and seek with that of Public Service. That is clear acceptance that somehow, things are not moving on well. The minister went ahead to propose to us alternatives. It is a very big joke for us to come here and pretend to make a saving when civil service workers out there – there are some who have been working for the last six months in the health sector and have not received their salaries. 

There seems to be ping-pong being done; there is a situation where a civil servant being paid in the month of February and is not paid in March. One, the one who was paid in February misses in March and they pay another one. For us to sit here in Parliament and receive this statement with joy is an insult to our people who are missing out on their payment. 

My submission is that you have done a good thing, Madam Speaker, to put up this committee. Probably, we need to mention when this committee should conclude their business and quickly come back to report to this House so that we can save the situation. 

As we speak, we know that those two ministries are not going to come to the bottom of this matter – the Ministry of Public Service – I am even surprised that the minister is sitting quietly watching on yet we were told that she failed to ably perform her duties. 

The Minister of Finance says that while the accounting officers have continually failed to submit – so the Ministry of Finance is actually making a saving, yet they know that when they fail to submit, there are people who are missing out on their salaries. Thank you. 




5.01
MS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Personally, I have been shocked by the statement of the honourable minister, especially when she said that she has made a saving of Shs 8.5 billion from Uganda Police Force. The case which hon. Bitekyerezo has just laid on Table is not an isolated one. Just last week, we were handling MTEF and a many similar cases came up, the debate was almost degenerating into a salary debate. 

We were with the hon. Minister for Finance; we brought this to his attention and told him something must be done. Many police officers have missed salary for over three months. I want to inform the Minister for Finance that they should not celebrate about this money, but instead clean up and pay the police officers. 

Secondly, there are certain weaknesses at the headquarters which are transferred and blamed on the accounting officers of the districts. I want to use the example of the CAO of Mubende who submitted his payrolls in time, but only for the teachers and medical works to miss their salary. Later on, we made a follow up and found that the CAO had duly submitted. So the ministry has to style up rather than blame the districts. 

One of the reasons the minister gave was about poor budgeting which leads to inadequacies. When we interfaced with the accounting officers, we found that the problem was the indicative planning figures especially for salaries, because they know the people they employed. But the Ministry of Finance gives inadequate indicative figures. 

For example, in police, this financial year, they were given Shs 186 billion for wages; and the next financial year, the same figure is given. Then the following financial year, they give even less at Shs 183 billion. So the accounting officers’ hands are tied. That is why at times these accounting officers do the unthinkable –(Member timed out_)

MR KWIZERA: Madam Speaker, when you look at annex No.3, the status for payment of April, 2014, salary for centralised votes as at 15 May 2014. When you look at the date of payroll submission, 28 May 2014; but yet the date of payment is 2 May 2014. So we are proceeding with the wrong documents. We should withdraw this document. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the document is going to be handed over to our select committee and they will tell us more; because what you have, I do not have it here.

MR MAGYEZI: Further information to what hon. Kwizera has pointed out. The statement we have is different from what we have on the iPad. In this statement, she comfortably deleted some very important information, which is in the statement on the iPad. So the honourable minister has not been genuine with us. 

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, hon. Members, what you have, I do not have. But let us have hon. Mateke and then we will ask our committee to examine this issue. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, in the same document which has been supplied to us, annex 3, there is a district called Maracha-Terego, which does not exist –(Interjections)– yes, it is here. So what kind of document is this –(Laughter)? 

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, the inconsistencies in this document presented to the august House is deemed to confuse us in such an important matter. Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the hon. Minister to withdraw this statement and harmonise another statement that we shall all be able to follow?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I only received this document when I was here, but some of the things the Members are showing me are not in my text. Please withdraw and supply us with a proper document. 

Then, hon. Members of the select committee, I am writing to you; you should start work tomorrow on the issue of the payroll. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I have a very big problem which the country must know. The creators of the ghosts are still in the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Public Service. The jigger is not yet removed and we must remove this jigger as a Parliament -  

THE SPEAKER: The jigger will be handled by our select committee –(Laughter)

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members, for recognising the progress that has been made and for the fact that we prepared this document on a very short notice. Accordingly, Madam Speaker, I withdraw the statement and we will re-table it according to your direction. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014

THE SPEAKER: There is no statement; so we proceed to the next item. 

3.08
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Budget Committee on supplementary schedule No.1 for financial year 2013/14. 

Introduction

In accordance with Article 156(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, where it is stipulated that, “If in respect of any financial year, it is found -
a)That the amount appropriated for any purpose under the Appropriation Act is insufficient, or that a need has arisen for expenditure….” – (Interruption) 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, we had agreed to stand over the ID statement. Right now, I am seeing the minister is fleeing the House –(Laughter)– we are eagerly awaiting for the statement and we cannot afford to see him leaving the Chamber. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister of Internal Affairs, can you give us an update on the ID project?

5.09
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I did interact with you yesterday, we are almost one month down the road into enrolment and we are beginning to collect data to inform us on the progress we are making. I am just coming from a meeting with all the CAOs in the country and tomorrow I have another meeting with regional players in the enrolment. 

Madam Speaker, within a week, we will have had a clear picture of what has happened in a month and we will be able to give you a comprehensive report on the progress of our work. So, I beg that I do present this report after the recess. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, do you want a comprehensive report, or a partial report? So why don’t you let the minister do it in the new session? I also have complaints which I brought to his attention. Do you want a partial statement? We need to hear from every district in the country so that you can debate from a point of knowledge. Let us give him that time, as soon as we commence that forth session, which is not far away, by the way –(Interjections)– Hon. Members, you note down the defects in your area and when we come, we shall give you a whole afternoon to deal with the issue of IDs. 

5.12
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Budget Committee on supplementary schedule No.1 for financial year 2013/2014. 

Introduction 

In accordance with Article 156(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, where it is stipulated that: “If in respect of any financial year, it is found -
a)that the amount appropriated for any purpose under the Appropriation Act is insufficient or that a need has arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act; or 
b)that any monies have been expended for any purpose in excess of the mount appropriated for that purpose or for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act; a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid down  before Parliament and in the case of excess expenditure, within four months after the money is spent.” 

Further, in accordance with section 12 of the Budget Act, 2001, it is stipulated that: 
    1) The total supplementary expenditure that required additional resources over and above what is appropriated by Parliament shall not exceed 3 percent of the total approved budget for that financial year without prior approval of Parliament. 
    2) Where funds are expended under sub section one, supplementary estimates showing the sums spent shall be laid before Parliament within four months after the money is spent. 
    3) Any reallocation of funds shall be made in consultation with all the affected ministries, departments, institutions or organisations. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented to Parliament Supplementary Expenditure schedule No.1 of financial year, 2013/14 on the 18 February, 2014 and the schedule was referred to the budget committee for scrutiny. 

The committee has scrutinised the schedule and now presents this report to the House for consideration. Basis of the Supplementary Schedule No.1 for financial year 2013/14; supplementary expenditure requests should maintain the following principles:
    a) Be in conformity with the law.
    b) Identify sources of funding either from surplus or vote suppression;
    c) Be occasioned by unforeseen and emergency expenditures,
    d) Be of a priority nature. 

The methodology

The committee held meetings with those institutions that are listed on page No.3. The committee also scrutinised the following documents in relation to the schedule, the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, The Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 and the Budget Act, 2001. 

Total Supplementary Requests

The total supplementary expenditure request under the schedule No.1 of 2013/2014 totals to Shs 237.271 billion; representing 1.69 percent of the approved national budget. 

Details of the supplementary schedule are attached in annex one. Total supplementary expenditure shall not exceed three percent as we already mentioned of the total approved budget for that financial year without prior approval of Parliament. This request is within the provisions of the law. 

Table one summarises the Supplementary Schedule No.1 of financial year, 2013/14 by category; expenditure category; recurrent expenditure an amount of Shs 80.505 billion and statutory, Shs 0.62 billion. Total recurrent, including statutory is Shs 81.125 billion and development She 156.141 billion and the total is Shs 237.27 billion. 

Overview of the Supplementary Expenditure

The supplementary expenditure recurrent requests under schedule No.1 for FY 2013/14 are as follows: 
    (a) Shs 0.997 billion under Vote-006 for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was required to facilitate the hosting of the Heads of State Summit of troops contributing countries to Somalia held at Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort in Kampala on 4 August 2013.
    (b) Shs 8.11 billion under Vote 007, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Part of this amount, Shs 3.2 billion was to cater for the facilitation for the Heritage Oil and Gas Limited and Tullow Oil Uganda operations arbitration case in London and Shs 4.84 billion of that same amount was meant for partial settlement of court awards.
    (c) Shs 1.3 billion under Vote-013 of the Ministry of Education and Sports was provided to enable the Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) process examinations. The shortfall in the budget arose as a result of an increase in the number of candidates.
    (d) Shs 0.912 billion under Vote 021 of the Ministry of East African Community Affairs was to cater for the costs of hosting the 15th EAC Summit of Heads of State held on 30 November 2013.
    (e) Shs 1.322 billion under Vote 111- Busitema University was provided to cater for general staff salaries.
    (f) Shs 2 billion under Vote 125- National Animal Genetic resource Centre and Data Bank commonly called NAGRC was required for the purchase of 1000 Ankole cattle for a cross breeding program.
    (g) Shs 60 billion under Vote-144 Uganda Police Force was required for additional recruitment and training of 3500 Police officers as part of the 2016 election road map.
    (h) Shs 5 billion under Vote 157- National Forestry Authority was required out of which Shs 2 billion was to cater or land demarcation and Shs 3 billion was for compensation of persons evicted from the Luwungu central forest reserve.
    (i) Shs 0.867 billion under Vote 219- Uganda mission in Brussels was required for renovations of the official residence using unspent funds from the last financial year.

The supplementary expenditure development requests under schedule one 2013/2014 are as follows:
    (a) Shs 0.859 billion under Vote 011- Ministry of Local Government was required for inspection, registration, transportation, distribution of fire-fighting equipment purchased for local governments.
    (b) Shs 138.583 billion under Vote 120- National Citizenship and Immigration Control was required for operationalization of the ID project. Government made a decision in the course of the financial year to implement the national identification project and this was duly approved by Cabinet.
    (c) Shs 16.7 billion under Vote 142- National Agricultural research Organisation (NARO) was required on account of an increase in donor funding to cater for the control of banana wilt disease. This was constituted as follows: Project 1139 ATTAS Shs 12.7 billion from the World Bank, IFAD and Global environmental facility. Project 1138 EAAPP Shs 4 billion from World Bank IDA.

The supplementary expenditure (statutory) which is a third category request under the Schedule financial year 2013/2014 are as follows:
    (a) Shs 0.621 billion under Vote 101- Judiciary was required to cater for the payment of non-resource taxes on consignment of five vehicles and attire for judges and justices.

Observations and recommendations

    1. Funding for the supplementary request one for financial year 2013/2014. 

The committee was informed that the sources of funding for the request are as follows: Shs 219.08 billion was from domestic borrowing. Shs 15.7 billion from external borrowing. Shs 0.867 billion from unspent balances. The committee notes that Article 159 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda requires all Government borrowings to be authorised by Parliament.

The committee recommends that in accordance with this Article therefore, Government must bring a motion for resolution of Parliament to authorise the domestic borrowing of Shs 219.08 billion before this supplementary request can be considered on the Floor of this House.

    2. Vote 021- Ministry of East African Community Affairs 

The committee was concerned about the costs Uganda incurred in hosting the 15th EAC Summit of Heads of State held on 30 November 2013. They observed that Shs 0.91 billion was too high. They inquired about the standard obligations of a country hosting such a summit under the EAC. The committee was informed that funds were spent on meals and accommodation, workshops and seminars, publicity, security, protocol, entertainment and hire of conference halls. Many of the halls and rooms had to be hired a few days before the summit for security reasons (see annex 2).

The committee observes that expenditure, particularly on accommodation appears to be too generous as the same offer is not availed to Ugandans when they attend similar meetings in other countries.

The committee recommends that in future such generosity should only be limited to heads of State and the ministers responsible for East African Community Affairs.

    3. Vote 125 - National Animal genetic resource centre and data bank

The committee was informed that Shs 2 billion was required for the purchase of 100 Ankole cattle meant for the cross breeding and conservation programme in the Aswa and Ruhenjere ranches. 

The committee was further informed that the unit cost of the Ankole cows, some of which were in calf, was Shs 800,000. The remaining Shs 1.2 million was to be spent on staff salaries, infrastructure establishment like boreholes, fences, vaccination, security services, among others. In other words, what we are saying is the unit cost of each cow, including all these expenses is Shs 2 million.

The committee resolved that before it can recommend the Shs 2 billion supplementary request, it must travel to Ruhenjere Ranch to see the 1000 heads of cattle and to Aswa ranch to see the infrastructure development that is currently taking place in preparation for the animals.

The committee recommends that the Shs 2 billion supplementary request for NAGRC be stayed till the committee reports back on its findings on the said visits.

    4. Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force 

The committee was informed that Shs 60 billion was required for additional recruitment and training of 3500 police officers as part of the 2016 election road map. 

The committee observed that Government has consistently under financed critical activities in Uganda Police Force. Most of the activities in question cannot be foregone, as a result, over the last five years, the Uganda Police Force has consistently sought supplementary funding to a tune of Shs 60 billion annually.

The committee observes that it is an abuse of the budgeting process and to the Parliament that appropriates and this is so because Government submits figures for appropriation knowing that they are not realistic and that they will obviously come back to Parliament through a supplementary request and get more funds appropriated. In any case, after it has already spent the funds.

The committee further observes that the kind of supplementary requests made by Uganda Police Force annually over the last five years have been consumptive in nature and recur several times. They therefore cannot be deemed to be of an emergency nature. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should raise the budget ceiling of Uganda Police Force to accommodate this recurrent figure of Shs 60 billion that is annually requested for under supplementary expenditure.

    5. Vote 007- Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. 

The committee was informed that there are three cases as follows:
(i) 	Heritage Oil and Gas Company sued Government of Uganda for a sum of US$ 434 million as a claim for taxes that were imposed on it for the transfer of its interests under the production sharing agreement.
(ii) 	Tullow filed a case that Government breached Article 2.1 of the Production Agreement and the claim is US$ 7,390,523,391.
(iii) 	URA wrongly assessed a total of US$ 331,999,660 in tax.

The request for Shs 3.267 billion was to cater for facilitation for the Heritage Oil and Gas Limited and Tullow Uganda operations arbitration case in London.

The committee observed that it is not right for Government to continue sinking money in this venture because it has been going on for some time now. There is need for the opinion of a third party.

The committee recommends that in the interim, Parliament should pass Shs 3.267 billion but the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs should investigate the matter in totality and report back to the House within a month.

Conclusion

The supplementary request sought for under schedule No.1 of financial year 2013/2014 and for the approval of Shs 237.271 billion representing 1.69 percent of the approved budget.

The committee recommends that subject to the adoption of a parliamentary resolution, approving the domestic borrowing of Shs 219.8 billion for financing 92.3 percent of the supplementary request, the request be approved as follows:
    • Recurrent expenditure Shs 78.505 billion less Shs 2 billion for NAGRC.
    • Development expenditure Shs 156.141 billion.

The committee also recommends that Parliament takes note and approve the supplementary statutory expenditure of Shs 0.621 billion.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move. A series of annexes are attached for details on this document. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. chair and the Budget Committee. I note that you have set two conditions which must first be accomplished. One is the motion authorising domestic borrowing and the second one is a visit to that farm. So I do not know whether we can sever a request.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, on page 9 on -

THE SPEAKER: You are a Member? No, if you are a Member, you do not speak to your report.

5.37
MR OTADA AMOOTI (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryadongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairman of the committee for a good report. Madam Speaker, in a country where the general budget is structured in such a way that the bigger bulk of our budget is recurrent expenditure and a leaner part of the budget is what is development expenditure generally in a normal budgeting process that is what you see - but what do you see here, Madam Speaker, when it comes to supplementary budgeting? It is one of those rare moments where you should have felt happy to see the development expenditure being more than the recurrent which should have been the ideal situation but in this circumstance, it is very deliberate. 

The development expenditure thankfully is on the higher side and the recurrent is on the lower side but it is perfectly timed and brought through the supplementary expenditure regime where procurement is done in an emergency way. In fact where there is room for theft if I may put it in very blunt terms.

The committee definitely recites the basis for a supplementary budget. It must be of emergency nature, it must be something very urgent but just look through. All these situations that occasioned the spending of these monies are all not urgent. 

Procurement of Ankole cows for restocking. This is somebody’s deal because under supplementary expenditure, cows are going to be bought probably under direct procurement or under solicited procurement and these are all deals, hon. Members and this is very sad for this country.

The Budget Act is being abused. I am happy that we are actually revisiting this with a view of repealing it through the Finance Bill. We really must exercise some prudential public Finance management if we are to manage this country in a way that will take us to the next level.  Gross abuse; look at all these expenditures; training of Police. Who was not aware that under normal budgeting, Police ought to be trained for 2016 not even for tomorrow and rescue Ugandans in South Sudan? 

So, hon. Members, to me this supplementary budget - the 3 percent as you have seen is enough leg room for people to get away with deals that are properly thought out before the budgeting process, during the budgeting process and after the budget has been passed. 

I want to thank the committee for the recommendation that you have made that a resolution of Parliament must be sought for this domestic borrowing and that probably you are going to see those cows. I do not know what you are going- After seeing those cows maybe you are just going to verify but you can be sure that buying of those cows was somebody’s deal under a supplementary budget. That one you can be sure but I think you are going to find some cows especially in Aswa there. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want us to just address the recommendations because if the recommendation is that we do not proceed until their solution has come, we should not waste time debating it. Also if we have not yet visited the ranch, what are we discussing?

5.40
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, this is a very sad way of ending our session. We are dealing with a supplementary budget and the conditions for a supplementary budget are very clear. It comes in extreme circumstances of unpredictability or a surplus in revenue but look at what we have here. Madam Speaker, it is quite disheartening.

We are told of external financing as a source of supplementary budget; we need to know what this external financing is. We are also told of Shs 0.8 billion spent as a source from unspent balances. We are not yet at the end of the financial year. What is this unspent balance in the middle of the year? This is a serious matter.

Looking at domestic borrowing without the prior approval of Parliament, surely that must have come under very extreme circumstances. Then you look at the wonderful Ankole cows. Why Ankole cows? Is it an emergency surely? Is there something unforeseen? Is there something that drives Government to say we must purchase 1000 cows under a supplementary budget? For me this is an abuse of the privileges given under the law.

Finally Madam Speaker, look at the money from the oil. Now we have a problem at hand. We had been convinced as a country that we were going to begin making money and the first was the US$ 434 million. Now we have a case at hand. Then you have poor assessment, another US$ 300 million. This is big money. Surely there must be responsibility somewhere. Somebody must take responsibility.

So I would like to concur with the proposal that we really do not pass this budget until some of these things are cleared. Let us know under what circumstances the government was forced to do these things given the local supplementary budget. I am not convinced that we should just pass this and say, let us go ahead especially for things that are not a priority and things that are not an emergency. It gives a wrong basis for tomorrow’s expenditure.

5.43
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The moment you mention Ankole cows, all the people in Uganda will say people of Ankole again. The one who brought the supplementary mentioning Ankole cows does not like the people of Ankole and that is very dangerous. If the people of Ankole are here, they should reject this budget immediately because they are being mentioned as going to get Ankole cows yet their name is already bad in the eyes of many Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, I want to concur with my brother from Ankole who has just left the Floor and he is very right by the way. Let us be Ugandans. The moment you say unspent balance, it means this budget was not deficit financing. What does deficit mean? That you budgeted but you did not have enough money and you had to fund the budget using a deficit by borrowing domestically. Now in the middle of the year you are telling us of unspent balances. Then what do you mean by deficit budgeting? That means our country has no deficit. The moment you have unspent balances in the middle of the year, it means we have no deficit.

Madam Speaker, if there is no deficit, then why are we borrowing? Why the domestic arrears? These are the issues and that is why if you bring a supplementary on the last day like this as we are ending, there must be a reason. This needs time so the moment you say that there are unspent balances vis-à-vis deficit financing of the budget then I am worried.

Madam Speaker, how does a supplementary arise from the unforeseeable? Are these items they are talking about unforeseeable? That is one. Secondly, you budgeted for (x) amount of money but when you went to the market, the price had gone up. Are these the activities we had planned for?

I will go to Police. They want to train police officers for 2016. Was it there at the beginning of the budget? Didn’t they know that there would be elections in 2016? Why does it become a supplementary along the way? This is another way of playing with our heads. We need police officers that is for sure but it must be a planned exercise –(Interruption)

MRS ATIM ONGOM: Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: I hope you will use just three minutes.

MRS ATIM ONGOM: Thank you so much for giving way. You have just stated that when we are giving a supplementary, it should be as a result of an emergency. We realise that the Electoral Commission is demanding money; I think about Shs 400 billion for cleaning the register and the rest. Up to now, the Electoral Commission has nothing, not even a single coin but we are hurrying up to train the Police. What is the reason and what is the emergency here? Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, now they want elections in 2016. The people who are going to stand are the majority of the MPs here. Among the 375, I am sure only about 20 are not going to stand. It means the remaining are going to stand. Even the security of the MPs is not there. We built a parking yard down here - I do not know where we are parking. They are telling us we should put security here for the MPs. Before securing the MPs who are going to stand in 2016, you are going to train the Police that are going to guard them when they are standing. Surely is that rational? Why don’t we first get money and deal with the security for the MPs to be safe so that in 2016, they are available to stand?

Madam Speaker, this is a serious matter- [Mr Ekanya, “Clarification”]

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members. We are going to wind up on this matter. No, he has taken more than three minutes. Please wind up.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the three minutes do not apply to me because you raised it when I had started.

THE SPEAKER: No, there is a custom and usage in this House.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am raising this because if the committee was serious, they would have thought of securing the parking so that Members of Parliament can get parking. We are told the equipment is ready but nothing has been done. So Madam Speaker, I do not see the budget for securing MPs who are going to stand in 2016.

Finally, the IGG wrote in the papers that she is unable to verify the assets of all the leaders in the country because she does not have the funds and the manpower. That is why people are stealing public money; because they know the IGG has no capacity to do verification. The moment verification does not exist, corruption is going to continue.

Recently, I went to Mubende and I found some Generals with square miles of land. I went to the IGG and asked, can you try and help me concerning these people’s declarations? When they looked at the forms, the square miles were missing. The moment the IGG becomes efficient in Uganda, I promise you corruption will go down. Why? Somebody will be worried that the moment he goes and buys something, he must declare it and it will be public knowledge.

We have already passed the Anti-Money Laundering law and that is very good for us but the next office we should equip or empower should be the IGG’s office –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Two minutes.

5.47
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Rt hon. Speaker. Two minutes will be enough for me. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you a member of the committee?

DR BAYIGGA: No, I left that committee long time ago.

THE SPEAKER: Which committee are you serving on?

DR BAYIGGA: National Economy, Madam Speaker but they still want to call me back because of my previous contributions. Some of the anomalies that have been pointed out are very glaring but when you look at the principles that have been outlined - Look at page 3 which talks about the basis of supplementary schedules. It says supplementary expenditure requests should maintain the following principles: conformity with the law, identify the resources and they talk about surpluses and suppression. When you go down and look at their sources of financing, they do not conform to that provision at all.

Secondly when we are talking about these supplementary expenditures, we are actually debating about the post mortem and what has already been done. There should be evidence that indeed there has been training of Police officers so apart from going to inspect where the cows are in the ranches you are talking about, there should be evidence from the Budget Committee that indeed Police officers have already been trained or they are undertaking training. Without that evidence, certainly I agree with you that it is very difficult to pass or even talk about this supplementary expenditure.

There is something that Parliament needs to take into consideration and very seriously so. The Ministry for Finance is available from time immemorial but these glaring deficiencies continue to come from time to time for parliamentary consideration and Members of Parliament have always been kind to say, this should not be repeated in future. We need to ask questions. Why should these glaring defects continue to trickle into this Parliament? Is it because somebody wants to take advantage of lack of proper scrutiny by Parliament or is it taking Parliament for granted? I think that Parliament should take deeper consideration of what Ministry of Finance is doing to Parliament as regards the bringing of supplementary expenditure. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal, you had a correction to make before we close?

5.50
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Madam Speaker, I am a member of the Budget Committee so I am not standing up to debate. I just want to correct the information given on page 9 under item 3, Vote 125. When you go to paragraph two, first of all, the recording of the units of shillings is not correct. It is not Shs 800,000. It should be Shs 800 million. Number two, should be Shs 1.2 billion. I just want the correction to be done.

Secondly, when we were discussing this issue yesterday, the ministry had made a very clear statement that Shs 1.2 billion was spent. Today the wording is different and says, “Was to be spent”. Parliament must take note of the difference in the two statements. “Was spent” means was already spent and it should be justified if it was actually spent. When the committee goes down on the ground, we must find the boreholes, the fences and we must find the vaccination and the staff who have been paid out of that Shs 1.2 billion.

If you say it was to be spent, it means – so, I just want the committee –(Interjections) - no, I am not presenting, I am just correcting. The clarification will come from the chairperson. I just want the correction as it was done yesterday. I am a member of the committee and it is important that Parliament be correctly informed that the statement, which was given to us by the ministry, was that Shs 1.2 billion was spent but today I am seeing here that it was to be spent. So the chairperson must take note and make sure the clerk does not disgrace us. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am just wondering. Unfortunately supplementaries usually come when I am in the Chair. This figure of 60 is like magic. Every financial year, Shs 60 billion is for the Police. I do not know whether the Auditor General takes an interest in this standard figure of 60 and usually for the same purpose. Last year it was for recruiting Police; this year it is also for recruiting Police. What is the magic about the Shs 60 billion?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Just to provide clarification on the issues raised by the Chief Whip from the Opposition side, the figure of Shs 800,000 is actually a unit cost. Just read the statement; the committee was further informed that the unit cost - we are talking about one cow before we get to the figure of Shs 800 million. So we are talking about the unit cost and the figure of Shs 1.2 million again is a unit cost; the amount of money that is to be spent on one cow. So the total spent on each cow is Shs 2 million. So if you take two –(Interjections)– just listen to me kindly.

Madam Speaker, if you take a figure of Shs 2 million per cow times 1,000, you come to a figure of Shs 2 billion, which is the supplementary expenditure that was requested for.

On the second observation about - I have just explained 1.2. The Shs 1.2 million is the average unit cost spent on each cow. That is what it is and that is what we were given. We are reporting what we were given and we are giving you that information.

MRS ATIM ONGOM: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. We just got information from the hon. Cecilia Ogwal on page 9 where she was giving us the figure of Shs 800,000 per unit. That is the explanation that the chairperson gave; that it is a unit for one cow. But we have the balance of Shs 1.2 million which the statement is saying was spent on boreholes, staff salaries and for fencing.

If the statement is saying that and he is explaining that it is the cost of buying each cow, can we have clarity on this? Is he therefore in order to misinform us when the information we have here is that Shs 1.2 million is for fencing, for boreholes and for staff salaries? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, hon. Members, it means that for each cow there is a bore hole, a fence - that is what it means. So there must be 1,000 bore holes and several fences. Anyway hon. Members, we are wasting time. 

I put the question that we defer decision on this matter until the government has moved a motion for resolution on domestic borrowing and secondly, that the committee has gone to visit the farm and come with a report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING TO BAN THE USE OF POLYTHENE MATERIALS IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Please use five minutes for presentation.

5.57
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Because of the time constraint, I will try to be brief. I would like to thank you for according me the opportunity to present this motion. I move this motion under rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure.

“WHEREAS on 29 March 2007, the Parliament of Uganda passed a resolution acknowledging and appreciating environmental dangers arising from the use of polythene materials; 

AND WHEREAS Section 3(1) of the Finance Act, 2009 prohibited with effect from 31 March 2010 the importation, local manufacture, sale and use of sacks and bags of polythene;

NOTING THAT Finance Regulations were passed into law in 2010 in exercise of the powers conferred upon the minister responsible for finance by sections 3(2) and (3)of the Finance Act, 2009;

COGNISANT that Article 39 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda stipulates that every Ugandan has a right to a clean and healthy environment;

APPRECIATING THAT Article 245 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda stipulates that Parliament shall by law provide for measures intended to protect and preserve the environment from abuse, pollution and degradation, manage the environment for sustainable development and promote environmental awareness;

FURTHER APPRECIATING THAT Section 52(1) of the National Environment Act stipulates that every person has the duty to manage any waste generated by his or her activities or the activities of those persons working under his or her direction in such a manner that he or she does not cause ill health to other persons or damage the environment;

RECOGNISING THAT the Schedule of the Finance Regulations under Statutory Instrument No. 32 of 2010 nearly exempted all polythene materials use in Uganda as per attached Schedule No. 1, maintenance of the status quo would lead to continued production and consumption of polythene materials, coupled with the current irresponsible disposal of polythene materials hence compounding the problem of solid waste management in Uganda;

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by the Parliament of Uganda duly convened and sitting today as follows:

That Government takes charge and tables before Parliament within 12 months from now, a Bill to ensure a ban on the importation, local manufacture or sale of polythene material.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by hon. Mwiru. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, my justification will be scientific and brief. The pronouncement of the Ninth Parliament on this calamity of polythene material is long overdue. So, this is an attempt to get ourselves to pronounce the obvious. I am happy that Members have been patient enough to witness the presentation of this.

Madam Speaker, polythene material is what is referred to as akaveera. It is not biodegradable and can reduce soil fertility through bioaccumulation in the soil, human and animal tissues. Polythene material is an environmental hazard and its decomposition can persist in the soil for up to 400 years. Many of us will have died by the time 400 years elapse, but we must be concerned about the future generation. It is a sign of responsibility, which every Member of Parliament here present must shoulder. As planners of this country, we have an environmental duty to care for the next generation beyond the care envisaged in the famous negligence case of Donoghue v Stevenson in 1932.

Madam Speaker, under articles 39 and 245 of the Constitution of Uganda and under the National Objectives of State Policy, No. XXVII, the polythene material is an environmental hazard and a deadly object. As we prepare ourselves - and this is very important - to produce and refine oil, it will be a catastrophe for us to venture into that before we pass a law to control the dubious investors who are waiting for oil production so that they link up with the manufacturers of kaveera because akaveera is a direct product of oil. So the faster we move to put in place a law to stop those people ahead of time, the better for us. This will help us control the production of kaveera locally in preparation for a better and environmentally free harvest of oil. 

This is a very important point, Madam Speaker. If we do not act, the kaveera manufacturers will flood all over Uganda and even encroach on our invaluable wildlife where we get a lot of money through tourism. You know that I am the shadow Minister of Environment and I am quite - (Interjections).

Madam Speaker, the Seventh Parliament started this crusade through hon. Banyenzaki and pronounced themselves on the ban of the kaveera. The Eighth Parliament supported the motion when they supported the ban using regulation through the Finance Bill, which stopped the importation and local manufacture of akaveera. Many of you recall the controversy, but we commend what the Minister of Finance at that time for what he did because he set the ball rolling.

As if that was not enough –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Conclude, please.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Finally, Madam Speaker, even the civil society must be congratulated. They have taken action to make sure that courts of law in Uganda pronounce themselves on this concern. 

In Green Watch (U) Ltd v The Attorney-General and NEMA 2011, Justice Eldad Mwangusya issued the following declaration: “the manufacture and use of polythene material undermines the rights of citizens of Uganda in enjoying a clean and healthy environment.” That resolution is very fundamental in law and nobody should ignore it. It is part of the books of law to make sure that people understand the importance of this concern.

This resolution serves as notice to the Government of Uganda that in the event that we ignore this clarion call, the presenter of this motion will not hesitate to bring a Private Members’ Bill to put in effect the concerns of my presentation. Thank you very much.

6.07
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a seconder of the motion, while we were preparing the justification with hon. Lukyamuzi, I know that inadvertently the person who typed this included the case of Donoghue v Stevenson but the relevant one is the one which he has quoted last.

I rise to support the motion and my justification is based on the principle of the polluter pays. It is a known principle of law that he who pollutes the environment must pay. When it comes to this kaveera which we are seeking to ban, the manufacturer in the actual sense is the polluter because the user who disposes of these kaveeras has no capacity to pay when they have actually polluted the environment.

It is on the basis of the above that as we strive for environmental conservation, we need to actually create a ban on importation. This has created a very big problem. I want to say that this is not the first time that a motion of this nature has been brought to the House; resolutions have been passed before but Ministry of Finance tends to value the taxes got from the polythene more than the effect they have on the environment. 

I want to invite the Minister for Finance to strike a balance between the environment and the money because most of the things we do on earth, even the food we eat is grown in the soil. So, we need to move to see that the long-term effect of these polythene bags on the environment is checked. Actually, we shall have to incur more costs in terms of buying fertilisers if we do not. 

Madam Speaker, I want to give statistics. One of the issues derailing the integration of the East African Community by Tanzania is the issue of soil. They said they have 990 square kilometres of land, Kenya has 527 square kilometres and Uganda has 370 square kilometres. They say that theirs is arable land and they fear to come together with countries that do not have arable land and yet here we are very busy degrading the environment by the use of these polythene bags. 

I want to say to the Minister for Finance that in his response, he should not try to put up an argument to make it an academic exercise –(Mr Kasule Ssebunya rose_) - Yes, you can.

THE SPEAKER: Your two minutes will go if you are generous.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Thank you, colleague, for allowing to be given information. 

The Ministry of Finance had actually done its part. As the Member who brought the motion stated, the Ministry of Finance had gone ahead to deter importation of buveera of a certain size, but it is the Ministry of Environment that defended the manufacturers. They said that we should give them a little bit of time so that they convert to degradable materials but up to now, they have never done so. It is them that should be blamed. I thank you.

MR MWIRU: Thank You. Madam Speaker, I appreciated yesterday when the Government Chief Whip informed us about the mis-coordination in Government and it seems to be reoccurring. 

That notwithstanding, the point that we are making is that we need a law. The mover of this motion does not mind whether it is coming from the Ministry of Finance or the Ministry of Environment. We also want to assume that from the way this Government operates – I do not know but it is reoccurring – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I did not read the details of your motion but I think that if I do recall from memory, the ban was about particular microns. If you bring a motion about everything, I do not know what we shall do about the milk, sugar; I think that you may need to be more specific because it concerns microns. 

HON. MEMBERS: 30 microns.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, 30 microns. The minister will tell us when they are ready. Do we agree to the motion saying that the minister will bring the Bill? 

6.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Flavia Munaba): Rt Hon. Speaker, I want to thank the mover of the motion. I also agree that the kaveera is a mischief that has negative implications for the environment and also for the health of the people, who are actually engaged in littering the environment with the kaveera. 

I also agree that the implementation of the ban is long overdue. However, the implementation requires multiple institutions to act together. We require the Ministry of Trade and Industry to develop guidelines that will guide the move towards the ban. As that takes place, the Ministry of Water and Environment is exploring ways of recycling the kaveera so that it is turned into cooking fuel to be used in customised stoves –(Interjections)– We shall be able to follow that –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are people in this country who are living on recycled materials, who are employed in the recycling industry. So as we debate, let us take into account the dangers and also the other side. The motion is approved and the minister will let us know in 12 months’ time. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE PETITION BY THE PEOPLE OF BULEGENI TOWN COUNCIL ON THE ALTERATION OF BULEGENI TOWN COUNCIL BOUNDARIES AND THE CREATION OF KAMU SUB-COUNTY

6.14
THE CHAIREPRSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mrs Grace Kwiyucwiny): Rt Hon. Speaker, this a report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the petition by the people of Bulegeni Town Council on the alteration of Bulegeni Town Council boundaries and the creation of Kamu Sub-county.

I have the minutes of the committee here with me and I beg to lay them on the Table. I also have the petition of Bulegeni Town Council and the correspondences that came along with them. I beg to lay them on the Table.

Bulegeni Town Council is located in Bulambuli District. It is inhabited by Bamasaba and Shana tribes. These two tribes have lived together for a long time but with some misunderstandings and conflict, which has resulted into tribal fights, imprisonment and even death of some people. This instability continues to-date. 

In March 2013, Parliament received a petition, presented by hon. Ekanya Geoffrey on behalf of the people of Bulegeni Town Council, against the creation of Kamu Sub-county and alteration of Bulegeni Town Council boundaries. In the petition, it was alleged that upon elevation of Bulegeni Town Board to a town council, some people within Bulegeni and Bulambuli District mobilised themselves to revolt against the elevation of the town council, but along tribal lines. 

The situation led the Bamasaba people in Bulegeni Town Council to think that the town council had been created for the Shana People and that Kamu Sub-county was specifically created for Bamasaba. This situation is alleged to have led to clashes between the Bamasaba and Shana people and the displacement of a lot of people from the area for fear of reprisals and disenfranchisement. This led into chaos and abandonment of the 2011 elections in Bulegeni Town Council and Kamu Sub-county.

The above conflict has divided the once harmonious communities that had lived together for centuries, intermarrying and sharing core cultural values, engaging in economic activities, in agriculture, commerce and hunting. To-date, the people of Bulegeni Town Council have never exercised their constitutional right to choose their leaders and, as a result, they do not have political representation at the district local council level.

The petitioners state that Bulambuli District local council, in which the people of Bulegeni are not represented, resolved to create Kamu Sub-county, curving it out of what used to be originally Bulegeni Town Council, without grassroots consultation and support. The petitioners are particularly against the sub-division of the town council and alteration of boundaries to create Kamu Sub-county due to the following reasons: 

a) 	Bulegeni Town Council is about four square kilometres, which petitioners contend is too small to accommodate two local governments at the sub-county level.

b) 	The boundaries between Bulegeni Town Council and Kamu Sub-county are hard to define.

c) 	The social and economic services such as schools, churches, markets and the trading centre were politically curved out of Bulegeni to form Kamu Sub-county.

d) 	The purported creation of Kamu Sub-county for the Bamasaba and Bulegeni Town Council for the Shana has created reprisals among the two communities. 

e) 	There is inadequate local revenue to support meaningful development, especially in Bulegeni Town Council, and hence, this will hinder progress in the area.

The petitioners’ prayer is that Parliament resolves thus:
1. 	The people and the local communities of Kamu and Bulegeni areas be involved in making decisions on issues affecting them.

2. 	The Minister for Local Government revokes the decision creating Kamu Sub-county because local communities were not consulted.

3. 	Parliament consults with opinion leaders in the concerned areas and assesses the suitability of Kamu Sub-county being curved out of Bulegeni Town Council.

4. 	Parliament urges the Electoral Commission and all relevant authorities concerned to expedite the process of conducting elections for the establishment of Bulegeni Town Council. 

The committee then travelled to Bulambuli District – Bulegeni Town Council and Kamu Sub-county - with the following objectives:  
a) 	To understand the current situation in Kamu Sub-county and Bulegeni Town Council and to establish whether the people of the area were involved in making decisions on the creation of Bulegeni Town Council and Kamu Sub-county.

b) 	To consult political, technical and opinion leadership of the area on the suitability and justification of creating the above local governments and assess as to whether it is feasible to revoke the decision to curve Kamu Sub-county out of Bulegeni Town Council.

c) 	To establish why the Electoral Commission could not carry out elections in the area during the 2011 election cycle in the two local governments and establish the possibility of carrying out elections in these areas at the earliest time possible.

d) 	To make appropriate recommendations on the way forward.

I will give you the background. In 2006, Sironko District Council in consultation with lower local government councils and residents of Bulegeni Trading Centre recommended that Bulegeni Rural Growth Centre be elevated to a town board to enhance proper planning and management and bring services nearer to the people. A technical study was conducted to assess the viability of Bulegeni Parish becoming a town board. The study found the area viable and thus a town board was established constituting of the original Bulegeni Parish. On June 20th 2007, the Minister for Local Government declared Bulegeni Trading Centre a town board. The reference is Appendix I. 

On June 8th 2008, the then chairman LC5 Sironko District, Mr Wambi, presented a memorandum to His Excellency the President to expedite the elevation of Bulegeni Town Board to a town council status. This was followed by a letter (Appendix II) from the then Principal Private Secretary to His Excellency the President, Ms Amelia Kyambadde, to the Minister of Local Government asking him to take appropriate action and elevate Bulegeni Town Board to a town council. 

On July 1st 2010, Bulegeni Town Council came into force by an instrument (Appendix III) dated 14 September 2009, from the Minister for Local Government addressed to Mr Stephen Mwanga – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, perhaps we could go to your recommendations. Members can read the background; they have this on their iPads.

MS KWIYUCWINY: Most obliged. 

THE SPEAKER: Go to your findings and observations.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I come from those areas. She mentioned the Bamasaba and I am one of them. I seek guidance because we shall need this Hansard for future reference; so you either allow the chair to read the whole thing –

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, we gave you iPads so that you can read. It is on your iPad.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, that is what I am coming to. You either allow her to read the whole report or the whole report becomes part of the Hansard.

THE SPEAKER: That is my business, do not worry. Let her present her recommendations and I will make my decision later. Go to your findings and observations.
 
MS KWIYUCWINY: Findings and Observations: The committee made the following findings and observations:

1. 	The committee observed that the leadership was aware of the conflict and that they had been at the forefront of trying to solve it.

2. 	The people of Kamu Sub-county are very comfortable with the Government’s decision to create Kamu Sub-county.

3. 	While the residents of Bulegeni Town Council maintain that they were never consulted during the creation of Kamu Sub-county and subsequent alteration of Bulegeni Town Council boundaries, the committee established that consultations were carried out by the honourable minister, the district leadership and local residents as confirmed at Kamu Sub-county. 

4. 	The committee established that Kamu Sub-county is housed in a poor building that is not easily accessible. 

5. 	The committee also observed that Kamu Sub-county comprises of an area covering about one square kilometre only.

    6. The committee noted that Bulegeni Town Council is basically rural and is housed in a health centre II facility.

7. 	The minister confirmed that a start-up fund to secure premises and kick-start operations was advanced to Bulegeni Town Council.

8. 	The committee further observed that the Shana and Bamasaba have been living together but have had undertones of tribal conflict.  

9. 	The committee observed that the conflict in the two local governments resulted into the postponement of the 2011 elections.

10. The committee also observed that the Electoral Commission went to Bulambuli recently and conducted an update of the registry.

Recommendations

The committee debated on two scenarios: (a) the created Bulegeni Town Council and Kamu Sub-county and their current boundaries being maintained; and (b) Kamu sub-county being merged with the current Bulegeni Town Council to form one administrative area. After a lengthy discussion, the recommendations were as follows:

1. The created Bulegeni Town Council and Kamu Sub-county and their current boundaries should be maintained.

2. Deliberate action should be taken by Government to make these two local governments viable by undertaking the following programmes: 
a) 	construct administrative offices in both local governments;
b) 	construct and develop new markets in both local governments;
c) 	construct a health facility that is well equipped to serve the population of both areas; and 
d) 	continue to provide the social services like roads and safe water.

3. The Government and the Electoral Commission in particular should ensure that all local council elections are carried out as soon as possible.

4. 	The Government should urgently provide funds for the construction of both Bulegeni Town Council and Kamu Sub-county offices.

5. 	Bulegeni Town Council should immediately vacate the premises of the health centre II to enable people access health services.

6. 	The Government should investigate the utilisation of the start-up funds of Bulegeni Town Council and Kamu Sub-county. Any misuse of such funds should be identified and the responsible persons be held accountable.

7. 	The Government should urgently identify funds to hold elections in the two local governments as continued leadership gaps may undermine developments and governance.

8. 	The Minister for Local Government should organise sensitisation programmes for Bulambuli District leadership and the Bamasaba and Shana people on tribal co-existence.

9. 	The committee urges the Minister for Local Government and Cabinet to desist from creating administrative units based on tribal considerations and sentiments as the precedents set are reprisals and are unsustainable. The committee suggests that there should be standard guidelines in creation of local governments and administrative units, which should be adhered to. 

Conclusion

In conclusion, there is a growing tendency by the local people to demand for the creation of new local governments and administrative units based on tribal sentiments. In this regard, the Bamasaba and Shana tribal conflict seems to have escalated to higher levels due to the same tribal sentiments. While the committee was informed that the creation of Kamu Sub-county was the only feasible option at the time to diffuse the tension and chaos that had engulfed Bulegeni Town Council and the eminent tribal conflict between the Bamasaba and the Shana people, this should not be left to grow out of hand. 

The Government should ensure that there is meaningful service delivery to the people of Kamu Sub-county and Bulegeni Town Council. Government should follow established guidelines for the creation of local governments and administrative units. These guidelines should always be adhered to in order to limit tribal sentiments and promote objectivity and unity in the country at large. 

I want to thank my committee members and I beg to report, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair and members of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. The full text of the report should be reflected in the Hansard. Thank you for saving me from the Bulegeni people as they are always hanging around in the corridors around my office. 

I do not know what the Minister for Local Government says about this – Okay, three minutes for hon. Nandala-Mafabi, hon. Wamakuyu and the minister.

6.29
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, I think it would be better for Members to debate this issue first before the minister can come in.

The issue of Bulegeni is a very complex one. It is the first time that I am hearing about the Shana because in Bugisu, we have Bagisu who are called Bamasaba and our neighbours are called Kupsabiny – the people from Sebei. So I do not know where these Shana that you are talking about come from. I do not know if they are even in our Constitution –(Interruption) 

MR WAMAKUYU: The information that I want to give my brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, is that these people have been with us in Bugisu and they are No. 63 in the schedule of those tribes. Look at No. 63. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, that is okay. Of course, learning is a continuous process and it is people who do not want knowledge that do not learn. I accept that if they are in the Constitution.

Madam Speaker, the reason as to why people really cry for administrative units is because they want services. I do not think that the people of Bulegeni are only the Shana who are No. 63 in the Constitution. I have been to Bulegeni and that place is near Sebei; it is not really in the middle but the whole area is Bugisu. So, you cannot say that the people there are all Shana because there must be Bagisu in that area of Bulegeni. 

Bulegeni is a trading centre where we all do business. I do not come from Bulambuli but I also have an interest in that area we are talking about. My only worry is that when I was in Bulegeni, people were claiming that there are people who are saying that they were handed over the town council personally, as individuals, and that it belonged to them. Now when you mention the Shana, that means that the Shana people assume that the town council belongs to them and not the community. 

Madam Speaker, unless the Government comes up and everybody agrees that the town council is for all of us, I can tell you that Bulegeni will be a hot place. The MP for the area, my brother, hon. Wamakuyu, is here and he will talk about it. He may fear because of votes but for me who is just a neighbour in one way or another and has business interests, I will tell you that it would be better for Government to carry out a referendum in that area –(Interjection)– I wish you knew, you would not just say “no”. 

Madam Speaker, that is my place of operation and I know what is happening. You go there, they will say that they do not want a town council and yet they are staying in a town council area and then they will tell you that they need a town council. Personally, I will need that place to have a town council because it means better development, better things for the area –(Member timed out).        

6.33
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (FDC, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you for this opportunity, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for the report.

Bulegeni is a place earlier known for people called Bakama. There was a tribe that came from Buruuli and they came and settled in Bugisu; I think they came from Nakaseke or Nakasongola. So, it is a tribe that has been with us and we have intermarried.

The issues of Bulegeni, like my brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, has said are because of the fight for political leadership. Since these people are few, when we get to elections, you find the Bagisu, who are the majority, take the seats. That is why these people have also been crying to the President and everywhere in Government that they also want to be heard. 

Secondly, there is a market which operates twice a week. It is a big market in that area and it operates on Wednesdays and Saturdays. So, they have been fighting for business in that market. Those are the two important issues which those people have been fighting over. 

Like hon. Nandala-Mafabi had suggested, carrying out a referendum is not necessary now. We have agreed, like the ministry did, to take a decision to create a unit for the Shana and another one for the Bagisu. Much as this is not the proper way to solve conflicts, it is the only remedy that has helped. On the issue of a referendum, I am a Member of Parliament for that place and to my brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I want to say that it is not necessary and it is uncalled for. We should not incite people. 

The challenge we have in those two units is that you find that in Kamu Sub-county, there are many Shana and few Bagisu in the town council; this is a big challenge that I have seen. For those people who want to be leaders even at the LC 1 level, it is also going to be difficult because they are now again engulfed with many Bamasaba. That is the challenge that I see, but a referendum is not a priority. 

What we can as leaders is to educate our people to live together other than divide them. Sincerely, even the honourable member can attest to this - initially, I was the one who opposed the idea of creation. When it came to time for elections, much as I did not perform well that side, I rejected the idea of creating the sub-county. However, when the tension flared, Government took the decision to resolve the issue that way. As leaders, let us try to live –(Member timed out_)

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I am the one who moved that petition.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Ekanya. You know, it was very interesting; it was not possible for someone from the Masaba area to move the motion and so I had to ask hon. Ekanya to do it. (Laughter)

6.37
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA: (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The question of accommodating different ethnic groups in this country is a matter that the Ministry of Local Government and Government need to handle. This is because as we grow, people move from different places to others. 

The elders from Bulegeni have been frequenting my office and are really very appreciative that their matter has been heard in this House. I want to thank the chairperson of the committee. We hope that like we created under the Universities and Other Tertiaries Act some equity for gender parity and so forth, we shall have equity where the indigenous people are not marginalised and also where the new people who come in respect the culture of the community. 

On the same issue, Madam Speaker, I hope that the Minister of Local Government will resolve the issue of the demand for a district for Tororo County, because we are disappearing as a people. Our culture and language is disappearing and we are never going to stop the demand for our district because we need it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what do you say about the report? We need to conclude.

6.39
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Tororo was not a subject of discussion in this report but to respond to the report, I would like to thank the committee for the investigations. 

I would like from the onset to say that I support all the recommendations of the committee; one, that the boundaries of Bulegeni Town Council and Kamu Sub-county be maintained. This is the position of the ministry. It is very difficult, Madam Speaker, to curve boundaries in a manner that ensures that tribes fall within the borders of where the majority of the tribe lives. It is very complex. 

Even when we created Bulegeni Town Council, which is predominantly Shana, and Kamu Sub-county which is predominantly Bamasaba, there are still Bamasaba in Bulegeni and there are still Shana people living in Kamu Sub-county. This is the trend everywhere in the country and I think it should be encouraged. The earlier our people integrate, intermarry and start getting united and living as one people, the better for Bulambuli and the better for Uganda.

I would like to undertake, Madam Speaker, like I did before the committee, that we stall try our best to mobilise funds within our budget to help these two local governments to have their own homes. We had earmarked a start-up fund of Shs 45 million, which was sent to Bulegeni Town Council with a view to help them start building something which they could work from. Unfortunately, these funds have not been properly utilised. As the committee proposes, we shall investigate how these funds were used but that notwithstanding, the ministry will do everything possible to have minimum accommodation for these two local governments.

Like the honourable member for Bulambuli County has said, I do not think a referendum in this matter is necessary because we consulted. I personally visited Bulegeni and Kamu, I met the residents and leaders of the areas, resolutions were passed, and of course, the majority of the people agreed. Some people did not agree; you can never have consensus in matters of this nature. However, whatever we did was based on the resolutions of the district council and sub-county councils. So, Bulegeni Town Council and Kamu Sub-county were created in accordance with the law. 

The way forward is to continue to sensitize the people to learn to live together. That way, these local governments will exist and serve their people. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the committee be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO ESTABLISH A NATIONAL WAR MEMORIAL CENTRE IN UGANDA

6.42
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I move under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure.

“WHEREAS objective IV of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy provides that the state and the citizens of Uganda shall at all times defend the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda;
 
AND WHEREAS several Ugandans have sacrificed their lives to participate in the military service to promote peace and security and to protect the interests and the image of Uganda both locally and internationally; 

NOTING THAT it is expedient for Uganda to establish a national war memorial centre to commemorate the members of the armed forces, including the UPDF and the Uganda Police Force officers who lost their lives while on duty within and outside Uganda as a result of war; 

COGNISANT of the fact that several countries such as the USA, the  United Kingdom, Australia and many others around the world have achieved great strides in recognising the service of fallen and missing soldiers and those who returned alive by establishing memorial monuments and archives in their honour;

CONSIDERING THAT there is need to honour the soldiers of Uganda who sacrificed and lost their lives while on duty;

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by this Parliament that:
1. 	Government establishes a national war memorial centre with befitting monuments to commemorate the sacrifices of the Ugandan Government soldiers who died in all wars within and outside Uganda from 1962 to date.

2. 	Government establishes a database for soldiers killed or missing in action both within and outside Uganda and during international peace keeping operation missions abroad.

3. 	Government establishes a commission of inquiry where citizens of Uganda are encouraged to provide information on members of the armed forces who disappeared without any clear information while serving as soldiers in all wars within and outside Uganda.” 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by hon. Otada.

MR FUNGRAOO: Madam Speaker, without a national war memorial centre, sons and daughters of Uganda who lost their lives while on duty will never be properly remembered and honoured by the nation as a whole. We have cases of people we knew and respected when they were alive and they passed on while serving us, but today here in Kampala or in other parts of the country, other than in their villages, they are not remembered. 

Maj. Reuben Ikondere is an example; he was a gallant son of Uganda who died in Congo at the hands of the Mai Mai. He is probably remembered by his family members but not by most of us because we have no sign to remind us about him. We have Lt Col Jet Mwebaze, the Ugandan soldiers killed in Somalia - In the interest of time I will not read their names. Even more recently, we had Capt. Celestine Igao from Kaberamaido who died in South Sudan and was buried. We have many others including people who died fighting the LRA, the ADF - people responsible for the peace that we are enjoying here. We do not remember them because we do not see them and their families, Madam Speaker. 

The worst is that when you see the widows and the orphans who are not receiving any help from Government, you really feel sorry for them. To remember them, you need to see their names written on monuments just like in the United States of America where I saw a monument near the White House with names of soldiers who died in the Vietnamese War, in the Korean War and in all the wars that have made the US what it is. We, as Ugandans, should remember our own even when they are dead.

Madam Speaker, there is a problem today. As Parliament we do not remember, we do not even know how many soldiers of Uganda have died outside Uganda or within Uganda. During the Congo War, Kisangani 1 and 2, near Kinshasa, the Kagera War, in my capacity as Shadow Minister of Defence and Security soldiers of Uganda came and gave me information. They complained but I saw that we had very little capacity to respond to them. 

In my view, if we had archives of soldiers who were lost, - we do not know where or when they died - it would be possible for the future generations to trace for the remains of these soldiers by using scientific methods like radiology. In radiology, they would use radioactive methods to trace and recover the remains of our sons and daughters from wherever they fell in the bushes of Uganda or outside Uganda and bring them back for a decent burial.

Madam Speaker, we have the responsibility to create continuity of the good actions of those who have been there before us and have made a contribution. I would like, therefore, to say that this motion is justified and I would like to urge honourable members here to support the motion. We are simply urging Government to construct a national war memorial centre for Uganda in a centrally accessible place. We have some monuments in places like Kabamba and in some places where the NRA rebels who started the war have been remembered. Those are NRA rebels and it is good to remember them, but national government soldiers are different. They need to be remembered here. 

We are not saying that they should be buried in Kampala or in one place; bury them in their places of origin but bring the names to a central place so that you do not stop thinking about them when they are not in your view. If you have a database, you treat them in the same way you treat the soldiers who are still alive. Madam Speaker, this is very important for you and me and for all of you, today and tomorrow. Support the motion please. Thank you.

6.50
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I rise to second the motion. 

I needed to say this last but because of time, let me say it first: In December last year, we were in Agago constituency with the President remembering the late father and late mother of Justice Owiny Dollo. He was there and I remember hon. Lanyero, hon. Lilly Adong and a number of Members were there. I supported this motion because of the one thing that the President said at that particular function. 

The President did not have enough time for the function but when Justice Owiny Dollo talked about his father and gave the illustrious history about how this old man fought in Japan, how he fought in World War I and all that, the President stood up and said, “But Justice Owiny Dollo, why did you have nyeko - jealousy in the Luo language – towards me not to have told me about your father early? I would have come to see your father much earlier before he died. You can never find people who have fought like your late father. The history of such people is really what freedom fighters like me have been looking out for. In fact, it is for that reason – lack of history and people who are enshrined with that sort of history - that I was close with the late Tito Okello Lutwa in Tanzania.” That is what the President said. 

The history was so rich and it ignited in my mind the fact that surely, war in itself is not something that I personally glorify - I actually detest it - but again I think President Museveni has made a case. He made a case that it was necessary for him and others to go to the bush to fight and bring restoration that many of us profess has brought this country to where it is. 

Therefore, I expect my colleagues to support this motion because this is a motion that is about accountability, giving salutations to fallen brothers and sisters and expressing solidarity. It is a motion that seeks to entrench patriotism. If we go to all these countries which my colleague, the mover of the motion, has talked about, you really find a spirit of patriotism engraved among the citizenry because of their past. Uganda has such a history, which I believe is worth writing home about. 

The other day while commemorating the late Bisamunyu here, Gen. Tumwine asked why we do not teach the history of Uganda. How come European history and other histories are actually compulsorily taught to our children and we do not know about these guys? He asked that here. I think this is something that he left with us to think about. These are gallant sons and daughters of Uganda who have gone out of their way and paid the ultimate price, Madam Speaker.

When you go to the USA, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, as you know the holocaust never happened in America but you are going to find a whole holocaust centre, which is a huge centre of attraction in DC. It is a huge destination for tourists and I thought the Minister of Finance would pick interest in this.

Finally, the World Trade Centre was brought down under circumstances that you know of – 9/11. To date, they have not rebuilt that place; in fact, what they have done is to make it a memorial. They have engraved names of all the people, at least most of them, who died under those circumstances. It will remain a memorial centre and is also one of the hugest tourist attraction centres in the world. So, honourable members, I pray that you think about this motion because it is going to entrench patriotism, not in the way that we are trying to teach it. I beg to support.

THE SPEAKER: Before the minister comes up, I want to say that whenever we have national functions, there is one old man who always matches last at the parade. I do not know whether we have ever recognised him. I do not know where he was, either in Burma or somewhere else. I think Members know him. These are the people we are talking about. Hon. Minister, use three minutes. 

6.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I want to thank the mover of this motion and the seconder. 

While we appreciate that it is an honour and a gesture of good will for our gallant soldiers and daughters who have served this country to be recognised by establishing a national war memorial centre in Uganda and to serve to enrich our history, my concern is that this motion has financial implications. Under our Constitution, Article 93 imbues us that if a motion has financial implications, it would need to be with the approval of or by Government. 

My plea is that is it not possible that this motion may be passed now. We can work with the mover of the motion to improve this motion having assessed the financial implications and then we pass it.

THE SPEAKER: But the motion is not saying that you establish it tomorrow. They are asking you to consider it. You have been to Rwanda and everybody who goes to Rwanda must go to the genocide memorial; it is automatic, whether you like or not.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I want to give the minister information. As we speak, we approved a World Bank loan here and the Minister of Trade and Tourism is going to rehabilitate all the war memorials in the country. I think this motion - that is why I want an amendment – is just to advise the Minister of Tourism. They did not think about it because they came to Tororo and they went to Jinja and they were looking for these war memorials of World War I. So, this is to advise them to include this in their programme. 

Therefore, honourable minister, this is what Government is doing. The only problem is that there is lack of coordination. So, you need to support this motion.

6.58
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Madam Speaker, I support the motion. I hope I am not asking for too much, but I request that the movers of the motion accept that we also bring on board the idea of victims, especially in areas where massive massacres took place like the Luweero Triangle and the Atiak Massacre. We had some serious massacres in Lapono, in Wang Lobo in Agago District and several other places. I really think these victims also deserve to be hailed. I think they are also heroes. 

Maybe it would be just a matter of putting some sections in the centre where we list the names of those who died in the massacres. I will give an example of Wang Lobo where 28 people were killed, chopped and cooked in pots. Really, this would enrich the history of this country and it would also add a lot of value, especially to the memory of Ugandans that such things also happened. I wonder whether this will work well with the movers of the motion. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

7.00
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would not mind supporting this motion, especially given the view that there are already existing World War memorials equivalent of centres or maybe graveyards. In Tororo, we have one, unkempt. I am told Jinja has one and also Nakivubo. All these belong to Government, so there would be no reason why Government would be rising up to say there are financial implications. I believe these war memorial centres would provide avenues for –(Interjection)– Honourable minister, you know that this is a motion that is not urging you with a timeframe; it is something more advisory than it is binding on your part. You can reject it, implement it or not. 

I think this could be something, as the minister has acknowledged, that we could work on together. Madam Speaker, I was wondering whether the minister would allow us improve on it. I have a problem with it; why is it from 1962 when I have people who died in 1919 or even before 1919? What is magical about 1962? These are the kinds of corrections we would make and then develop a database that would help us all. We would all be proud to know who the heroes were, who the people who fought were, and not just heroes but those who fought for this country or the world, and have it somewhere where we can take our children to see or tourists to see. I think, Madam Speaker, in that regard, I support the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in my village there is an old man who fought in 1939 and because he is still chasing the benefits of his colleagues, whenever he hears that I have come, he will come to remind me to ask the government about their benefits. 

7.02
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. I do not want to just close this to militarism only; I would rather we expand. When you are talking about people who fought in the world wars and you come here and cannot find Amin’s photograph or Obote’s anywhere or even that of past leaders - I see people looking for land titles of their kingdoms, like the honourable Minister Kajara; if we said give us all the photographs or the portraits of your past 10 kings, they would not even get them. So, we should look at all these. 

I went to Switzerland and I had to pay US$ 100 to see the kings who ruled there since the 16th century. When you go to Burundi, you find the same; when you go to Rwanda, they have promoted tourism through genocide. What is wrong with us having monuments? 

The other day I got tourists from outside the country and they asked, “Can we see where Amin used to stay?” You cannot even find where Amin used to stay. If we got the shoes which Amin used to wear or his accordion, we would earn money. But here, they do not want to know their history and they want to weaken the future. Even leaders like the honourable Minister Kajara who do not want to remember the past history will be forgotten. However, they should not be an obstacle to keeping and preserving our history. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, somewhere in Europe there is someone who keeps the tooth of Patrice Lumumba, which was forcefully taken out of his mouth when they killed him. 

Honourable members, this motion is interesting but I think we need to develop it further. Can we assign the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry? Members who have ideas on how it should be, please go there so that we get something good; it is a very good thing for our country. Is that okay? Thank you very much, honourable members. 

Honourable members, I really want to thank you for the work done throughout this session. The House will be prorogued tomorrow but I want to remind you that we have a sitting in the afternoon in honour of the late hon. Obonyo Jabwor, the former Member for Kotido South. The body will arrive at 10.00 a.m. and the sitting will be at 2 O’clock. So, House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much.   

(The House rose at 7.05 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 16 May 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)



















