Thursday, 19 May 2016

Parliament met at 10.04 a.m. in the Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Chief Justice, Justice Stephen Kavuma, in the Chair)

PROCLAMATION

THE CLERK TO PARLIAMENT: Honourable members, a new Parliament has been elected. The Members have been sworn-in and they are now ready to commence their five years term effective today, the 19 May 2016, in Parliament. 

Article 95(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda states: “Where a new Parliament is elected, the President shall, by proclamation, appoint the place and a date not beyond seven days after the expiry of the term of Parliament or of the extended period, as the case may be, for the first sitting of the new Parliament.” 

We have now received a proclamation by His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda, which I will read verbatim.

PROCLAMATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY YOWERI KAGUTA MUSEVENI, PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

“WHEREAS under Article 95 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda where a new Parliament is elected, the President is required by proclamation to appoint the place and a date not beyond seven days after the expiry of the term of Parliament for the first sitting of the new Parliament;

AND WHEREAS elections of Members of Parliament to the Tenth Parliament were concluded on 18 February 2016 and in accordance with the provisions of Section 59 of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 the names and the constituencies of the elected candidates were published in the Gazette;

NOTING THAT under clause (3) of Article 77 of the Constitution, the term of Parliament shall be  five years from the date of its first sitting after the general elections;

FURTHER NOTING that the first sitting of the Ninth Parliament was held on the 9th day of May 2011 and, therefore, the term of the Ninth Parliament expires on 18 May 2016;

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the President by clause (1) of Article 95 of the Constitution, it is hereby proclaimed that the first sitting of the Tenth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda shall be held at the Parliamentary Conference Hall, Parliamentary building on the 19 May 2011 at 10.00a.m.

Given under my hand and public seal this 14th day of May 2016:

Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda.”

STATEMENT BY HIS LORDSHIP, THE DEPUTY CHIEF JUSTICE

10.10
THE DEPUTY CHIEF JUSTICE (Justice Stephen Kavuma): Honourable Members of Parliament, I take this opportunity to warmly congratulate you all on your election to this august House. The journey to this House has not been easy. We thank the Almighty God who made it possible for each one of you and for His blessings. I welcome you all to this first sitting of the Tenth Parliament.

It is almost three months since you were declared winners in the recently concluded parliamentary elections. For some of you, it is not the first time to be in this House. For many others, however, it is the first time. Together and in unison, you now constitute the Tenth Parliament. 

However, you do not yet have a leadership for the House and you cannot, therefore, function effectively. Putting in place such a leadership is the reason for your and my coming here today. 

I have been designated by His Lordship, the Chief Justice of the Republic of Uganda, to preside over the function of the election of the Speaker for this House. I wish to convey the apologies of His Lordship, the Chief Justice of Uganda, for not joining you on this function, as he is out of the country on official duty. He conveys to you all, through me, his warm regards and congratulations upon your election to the Tenth Parliament.

My role is to preside over the function in fulfilment of Article 82 of the Constitution, which provides for a Speaker and a Deputy Speaker of Parliament. Clause (4) thereof, provides: “Subject to Article 81 (4) of this Constitution, no business shall be transacted in Parliament other than an election to the office of Speaker at any time that office is vacant”. Clause (5) of the same Article provides that, “The Chief Justice or a judge designated by the Chief Justice shall preside at an election of a Speaker, and the Speaker shall preside at an election of the Deputy Speaker.”

Honourable members, my working visit here today pleasantly reminds me of my serving this House many years ago, in various roles. I have fond memories of this House. During my journey as a legislator, which started way back in 1987, when I served in the Fifth Parliament, the then National Resistance Council and extending to the Sixth Parliament; first as  a back Bench member but later graduating to the front Bench and serving as a minister.

I have been privileged to serve our country in all the three arms of Government: as a Member of Parliament, a member of the Executive and currently in the judiciary as the Deputy Chief Justice of our country -(Applause)- and now, for a while, acting Chief Justice.

I will always be very grateful to the people of Kyadondo South Constituency, whom I represented in this House; then His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of the Republic of Uganda; and above all, to the Almighty God for giving me the opportunity to serve our country in those capacities. (Applause)

Honourable members, I am informed that you have been provided with the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, which govern the election of a Speaker and a Deputy Speaker. I now request the Clerk to Parliament to read those rules for purposes of refreshing our memories on the procedure to be followed.

READING OF RULE 5 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE ON THE ELECTION OF THE SPEAKER AND DEPUTY SPEAKER

THE CLERK: Rule 5 of the Rules of Procedure states as follows:
“
    (1) The Speaker shall be elected by the Members of Parliament from among their number.

    (2) A person shall not be qualified to be elected as Speaker if he or she is a Vice President, Prime Minister or a Minister.

    (3) No business shall be transacted in Parliament other than election to the office of Speaker at any time that the office of the Speaker is vacant.

    (4) The Chief Justice or a judge designated by the Chief Justice shall preside at an election of a Speaker.

    (5) A person being proposed as candidate to the office of Speaker shall give his or her consent to the nomination.

    (6) Subject to sub-rule (10), of this rule, the election of a Speaker shall be by secret ballot.

    (7) At an election of the Speaker, the presiding officer shall invite nominations from Members of Parliament present.

    (8) A Member making a nomination shall move a motion that “(Name)……do take the Chair of this Parliament ‘as the Speaker’” and shall give a brief statement of the background and qualifications of the nominee.

    (9) Nomination shall be seconded.

    (10) If only one person is nominated, he or she shall be declared elected and conducted to the Chair.

    (11) Where more than one person is nominated, the House shall proceed to elect a Speaker.

    (12) When all nominations have been received, the person presiding shall announce that “the ballot will now be taken”.

    (13) Voting shall be in the following manner:-
    a) the Clerk shall ascertain the number of Members present;
    b) before voting commences, the person presiding shall cause to be produced one ballot box and cause to be demonstrated the fact that it is empty;
    c) the person presiding shall cause to be given to each Member of Parliament present a ballot paper on which the member may record his or her vote by writing the name of the person for whom he or she wishes to vote and depositing it in the ballot box;
    d) a Member who wishes to vote shall proceed to a booth or designated area for the purpose and located within reasonable distance of the ballot box and shall, while there, write the name of the candidate of his or her choice, fold the marked ballot paper and drop it in the ballot box;
    e) on the election of the a Speaker, no vote may be cast, or abstention recorded, by proxy;
    f) after all Members who wish to vote have voted, the person presiding shall in full view of the Members present, cause the Clerk to empty the ballot box and immediately count the ballot papers contained in it;
    g) at the completion of the counting, the person presiding shall announce the results of the voting specifying -
        i) the total number of ballot papers contained in the ballot box;
        ii) the total number of Members who have abstained from voting;
        iii) the number of both spoilt and blank ballot papers; and
        iv) the number of votes obtained by each nominee;

(i)	where two or more persons are nominated for the office of Speaker, the person who receives the majority of the votes of all Members present and voting shall be declared Speaker, and if no person receives that majority, a second election shall be held between the two persons who obtained the highest number of votes.
            (j) where at any ballot between two nominees the votes are equal, another ballot shall be held; and
            (k) where a second election has to be held under paragraph (h) and two or more persons receive equal votes in the second position there shall be a ballot to determine the person to stand in that second election and this shall be repeated where there are ties until one person can be identified.

    (14) The person elected Speaker shall be conducted to the Chair.

    (15) As soon as possible after the election of the Speaker and before assuming the duties of the office of the Speaker the person elected shall, in the manner prescribed by law, take and subscribe to the Oath of Speaker specified in the Fourth schedule to the Constitution as required by Article 82 (10) of the Constitution.

    (16) In this rule the, “person presiding” means the Chief Justice or the Judge designated by the Chief Justice under sub-rule (4) of this rule.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: My Lord the Chief Justice, I have a procedural issue. My name is hon. Nandala-Mafabi, a representative from Budadiri West. I have been in Parliament for a while – this is my fourth term and I am trying to rely on my institutional memory, that is why I am raising the procedural issue.

Your Lordship the Deputy Chief Justice, on the 19 May 2011, the Chief Justice came here  - and said, “Our rules of Parliament until they have been amended will be the ones we use or adopt”.

On the Order Paper, I have seen an item tagged, “Arrival of His Excellency, the President” and I have seen that he is going to conduct administration of Oaths to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. However, for all the four times I have been here, I have never seen it. Why today of all days and why this time? It is not in the rules and that is why I started with the rules. Even in the three copies of the Hansard I have here, the President has never presided –(Interjections)– this is a procedural issue; you cannot raise a point of order. You may need to be taught. What type of Attorney-General are you going to be? Please sit down. My Lord, the Chief Justice, a procedural issue is above –

THE DEPUTY CHIEF JUSTICE: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, there is a point of order on the Floor.

MR RUKUTANA: Much obliged my Lord the Chief Justice. The point of order I would like to raise my Lord is whether it is in order for the honourable member to rise on a procedural matter without pointing out any particular rule that prohibits what he is complaining about? Can he tell us under what rule he is proceeding to raise the procedural point? If there is no such procedural rule, then my Lord, I pray that you find the honourable member out of order.

THE DEPUTY CHIEF JUSTICE: Honourable members, my mandate this morning is limited to one function; election of the Speaker. If you have your other business that must be transacted by this Parliament, then it will be under the proper chairperson or chairmanship of the Speaker. I, therefore, rule that we proceed with the business of electing the Speaker.

NOMINATION OF CANDIDATE(S) FOR THE OFFICE OF THE SPEAKER  TO PARLIAMENT AND NOMINEE(S) GIVING CONSENT TO THE NOMINATION

THE DEPUTY CHIEF JUSTICE: I call for nominations, honourable Members of Parliament. Hon. Magyezi Raphael. 

10.25
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): My Lord, the Deputy Chief Justice, I am Raphael Magyezi a Member of Parliament, representing Igara County West Constituency, Bushenyi District.

My Lord, in accordance with Article 82(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 5 (1) and (8) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I do move that hon. Alitwala Rebecca Kadaga, the Woman representative, Kamuli District, do take the chair of this Parliament as the Speaker. (Applause) I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHIEF JUSTICE: Any seconder?

10.26
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Your Lordship the Deputy Chief Justice, I am Atim Ogwal Cecilia Barbara, woman Member of Parliament, representing Dokolo District. I rise to second the nomination of hon. Alitwala Rebecca Kadaga as Speaker of the Tenth Parliament.

THE DEPUTY CHIEF JUSTICE: Does the Member consent?

10.27
MS REBECCA ALITWALA KADAGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamuli): Your Lordship the Deputy Chief Justice and Members of Parliament, I hereby give my consent to the nomination.

THE DEPUTY CHIEF JUSTICE: Any other nominations?

10.28
MR JULIUS OPONDO (Independent, Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Your Lordship. I am Mukasa Julius Opondo Majegere Member of Parliament representing Bujumba County in Kalangala District. In the interest of time, I propose that you close the nominations. 

THE DEPUTY CHIEF JUSTICE: Honourable members, it is a long time ago when I was here and many things have taken place. When you see that I do not call you by name, it is not because I intend it, but that is the explanation.

10.29
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Your Lordship the Deputy Chief Justice, I am Akol Anthony, Member of Parliament from Kilak North. I nominate hon. Jacob Oulanyah to take the chair of the Speaker of the Republic of Uganda.

THE DEPUTY CHIEF JUSTICE: Is there any Seconder? I see no seconder. I think the honourable member’s motion to close nominations is still on the Floor. I can only accept more nominations, and if there are no nominations, we proceed with the programme as issued by the Clerk to Parliament. I, therefore, think the motion to close the nominations is still on record and I declare that nominations are closed. (Applause) 

Honourable members, I am getting a good experience of how environments differ. The other place where I work, there is almost absolute silence - but it is not the same in this Parliament. Therefore, I am not about to condemn anybody for contempt. I will now ask the only one nominated candidate for speakership to –(Interruption)– Oh okay. You know, this Clerk is not like the one at my court, she keeps chipping in. However, I wanted to request the honourable member who was nominated to listen to a statement from the Member who proposed the nomination, and I think that is in order - I so rule.

10.31
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Your Lordship, the Deputy Chief Justice and acting Chief Justice. Honourable Members of Parliament, good morning and congratulations upon your successful elections and swearing-in.

It is my pleasure and honour to present to you this brief statement of the background and qualifications of hon. Alitwala Rebecca Kadaga, our candidate. Thank you for your endorsement of our sole candidate for the position of Speaker of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda.

As it is required of me, the mover of this motion by our own Rules of Procedure Rule 5(8), My Lord and honourable members, hon. Rebecca Kadaga hails from Kamuli District Buzaya County, Mbulamuti Sub County in a village called Busobya.

She was born on 24 May 1956, and I hope next Tuesday, you bring her flowers and messages of happy birthday. She was born to the late George Wilson Kadaga and Ms Eve Kadaga.

She attended Shimon Demonstration Primary School, Kampala; St Catherine Senior Secondary School in Lira; and Kamuli College Namasagali.

She pursued a Bachelor’s Degree in Laws at Makerere University, which she attained with honours in 1978 and did her postgraduate training in legal practice at the Law Development Centre, Kampala in 1979.

Today, hon. Rebecca Kadaga is a distinguished lawyer. She holds a Masters in Women’s Law from the University of Zimbabwe, which she attained in 2003.

She was the first woman in Uganda to establish a private law firm in 1984. Therefore, she has the proven proficiency in the interpretation of law and working relations with the Judiciary, a key attribute of a good Speaker of Parliament.

The hon. Alitwala Rebecca Kadaga today is the Woman Member of Parliament of Kamuli District. She is among the 39 women who served in the National Resistance Council (NRC) when it was expanded in April 1989. She is, therefore, one of the few longest serving legislators we have today, an experience which the Tenth Parliament stands to benefit from.

Hon. Rebecca Kadaga is the first Ugandan woman to hold the post of Speaker of Parliament and if you endorse her today, she will be the first woman Member of Parliament to hold the post of Speaker of Parliament for the second time.

She has been the Speaker of the Ninth Parliament of Uganda and prior to that, she served as the Deputy Speaker of Parliament of the Seventh and the Eighth Parliaments; that is from 2001 to 2011.

She is the patron of Uganda District Council Speakers Association (UDICOSA) where she helps to mentor and guide the speakers of the local governments.

In terms of political affiliation, hon. Rebecca Kadaga belongs to the National Resistance Movement (NRM). (Applause) She was unanimously elected second national vice-chairperson of the NRM by the party’s national delegate conference not once or twice but thrice; in 2005, 2010 and 2015.

She is, therefore, a member of the Central Executive Committee (CEC) of the ruling NRM party. This means she is highly placed in the hierarchy of the ruling party a position that the women of Uganda should celebrate.

Her mobilisation capacity is seen in the overwhelming support, which the people of her district Kamuli have given to the NRM in the recent and previous national and local council elections.

Hon. Rebecca Kadaga was a member of Cabinet holding various portfolios and these include: From 1996 to 1998, she was a Minister of State for Regional Cooperation; from 1998 to 1999, she was a Minister of State in charge of Transport and Communication; in 1999, she was appointed Cabinet minister in charge of Parliamentary Affairs, a post that she held up to 2001.

Arising from this kind of enormous experience, she has in depth understanding and appreciation of the workings of the central government, another attribute that to me is of a good Speaker in terms of ensuring harmony within the different arms of the state.

My Lord and honourable colleagues, the hon. Alitwala Rebecca Kadaga has held a number of high profile offices and played a leading role in women empowerment and gender parity activities here in Uganda and at international levels. They include the following: She was the vice-chairperson of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians International from 2009 to 2014. 

Today she is the Chairperson of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians International, a position that she has held since 2014. She is a strong and powerful woman who is an executive committee member of the Inter Parliamentary Union Assembly of the world, representing the Africa geopolitical region.

In the CPA Africa region, she has been the chairperson of Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians African region. Here she has spearheaded a campaign of engaging leaders of political parties in Africa and other countries, to appreciate the value of supporting more women to contest for elections to increase the number of women in high positions of leadership such as Cabinet and Parliament.

It is worth noting that her campaign for promotion of women in leadership has today culminated in the inception of the first female Speaker of Parliament in the Arab countries in United Arab Emirates.

Hon. Rebecca Kadaga has held other distinguished positions of responsibility, and they include: She was the Secretary General of the East African Women Parliamentary Association in 1996. 

She was the President of the International Federation of Women Lawyers (FIDA Uganda) in 1986 to 1989 and in her term of office, she was credited with establishing the first legal aid service in Uganda under FIDA.

She was the founding chairperson of the University Council of Mbarara University of Science and Technology in 1990 and she is the current chairperson of Busoga University Council.

She is internationally acclaimed as a campaigner for the eradication of female genital mutilation in Uganda and the horn of Africa.

She spearheaded the establishment of the certificate of gender and equity in this Parliament; the first in the world, which has been recently acknowledged by the United Nations Women at the International Women’s Day at Kololo in March this year.

Owing to her outstanding contribution for development and democratisation of Uganda, Africa and the Commonwealth, hon. Rebecca Kadaga, was the recipient of the Golden Jubilee Award by H.E the President of Uganda in 2012.

Equally important, hon. Rebecca Kadaga, was recognised for campaigning for women’s empowerment by the President of Benin, in April 2014. She is indeed a holder of the Grand Officer Award of the Republic of Benin among several other high profile honours.

Finally, My Lord, the Deputy Chief Justice, it is a great honour and a memorable privilege for me to nominate hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, a woman of formidable courage and strength. She is a highly proficient lawyer and a person of impeccable records when she presided over the Seventh, Eighth and Ninth parliaments. She is a defender of the principle of gender and equality of all persons and a legislator with profound experience for the job she truly deserves.

Colleagues, honourable Members of Parliament, please accept and support my nomination of hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga as the Speaker of the Tenth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHIEF JUSTICE: Honourable members, I now request hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga to make a statement to this august House - yes, hon. Cecilia Ogwal?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Your Lordship, the Deputy Chief Justice, the procedure of Parliament is that when the mover of a motion speaks, there must be a seconder to that motion. I happen to be the seconder of this motion and that is why I thought - maybe I had failed to catch your eye.

THE DEPUTY CHIEF JUSTICE: I thank you, hon. Cecilia Ogwal. This is why it is very important to have Members who have experience for many years. (Laughter)

10.49
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Your Lordship, I wish to unpack the honourable member of Parliament called Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga. Hon. Rebecca Kadaga’s qualities and strengths are several and multifaceted. However, allow me to focus on only five in the interest of time.

Firstly, hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, has done a lot for this country. In her first term as Speaker, Parliament was able to construct and complete the Sixth Floor of Parliament Building, something that had not been done since the 1960s. (Applause) Under her leadership and stewardship, Parliament has constructed a vast car parking space for members. This has lessened the stress on Members of Parliament and ensured security for their motor vehicles. 

Parliament has introduced e-governance in Parliament by the provision of ICT. The examples include the use of iPads, wireless internet, desktop computers as well as the biometric attendance register, which is yet to be fixed. This is also environmentally friendly and eases flow and access to information, and also reduces cost of stationery. (Applause)

Parliament has endeavoured to provide office accommodation for every member of Parliament, thereby eliminating the embarrassment that members of Parliament used to face by walking with their files in the corridors of Parliament and on the streets. 

Unknown to the African region, hon. Rebecca Kadaga has introduced a highly modern security system which has the capacity to monitor beyond five kilometres radius of the precincts of Parliament. (Applause) This system has benefited other institutions in Kampala such as the Office of the President, surprisingly -(Laughter)- Bank of Uganda, KCCA and many others.

My Lord, in future we would like to introduce a motion to charge a fee for providing such high-powered security system in Kampala.

Secondly, hon. Rebecca Kadaga is a typical African mother. (Applause) In her five years of tenure as Speaker, she has already ensured that nursing mothers in Parliament – both MPs and staff – have a modern child day-care centre. This is a unique phenomenon in Africa that addresses the challenges facing women in leadership. 

She is equally concerned about the health of Members of Parliament and staff by providing an in-house health clinic, health insurance policy and a gym facility. Today, Parliament has a full-time qualified medical doctor, nursing staff and ambulance. 

She has shown that she is able to handle both a strong child and a weak child. For example, while hon. Rebecca Kadaga on one hand pushes very hard for issues that concern Karamoja and Northern Uganda – for affirmative action to address the poverty levels in those regions – on the other hand she champions the issue of developing Kampala into a modern capital city of international standards.

Thirdly, hon. Rebecca Kadaga is a pro-people’s Speaker -(Applause) in the execution of her duties. She has been able to take Parliament to the people. This is seen in the parliamentary outreaches where members of Parliament hold debates in different regions of the country, making Parliament accessible to all people, thereby fostering a people-driven Parliament. 

She has demonstrated that she has a heart for the rural populace. The Ugandan Parliament is on record to have refused to pass a budget because of shortfalls in the allocation to the health sector. This points to her mindfulness of the plight of the rural poor who die of sicknesses, which otherwise could have been cured. 

Several petitions lodged by ordinary people have been listened and attended to by Parliament under her leadership. These have covered issues of land grabbing, unfair treatment as in the case of Kasokoso, disasters and landslides like in the case of Kasese and Bundibugyo, and several others.

She listens and attends to the plight of the disadvantaged persons or people who are exploited at work, such as Ugandans who are taken abroad for jobs and end up being molested, underpaid, exploited and abused. She has condemned the perpetrators of modern slavery, especially women who are purportedly recruited as domestic workers in foreign countries, have their passports confiscated and turned into sex slaves.

Openly, she championed the fights against female genital mutilation and other inhuman practices. More importantly, hon. Rebecca Kadaga will be remembered by Ugandans for listening to the outcry of the people of Uganda and beyond on the fast spreading foreign culture of homosexuality. She spoke out vehemently against it at home and abroad and presided over the debate to outlaw it.

Hon. Rebecca Kadaga believes in building Parliament into a strong and independent institution that can deliver. 

Let us look at education; she has advocated for the construction of girls secondary schools to cater for the girl child education in the rural areas that have been for long left behind such as Kosil Girls Secondary School in Kween, Iguli Girls Secondary School in Dokolo and several others. She has advocated for opening of new universities in Soroti, Lira, Kabale and Arua. 

She has been a strong advocate in the construction of roads, bridges, provision of ferries in areas where these problems are being experienced. 

Your Lordship, I would like to remind you of an experience where the Speaker visited West Nile and Acholi and found that the people of Obongi and Aswa had broken bridges. She ensured that the two were fixed within a very short time. Above all, my Lord, hon. Alitwala while Speaker, she has ensured that there is rapid response to disaster.

I would like to end by saying that hon. Kadaga has an amiable and respectable personality. She has had a strong influence on other Members of Parliament and staff by mentoring, guiding and counselling them. She is approachable and her door is always open to all the Members and staff. 

She has demonstrated impartiality in the execution of her responsibility as Speaker and like a mother hen, she defends and protect Members of Parliament regardless of their political affiliation without compromising the efficiency and effectiveness of the individual Member of Parliament. 

As already mentioned above, my Lord, she was the first woman to establish a law firm, something which the women of Uganda must celebrate because today we have so many women, who in their own right are practising lawyers.

She is a principled person, a woman of integrity, dependable, and scandal free. Despite the fact that she had long served in public offices, but she has remained a woman of dignity.

Honourable members, hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, whom I have unpacked to you is a daughter of Uganda and Africa, and she has all the qualities and attributes to make an excellent and indisputable Speaker, for the Tenth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.

Members, I would like to congratulate you for being sworn-in to be Members of the Tenth Parliament, and I would like to thank you for your unanimous support for the candidature of hon. Alitwala Rebecca Kadaga. I beg to move, my Lord. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you very much, hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal has done many things this morning and one of which is to appoint me bishop. I will wait for parliamentary approval on that. (Laughter)

Now, on the other side where I work, I enjoy looking at those who are before me. I look at the demeanour and I read the body language; but, from what I see, there is overwhelming evidence that Members would now want to listen to a statement from hon. Kadaga. (Applause)

Her statement comes after declaration of results - (Interjection) Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you see, we are sharing experiences. What I am saying is that when the Chair is speaking, the other Members listen. (Applause)

Honourable members, I think we better keep moving. In the interest of time, I am now going to make a declaration about the person you have elected as Speaker of the Tenth Parliament. I proceed to do that by saying that hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, the Woman Member of Parliament of Kamuli District has been unanimously elected the Speaker of the Tenth Parliament. In the political language, you call it unopposed and the honourable member is your Speaker for this Tenth Parliament. (Applause)

Can we have order in the House? Thank you very much. Honourable members, I will now make a few remarks and then we will proceed from there. 

Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, Speaker elect of this august House, and honourable members of Parliament, it is my singular honour and privilege to take this opportunity to address you once again as your Speaker begins to serve in the capacity of Speaker of this House for a second time. This is a historic event which will be recorded in the annuals of the history of Uganda. (Applause) 

It is also a great honour to all, but more especially to the women of this country. I wish to congratulate you most heartily, Madam Speaker, and thank the honourable members for the confidence they have placed in you, by electing you unopposed for the second time to steer and provide leadership to this Parliament. 

Your record of service in and outside Parliament has been exemplary. I have had the opportunity of working with you for a long time, Madam Speaker elect, stretching back to the days of the National Resistance Council. I worked with you in the National Resistance Movement as well as Cabinet when I was still in active politics. I wish you every success in handling the affairs of this august House. I have no doubt whatsoever that you will steer it like a good and experienced captain, and that is what our country expects of you at this crucial time, as mother Uganda continues on her journey in the development of her institutions, of which the Parliament you now head is one.

Today we have witnessed the pleasant occasion when a lady Member of this House climbs to the helm of the House a second time. The message is clear; the people of Uganda will expect this House under your leadership to fulfil their wishes and ambitions as they continue to develop.

I would like to thank you, honourable members, for your patient participation that has made it possible for the exercise to be smoothly conducted. I urge all of you to put aside the euphoria of victory and begin to work for our nation. From now onwards, there is the need to make proper use of that victory individually and collectively as a House for the betterment of the people of Uganda, from whom you derive your power and authority.

Your duty is to be part of the solution to the social, political and economic problems that continue to face this country. The country does not expect you to be part of the problem. Legislators are crucial as you are the chord in the engine of democracy and good governance of this country. Whatever it takes, you must bear in mind that this position requires total commitment, patriotism and effective leadership. Always put the interests of our nation before any other interests. 

I call on you to embrace this so that it becomes the yardstick by which the Tenth Parliament of Uganda can be judged by the people. Always ensure that what you do is geared towards the promotion of the welfare of our society, and to the just and good governance of the people of Uganda. 

In conclusion, let me, Madam Speaker, and honourable Members of this august House, implore you to always ensure that the laws you are going to make within the five years term of this Parliament, and indeed in all your other activities as members of Parliament are made or done for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda within the commands of Article 79 of the Constitution. I wish you every success in the Tenth Parliament and may God bless the Parliament of Uganda and our beloved country. (Applause) 

All that I have said is for God and our country. (Applause) Honourable members and Madam Speaker elect, I will now suspend the House for some time until I reconvene the same. It is so decided. 

(The House was suspended at 11.14 a.m.)

(On resumption at 11.23 a.m. the Deputy Chief Justice presiding_)

ARRIVAL OF HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

Uganda National Anthem (Three stanzas)

East African Anthem (Three Stanzas)

DECLARATION OF THE RESULTS

11.25
THE DEPUTY CHIEF JUSTICE (Justice Stephen Kavuma): Your Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, it is my honour and privilege to welcome you to the Tenth Parliament on behalf of this Parliament.

Your Excellency, we went through an exercise of electing a Speaker for the Tenth Parliament and I am glad to report that the exercise went on very smoothly. Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga emerged the Speaker of the Tenth Parliament having been elected unopposed. (Applause)

ADMINISTRATION OF THE OATH OF THE SPEAKER BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF UGANDA IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 82(10) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND THE SECOND SCHEDULE OF THE OATHS ACT (CHAPTER 19 OF THE LAWS OF UGANDA)

The oath was administered to Ms Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga.

HANDING OVER OF THE INSTRUMENTS OF POWER BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA TO THE RT HON. SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT

(The instruments of power were handed over to Ms Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga.)

STATEMENT OF ACCEPTANCE TO THE POSITION OF SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT BY THE SPEAKER-ELECT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we have some order please? Your Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, my Lord the acting Chief Justice, the outgoing Vice President, the outgoing Prime Minister and the deputy Prime Ministers, distinguished Members of the Tenth Parliament.

First, I would like to thank you, the members of the Tenth Parliament for the confidence placed in me by overwhelmingly electing me to the office of the Speaker, unopposed. (Applause) I promise that I will be a Speaker for all the members of Parliament.

Honourable members, I would like to pay tribute to the President of Uganda who is also the Chairman of the National Resistance Movement party, for giving me the necessary support in the Central Executive Committee of the party, and also in the caucus of the NRM members of Parliament. 

Let me also take this opportunity to pay tribute to the members of the Ninth Parliament for the good work they did, and for laying a strong legislative foundation on which the Tenth Parliament will build. 

Given the challenges of the Ninth Parliament, I wish to appeal to all the members of the House to apply themselves very diligently to their duties. Much is expected of us as we are part of a very vibrant society, which has access to information and the media and which society is well informed.

The public wants good service, value for money, transparency, accountability and overall good governance. This should be the main focus of the members of Parliament and as you will appreciate, the rate of attrition is extremely high. Therefore, it is important that you, members remain relevant to the population. 

It is also my intention to continue bridging the gap between Parliament and the population, by coordinating regular outreach programmes of which the Speaker, Deputy Speaker, members of the Commission and the ministers attend, so that we can engage the local leaders on their issues, and get advice from them to facilitate our policy decisions, as well as legislation.

I would like to apologise in advance for the shortage of space. As you can see, we are not in the plenary hall of the House but gradually, we shall be able to sort out that problem. You will be inconvenienced for a short time but please bear with us. Even if you are called upon to share offices, please accept it because that is what we have for the time being.

Let me place a special appeal to the President of Uganda to support the Parliamentary Commission, to secure the required funding to construct the new Chamber in the northern car park as we had planned. Your Excellency, we have planned that, that Chamber will accommodate 500 Members. It will also have additional office space for the members of staff and other amenities.

Honourable members, between Monday and Wednesday, you took the oath of allegiance and the oath of office. You were also given a handbag with the constitution and the Rules of Procedure as well as a parliamentary hand book. I would like to specifically draw your attention to the code of conduct in Appendix (F) of the Rules of Procedure, which remind you about public duty, public interest and public trust, among other values. 

Your Excellency the President, my Lord the acting Chief Justice and distinguished colleagues, let me reaffirm my commitment to be objective and fair to all of you in conducting the business of the House. I will always be available for consultation and call for the cooperation of all the Members.

In the meantime, honourable members, we must start business. In that regard, I have written to the secretaries, leaders of the political parties represented in this House to submit to me, at the earliest opportunity, but in any case not later than Wednesday, 25 May 2016, the names of the party whips in Parliament.

This will facilitate the composition of the Appointments Committee as well as the leadership of the standing and sectoral committees of this House. The letters are on the way and I would appreciate it if the parties responded at the earliest opportunity.

Honourable members, thank you again. I look forward to cooperation, support and commitment from you. Thank you very much. (Applause)

Honourable members, I will suspend proceedings for 10 minutes to enable me to return as the Speaker of the House. Thank you.

(The House was suspended at 11.14 a.m.)

(On resumption at 11.23 a.m. the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you may take your seats.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President and members of Parliament, we have in the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery a delegation of staff from the Parliament of Ghana: Mr Anyimadu Emmanuel, the Clerk to Parliament; Mr Ebenezer Ahuma, Director and Principal Clerk and Mr Benet Kwaye Note, Clerk Assistant. They are here to observe the proceedings of Parliament, please join me in welcoming them to the Uganda Parliament.

Your Excellency, the President, under the Rules of Procedure, the election of the Deputy Speaker is presided over by the Speaker. We invite you, if you have the time, to stay but it is a bit tedious because of the voting. However, you are welcome to stay and administer the second oath.

NOMINATION OF CANDIDATE(S) FOR THE OFFICE OF THE DEPUTY SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT AND NOMINEE(S) GIVING CONSENT TO THE NOMINATION

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am calling for nominations.

11.53
LT COL (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (NRM, Isingiro County North, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, let me congratulate you once again for being put in the Chair, for yet another term. Your Excellency and Madam Speaker, I nominate hon. Jacob Oulanyah. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Are there any seconders? Yes, I see several seconders. 

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, the candidate I am nominating, hon. Jacob Oulanyah, is a graduate with a Bachelors’ degree in Agricultural Economics -

THE SPEAKER: Let us wait. We need to see if there are other nominations before we invite them to consent. Are there any other nominations? Seconders? There were many seconders, I saw about ten. It has been seconded.

11.54
MR PETER MUGEMA (NRM, Iganga Municipality, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker and congratulations upon your nomination. My Chairman, Your Excellency the President, I salute you, Sir. 

I am hon. Peter Mugema, a.k.a Panadol and I represent Iganga Municipality on the NRM ticket 3.1.1.

Madam Speaker, pursuant to Rule 6 of our Rules of Procedure, I move a motion to nominate Al Hajji Nsereko Muhammad, member of Parliament for Kampala, as our candidate for the chair of Deputy Speaker of the Tenth Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Has it been seconded? Okay, there are a number of seconders. Are there any other nominations?

11.55
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues who have already congratulated you. 

Madam Speaker, basing on the good work done by our UPDF in the agricultural sector; NAADS, and knowing that the army is well represented here, and we should work with them for the development of this country, I, Betty Nambooze Bakireke, MP, Mukono Municipality, move a motion and I propose the nomination of hon. Col Felix Kulayigye, for the post of Deputy Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, are there any further nominations?

11.56
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Madam Speaker, rule 6, sub-section 5, prescribes for the election and taking oath of the Deputy Speaker. It says, “The rules prescribed for the election and the taking and subscribing to the oath of a Speaker shall apply with necessary modifications, to the election of the Deputy Speaker.” 

I have looked at the procedure for the election of the Speaker; Rule 5, sub-section 8 which says, “A Member making a nomination shall move a motion that … and shall give a brief statement of the background and qualifications of the nominee.” 

I move that the nomination of hon. Jacob Oulanyah and hon. Muhammad Nsereko be invalidated because it is not according to the procedure. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in this House, the custodian of the Rules of Procedure is the Speaker. Can I invite the nominees to indicate whether they consent to their nominations? I will start with hon. Oulanyah. (Applause)

11.58
MR JACOB OULANYAH (NRM, Omoro County, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I hereby give my consent for the nomination of my name to be Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Can I know whether hon. Nsereko consents to his nomination?

11.59
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Madam Speaker, pursuant to rule 6 of the Rules of Procedure, I hereby consent to my nomination, for the post of Deputy Speaker of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I know whether Col Kulayigye consents to his nominations? 

12.00
LT COL FELIX KULAYIGYE (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, I decline the nomination in favour of hon. Jacob Oulanyah. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, there being no other nominees, we have the nominations of two candidates: hon. Jacob Oulanyah and hon. Muhammad Nsereko, both of whom have given their consent to the nominations. 

May I now invite the mover in respect to hon. Oulanyah to justify their nomination? Hon. Rwamirama -

COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, Your Excellency the President and honourable colleagues, I nominate hon. Jacob Oulanyah who is a graduate of Bachelor of Arts in Agricultural Economics (1992) before pursuing a degree in law in 1995. He also holds a post-graduate Diploma in Legal Practice (1996) from the Law Development Centre. Professionally, he is an advocate and notary public practicing under J.L. Oulanyah and Company Advocates. 

He has four professional certificates in legislative drafting obtained from the International Law Institute, Kampala; the Bureau of Parliamentary Studies and Training, New Delhi, India; the G.V. Mavalankar Bureau of Parliamentary Studies and Gujarat Legislative Secretariat, Gandhiji, India. He attended a CPA Westminster Training on Parliamentary Practice and Procedure, London, 2002. He was trained by the best in the House of Commons. 

From 1997, hon. Jacob Oulanyah taught Legislative Drafting and Constitutional Law at LDC and only left in July 2001 when he was sworn in as the Member-elect of Parliament for Omoro County. 

In Parliament, he was a member and later became chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, handling the challenging process of political transition and constitutional review. 

Madam Speaker, those who were following parliamentary proceedings at the time know that hon. Oulanyah was a shock absorber and steered the Parliament effectively and did the work satisfactorily. (Interjections) Madam Speaker, I need your protection.

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. Permit the honourable member to proceed.

COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: He steered the committee to process two constitutional amendment Bills and nine other Bills to implement the provisions of the amended Constitution. His committee supervised the Parliamentary Commission. He presented the only Private Member’s Bill in the Seventh Parliament. He was a founder member of the Consultative Assembly for Parliamentarians on ICC. 

Madam Speaker, from 2006, after he lost his seat in Parliament, hon. Oulanyah continued to engage himself actively in legislative activities such as training legislators in Kenya, Swaziland, South Sudan and Sudan on parliamentary practice and procedure. He also trained them in legislative drafting and other subjects relevant to the proper functioning and administration of Parliament. He brings himself with a rich experience. He has drafted several rules and procedures for other parliaments.

Madam Speaker, hon. Oulanyah was a legal adviser to high-level persons including Dr Riek Machar, the chief mediator in the then Juba peace talks and President Joaquim Chissano, the UN Special Envoy to the Lord’s Resistance Army affected areas. He drafted the Juba Peace Agreement and he was also an adviser to the Government of South Sudan. 

He has been Deputy Speaker of the Ninth Parliament and he comes with experience to handle the business of the House, upholding the independence of Parliament and ensuring befitting welfare for its Members. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, why should we vote hon. Oulanyah overwhelmingly? With over 19 years in legal practice and 15 years of parliamentary experience, both in and out of Parliament, hon. Jacob Oulanyah has developed a very successful career path in parliamentary practice and procedure. He offers extensive practical hands-on experience in legislative matters.

Madam Speaker, my candidate is a believer in the parliamentary system of representative democracy and an ardent believer in procedural power and orderly conduct of business. He is a persistent and tenacious seeker of high standards of parliamentary service delivery, and capacity building for effective performance of representative and oversight roles of Parliament. 

He has a professional appearance and presentation, is energetic and has an independent mind with a positive and inspiring outlook. He is reliable and dependable. He firmly believes that while the majority may have its way, the minority right to have its say must be protected, preserved and observed as the cornerstone of parliamentary democracy. He respects authority and, therefore, makes a good deputy. 

Madam Speaker, at a private function where you and I were present, hon. Oulanyah publicly pledged to be your deputy, to abide by you, support you and respect you. Madam Speaker, he is a bridge between the old and the young parliamentarians. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, hon. Oulanyah, my candidate, brings himself as a true son of Uganda. His sense of humour and ability to do work makes him reliable and, therefore, it is befitting for us in Parliament to maintain the status quo. 

I therefore ask you, honourable colleagues, to vote my candidate overwhelmingly because he deserves it. He is next to none in the line-up. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Order, Members. Can I now invite the next seconder, hon. Amongi?

12.10
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Madam Speaker, Your Excellency, the President and members of Parliament, I am Betty Amongi, a member of Parliament representing Oyam County South. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, stop heckling please.

MS AMONGI: Madam Speaker, I come here as someone, who from the beginning, had argued for status quo. I believed that the current status represented gender and regions. That is why I stand here to second the nomination of hon. Jacob Oulanyah. (Applause)

Many of you might know Jacob Oulanyah with his signature bowtie. However, I have known him as a member of Parliament and a strong leader hailing from northern Uganda. 

I served with Jacob Oulanyah in Juba during the peace talks. We combed Garamba forest for three years, looking for peace for the people of northern Uganda. Not many of us sacrificed. Hon. Mao, hon. Jacob Oulanyah and I were there. We had to travel to The Hague at the ICC to plead with the prosecutor to ensure that he suspended the arrest warrant, so that the peace talks could yield peace. 

I would like to tell you that when we signed the peace pact, which stopped hostility and facilitated the LRA rebels to move from northern Uganda to Owiny Kibul in South Sudan, that is when the people of northern Uganda left the camps and went back to their homes. Jacob Oulanyah was one of those who drafted that declaration. How can I betray the people of northern Uganda?

Honourable members, I do not have much to say but I would like to leave you with this. I would like to say that during the last three days, you swore by the Constitution and I would like to make reference to the third National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy: National Unity and Stability. It says, “All organs of state and people of Uganda shall work towards the promotion of national unity, peace and stability.” I plead with you that if we want national unity, this Parliament is better off with the status quo and will remain united. 

Still in the same vein, 3(2) says, “Every effort shall be made to integrate all the peoples of Uganda while at the same time recognising the existence of their ethnic, religious, ideological, political and cultural diversities.” The people of the north present this candidate for the purpose of unity and integration in these aspects. 

I would like to conclude, that, I have also served under Jacob Oulanyah during the last five years. This is my fourth term in Parliament and I have served with him for two terms. He was in the Seventh Parliament and in the last Parliament. If I am to talk about complementarity, the Speaker, Kadaga and hon. Oulanyah will complement each other on their knowledge of legislation. We need that complementarity. He is a good time keeper and very swift in disposing of the Order Paper. 

I would like to ask you to support and vote for hon. Jacob Oulanyah. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I now invite the movers for hon. Nsereko to justify their nomination. Hon. Mugema -

12.17
MR PETER MUGEMA (NRM, Iganga Municipality, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Below are the credentials of hon. Al Hajji Muhammad Nsereko, our Deputy Speaker to be.

Hon. Nsereko is not going to represent a region but the whole of Uganda. He was born on 27 April 1981 at Old Kampala, in Kampala Central. Therefore, he knows Kampala very well. He is born of a veteran radio journalist and veteran NRM cadre, Al Hajji Nsereko Mutumba Abdul who was the first Speaker of Kampala City Council.

Al Hajji Nsereko is a married man –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. Let us listen to the justification.

MR MUGEMA: Al Hajji Nsereko has been married to Ms Naome M. Nsereko for the last 10 years and is a proud father of five children. I can attest that of recent, DNA results showed that he is the true biological father of those five children. (Laughter)

Educational Background 

Al Hajji Nsereko attended Twin Age Nursery School in Kampala and Buganda Road Primary School for his primary education. He attended Kibuli Secondary School for his Ordinary level education and Kawempe Muslim Secondary School for his ‘A’ level; he was the head prefect there. 

In 2002, he emerged as the best UACE candidate in the whole of Uganda. He studied Bachelor of Laws where he was a member of Livingstone hall. He pursued his legal practise at Law Development Centre and he got a post-graduate diploma in the bar course in 2008. 

He also has an International Institute of Business Studies and Media Studies Diploma in Journalism as well as a post-graduate diploma in environmental law research. 

Work experience

He has been the chairman of Kampala Central Land Committee from 2007 to 2010. He is also a partner with Nsereko-Mukalazi and Company Advocates, 2006 to date. He is the legal brain behind that particular law firm. 

Political career

He was the youth leader for Kampala from 2001 to 2004. He has been the General Secretary for the National Referendum Committee of 2005 and he was the Publicity Secretary for NRM Kampala Central from 2005 to 2010. He will, therefore, cater for all the interests of those who fear NRM. 

Al- Hajji Nsereko has been a member in the last Parliament of the Committee on Natural Resources. He has also been a member of the Committee on National Economy and the Committee on Presidential Affairs. He is a Member of the Committee on Human Rights as well as the Oil and Gas Committee. 

Colleagues, as I conclude, hon. Muhammad Nsereko, is a courageous, intelligent, honest, strong, trustworthy, transparent, articulate, hardworking, patriotic, visionary, charismatic and above all a reliable son of Uganda. I, therefore, nominate him as a candidate for Deputy Speaker. I beg to move.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Is there any other seconder? Yes, hon. Winfred Kiiza.

12.23
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate you upon this achievement. You deserved it and it is befitting. 

Colleagues, I come here to support the nomination of hon. Muhammad Nsereko - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please allow her to second her motion. 

MS KIIZA: I come here to support Muhammad Nsereko for the position of Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda. 

The reason as to why I am seconding the nomination of hon. Muhammad Nsereko is that the people out there are looking out to a Parliament that is united and a nation that espouses all political and religious shades of this country. 

Colleagues are aware that the President and the Speaker of this country are both Anglicans. The Chief Justice is Catholic. The only space remaining for the Muslims is here presented in the name of the Deputy Speaker, Muhammad Nsereko.

Colleagues will bear with me that hon. Muhammad Nsereko - 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MS KIIZA: Madam Speaker, hon. Muhammad Nsereko has tried to fight for the democracy of this country. When this House was at a test, many of the members of Parliament believed it was all gone. However, Nsereko stood firm to fight for his own right, to portray the democratic nation that we have and to correct the impression that had been put forward. This is a man that I am presenting to you and I am proud to second him. 

I second hon. Muhammad Nsereko, just like my colleague said, because he is a charismatic leader. He is a member of our generation. He is energetic and willing to serve, a Member who believes in the values of society, a Member who believes in the respect and dignity of humanity and a Member ready to serve under any circumstances. 

When the hard times came and taxes were high on business persons who deal in second hand clothes, hon. Nsereko did not mince his words. He fought for the poor people of this country. When it comes to standing members of this Parliament, hon. Nsereko travelled all the way to Kasese to stand with us when we were faced with hardships of floods and the killings. 

At a hard time when we lost one of our own; hon. Nebanda, hon. Nsereko stood with the Parliament of Uganda and the people of Butaleja. When the people of Bundibugyo were going through trials, temptations and tribulations, hon. Nsereko was there. Hon. Nsereko has been to all the parts of this country. He is, therefore, not a Kampala member of Parliament but a Member of Parliament of Uganda and, therefore, deserves to be the Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda. 

Colleagues, I beg and request that the man who stays in the heart of the country, a man who houses our Parliament as we are in Kampala - let us honour Kampala by giving hon. Nsereko the deputy speakership of this country. 

I would like to thank you and I invite you to sincerely and genuinely vote for my candidate, hon. Muhammad Nsereko. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. The nominations have been received and seconded. I believe that the ballot should now be taken. Let me invite the Clerk to ascertain the number of Members present before voting commences.

Honourable members, I want to ascertain how many Members are present. That is what we are doing now. According to the register, there are 398 Members who have registered. Is there any one here that has not registered in the Members’ register? I would like to know how many we are before we start.

The clerks are counter-checking to see whether the register agrees with their tally. Then we shall start voting.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is, how can hon. Betty Amongi sign the book now when she was here busy nominating hon. Jacob Oulanyah? Was she allowed to nominate when she had not signed our book? Was she in order?

THE SPEAKER: She is a sworn-in Member of this House and it is okay for her to sign the register, before we commence business, which is now. Members that have not registered, please, endeavour to do so.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. We have new members of Parliament. This is their first time to join the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.

The point of procedure I am raising is, isn’t it procedurally right for you to give at least five minutes to the candidates, so that the honourable members could see them properly and get to know better their level of understanding? (Interjections) Please, allow them at least five to ten minutes each as we re-organise ourselves, so that Members vote for the candidates of their choice. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have elected Speaker on many occasions in this House. There has not been a time when they have campaigned for their post. (Applause) They are spoken for by the mover and the seconder, which has been done.

Honourable members, we now have 413 Members of Parliament registered in those two registers. Let me read the summarised procedure for voting. The Clerk will read out the names, one by one.

A member will proceed to the Clerk’s table, there he or she will receive a ballot paper and will proceed to the booth there – that black thing there. That is the polling booth. The member will tick against the name of their choice, fold the ballot paper and then proceed to the ballot box and drop the paper there in and then return to his or her sit. Is that understood? Let me now invite the Clerk to show the ballot box to the voters.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My name is Anywarach Joshua Carter, member of Parliament representing Padyere Constituency, in Nebbi. Carrying the box in front of us to see if there is the honesty and transparency is leading us to ask a lot of questions for nothing. 

The procedural point I am raising is, since this is a historical event, with the President in attendance, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to move under Rule 15 of the Rules of Procedure (2012) and suspend Rule 5 onsecret ballot – (Interjections). The procedural guidance will be given by the Speaker.

Madam Speaker, Rule 15(2) states “This rule shall not apply in respect to Rule 5, 6, 11, 12, 13(1) and 88.”

However, Rule 15 does not exclude itself among the non-suspendable rules. We shall move to suspend Rule 15 to suspend itself and then we go for open voting. (Interjections) Can I be guided, Madam Speaker? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have heard but no case has been made to justify suspension of our rules. Let us proceed in the ordinary way. (Applause) In any case, Rule 15(2) exempts Rules 5, 6, 11, 12 13(1) and 88 from suspension. Let us proceed. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to congratulate you, Madam Speaker, upon your election as the Speaker of the Republic of Uganda and Parliament of Uganda.

The point of procedure that I am raising on is in regard to Rule 10, “The Presence of the President in the House.

“(1) 	There shall be a Chair of State for the President in the House.
(2)	 The House shall be called to order and stand in silence whenever the President enters or leaves the House.
(3) 	The President may be accompanied in the House by an Aide-de-Camp.
(4) 	The President, while occupying the Chair of State-
(a) 	May make a Presidential statement, which shall be heard in silence and not followed by any comment or question;
(b) 	Shall not otherwise participate in the proceedings of the House in any way.”

Madam Speaker, the point of procedure I am raising is, under what circumstance can we define the presence of the President in this House –(Applause)- because in this event, we are going for elections and the President is here as Head of State.  I would like to get your guidance as to whether it is procedurally right to proceed under this circumstance in the presence of the President in the House? (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, perhaps it has been an omission on our behalf not to include the presence of the President in our Rules of Procedure. However, under the Oaths Act, Volume 2, of the laws of Uganda, the President is the one who administers the Oath to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker.  (Applause) That is why he is here.

Honourable members, I will now ask the Clerk to read out the names.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not know whether it is because the colour of the microphone is yellow and that is why it is trying to reject my speech. (Interjections) Madam Speaker, you gave me permission to come here.

THE SPEAKER: Let him speak and then voting starts. Please, quickly, hon. Okupa.

MR OKUPA: Honourable members, the rules demand of us to listen to one another and I beg that of you. My name is Okupa Elijah representing Kasilo County. Having been a Parliamentary Commissioner in the Ninth Parliament, we installed security systems in this House. Whatever we do here is watched. 

My concern is on the issue of the booth. Can we have a secure place where those who are monitoring – I know in the control room they will be able to see who is voting who.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I request that we have a secure booth where we vote from. (Interjections) You can see the cameras everywhere and the people in the control room - I was a Parliamentary Commissioner and I know what happens there. They see everything. You were told that we can watch up to a radius of five miles from this Parliament. So, I know what I am talking about.

Madam, Speaker, I beg that we have a secure booth for voting. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are going to use the podium. Take it to the back and Members will use it to go and do what they want on the podium. Would you like us to switch off the cameras? No, just operate under the podium.

LT COL. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, the security system here is only restricted to security personnel and it was installed to make sure that what happens here is monitored in case of any foul play -(Interjections)- Yes. If we demobilised the security system as we vote -(interjections) Wht happnes in the event that the system has been demobilised and someone engages in foul play, and we want to look at the recording to see whether there was a foul play? It is impossible if the system has been demobilised. I request that the system remains operating. (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Is it in order for the honourable member to disrupt a programme on our Order Paper, which has already started; which is voting his candidate?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not worry about the cameras; they are for the Hansard. Let us proceed.

(Members voted by secret ballot.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if every Member has voted, I would like to invite the contenders - hon. Muhammad Nsereko and hon. Jacob Oulanyah – to each nominate two agents to oversee the vote counting. We need only two agents. Hon. Godfrey Kiwanda and hon. Kinyamatama are agents for hon. Jacob Oulanyah and hon. Gilbert Oulanyah and hon. Tinkasimire are agents for hon. Mahammad Nsereko.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Before we count the ballots, which have been cast, we should be interested in establishing the number of people who have voted first before we start counting what is in the box.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, under our Rule 5(13)(g) we are advised as follows: “(i) At the completion of counting, the person presiding shall announce the result of the vote specifying total number of ballot papers contained in the ballot box; (ii) total number of Members who have abstained from voting; (iii) the number of spoilt and blank ballot papers; and (iv) the number of votes obtained by each nominee.”

Would that satisfy you? Then let us count. Clerk, please start the process. The ballot box is empty and all the ballot papers are on the Table.

(Vote counting commenced.)

THE SPEAKER: Order please. Allow the counting to take place. Order Members. The counting is still going on. Please sit down. 

DECLARATION OF RESULTS

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, an election took place this morning and in accordance with Rule 5(13)(g) and Rule 6(5) of our Rules of Procedure, I would like to announce the following: 

    1. The total number of ballot papers in the ballot box were 416. 
    2. The total number of spoilt ballot papers was one.
    3. The total number of votes obtained by each candidate was as follows: 
    a) Hon. Nsereko Muhammad, 115 votes. (Applause)
    b) Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, 300 votes. (Applause)

Please hold on, I am still making the declaration. Honourable members, I have the declaration forms here, duly signed by two agents – hon. Geoffrey Kiwanda for hon. Jacob Oulanyah, and hon. Gilbert Olanya on behalf of hon. Nsereko Muhammad.

I now declare hon. Jacob Oulanyah duly elected as the Deputy Speaker of the Tenth Parliament. Congratulations. (Applause)

Honourable members, can I invite hon. Jacob Oulanyah to proceed to the dais to take the Oath of the Office of the Deputy Speaker and then he can come and sit near me, here. (Applause)

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to Mr Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there has been a contest and obviously, there was a side supporting hon. Nsereko and the other side supporting hon. Jacob Oulanyah. However, we are going to work together in the Tenth Parliament. (Applause) I would like to invite Members to close fences now. The election is over and work has got to start this coming week. 

The people who have been elected are, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga and Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. (Applause) Let me just invite hon. Nsereko to thank the voters before hon. Oulanyah comes up - He has not yet got the instruments? Let hon. Nsereko speak briefly and then the President will hand over the instruments to hon. Oulanyah.

3.23
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Your Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda and Commander In Chief of the Armed Forces; the Deputy Speaker, Rt. Hon. Jacob Oulanyah; - (Applause)- His Excellency the Vice President; and honourable Members of Parliament. My name is Al Haji Muhammad Nsereko. Like they clearly said, I rise up before you to accept that in democracy, there is always a winner and a loser. (Applause)

However, to my countrymen, we have all won today because clearly, democracy is the winner. To all the young men and women in this country that aspire to lead this nation, let us rise up and embrace true knowledge, led by God, who is the source of life - and we shall rebuild our motherland.

Comrades from the National Resistance Movement, you have spoken and you have spoken aloud; your voices have been heard. The independents, you have spoken aloud and the nation has heard. The Opposition, you have clearly spoken and your voices have been heard. There is no doubt in my mind that this country is not going to be the same again. Our rights to stand shall never be unabated.

We were ready for the contest and thank you, Almighty God. The 115 people always told me, “Hon. Nsereko, do not betray our trust”, and indeed I have not. (Applause) When people give you their trust in this world, there is no reason as to why you should turn your back on them. I did that and I can promise that I will work closely with the Office of the Speaker because there can only be one Deputy Speaker. Congratulations, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, for this victory.

To my countrymen, there is a huge question that is being posed. I would like to address you, the nation. Members’ welfare is a huge question. If we want an independent Parliament that will speak, please come out and support us on the following:

Our wages; I would like to repeat to my countrymen that if you have a Parliament that is poorly paid, then you will not win an independent and courageous Parliament. (Applause) I know it is something that few can speak about, but I will speak about it because I am ready to defend the norms and values that I believe in.
To the members of Parliament, it is not that the world does not support our being paid well. Why? It is the same Government that pays the Governor Bank of Uganda over Shs 50 million; it is also the same Government that pays the Executive Director of Kampala over Shs 46 million –(Interruption)- the list is long but -

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Nsereko, you are bordering on the breach of rule 63. Concentrate on this election.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. However, these are some of the things I wanted to address for the benefit of our countrymen. 

As I conclude, I would like to say that we are all one family. Democracy has spoken and we have to stand by one principle - that even those that do not agree with you should never be your enemies. The voice of tolerance should be given chance to thrive in this country. (Applause) Therefore, even if we disagree on certain opinions, let us agree and have a harmonious nation. 

Thank you very much. God bless you all. For God and my country. May this speech inspire all the young men and women in our society outside there. I know we have Uganda and Uganda is one and it is for all of us. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Nsereko. Let me now invite His Excellency the President, under the provisions of Clause 82(10) of the Constitution and the Second Schedule of the Oaths Act, to hand over instruments of power to hon. Jacob Oulanyah.

(The Instruments of power were handed to Mr Jacob Oulanyah.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the instruments of power have been handed over. Let me now invite hon. Jacob Oulanyah to make an acceptance speech before the head of state addresses us.

STATEMENT OF ACCEPTANCE TO THE POSITION OF DEPUTY SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT

3.29
MR JACOB OULANYAH (NRM, Omoro County, Gulu): Your Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, Madam Speaker and honourable members, I am delighted to speak on this podium this afternoon. I must say that this race has greatly humbled me. (Applause) I go back to Gulu, I go back to Omoro, and I go back to my people knowing that this race has taught me one lesson – humility. (Applause) I think that goes to all of us, that humility should be the cornerstone of our operations. 

I just have a few words to say on this occasion. Your Excellency, Madam Speaker and honourable members, I address this meeting with great humility. I thank God Almighty for His Grace and the gift of life that has enabled me to witness this day. I congratulate you, Madam Speaker, upon your re-election and I pledge my full and total support to you. (Applause) I thank you, honourable members, for the confidence you have put in me again; I can only promise to do my best to deserve the trust you have given to me. I thank my party, the NRM, for nominating me. I thank the people of Omoro County, without whom I would not be speaking here today.

Your Excellency, Prof. Dicey, a professor of Constitutional Law, once stated that “Parliament has power to do anything under the sun except the power to turn a man into a woman. However, even now that is possible through surgery, which is permitted by law. (Laughter) This Parliament, under Article 79(1) of our Constitution, has powers to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda. There is no question that my role as Deputy Speaker will be to continue to execute, with utmost diligence, assignments given to me by the Speaker and this august House. (Applause) That standard should apply to all of us when executing whatever assignments we will be given as members of Parliament. It is called utmost diligence. 

To achieve this, I strongly believe that we will need to adopt some methods of work and guiding principles on how to effectively deliver on the bigger purpose of the Parliament and its service to the people. Our declared mission, which has been declared to this Tenth Parliament by His Excellency the President, is that this country should become a middle income country by the year 2020. That is a declaration of principle. Your Excellency, somebody said every generation has its mission; it can choose to fulfil it or betray it. This Parliament will not choose to betray this mission. (Applause) 

This generation of parliamentarians is tasked with achieving that mission of delivering this country to its middle income status by the year 2020. We can only do that, and only we can do that, because we are the highest legal forum in the country. It will not be law unless we have approved it; it will not be a policy of Government that can be implemented unless we have approved it; the budget can never be called a budget or money spent without us appropriating any money.

Your Excellency, the task upon us, therefore, is enormous. This Parliament, like other parliaments around the world, has that responsibility. For us not to betray the mission of delivering Uganda to a middle income country by 2020; there will be policies proposed before us, there will be laws proposed before us, and there will be annual budgets proposed with specific intent of achieving this particular mission of becoming a middle income country by the year 2020.

I, therefore, humbly suggest some methods of work, which I found very useful in my days as Chairman of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, and also in my days as Deputy Speaker of the Ninth Parliament of Uganda. The first principle is facing facts. We should agree that from the outset, we will lay the facts on the Table and use them as reference points when expressing sometimes very divergent opinions. Let us base ourselves on facts.

Two, reason as a guiding principle: We should agree that we will endeavour to use reason and sound logic in tabling our positions. This will enable us to derive the correct interpretation from facts wherever we will agree them to be. 

Three, tolerance and mutual respect: We should agree that no view will be suppressed. All views will be received with tolerance and given fair treatment based on known facts and reason. We must pledge to override intolerance. 

Four, harmony: We should agree that monumental as the task before us will be and will always be, it is still important that we adopt a collegial approach and debate in such a manner that would bring our collective wisdom to bear on the problems presented before us through Bills, motions, different reports,  budgets and different policies. The spirit of harmony should and will keep us conscious that the people did not give us this task as individuals but rather as the august House as a whole. Therefore, we have a collective responsibility to work together harmoniously. 

Five, national interest above self and party –(Applause)- In one’s lifetime, one can change party affiliations but it is unusual, and indeed unlikely, that one would change nationality or citizenship. We, therefore, must resolve that from the outset, our supreme guiding star, the unchanging star, like the true north of a magnet, would be the enduring interest of the people of Uganda. 

As individuals, we have interests and even as members of political parties, we are party to partisan positions. We should find occasion to declare these interests boldly before this august House and its committees and when decision time comes, we must ensure that alongside the national interests, we weigh all these things. More often than not, we will find that the national interest rings true to all of us without exception. We will face moments when we will all have to abandon strongly held partisan positions when the bright light of national interest is shone.

In short, our work will enable us to learn more about and from each other. Prejudices will be abandoned as we discover how much we all care about our country and our people. Convictions will be entrenched as we find new visions to work together. None of us will claim not to have learnt something new in the course of our work. 

I can say, without any fear of contradiction whatsoever, that whether you agree with an opinion of an individual Member or not, you will find that you are all women and men of conviction, determined to make a difference in the lives of the people we represent. You will work long hours at night and sometimes even on weekends. You will listen to sometimes really offensive viewpoints. You will even endure threats of lawsuits and some other veiled threats. 

I can only say that I feel greatly humbled to be called your Deputy Speaker and to serve under the Rt Hon.  Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga. (Applause) I hope and pray that the guidance and decisions I will have opportunity to make in the House in the course of the next five years will make me truly deserve the overwhelming confidence you have shown in electing me as Deputy Speaker of the Tenth Parliament.

I invite you, honourable members, to pick a leaf from the statement I have made and consider adopting this method of work. When we accept fact, reason, tolerance and mutual respect to shape our actions, harmony consensus and legitimacy is bound to be the inevitable result. Our people will delight in our handiwork; they will no longer refer to us merely as politicians but rather as true leaders and patriots. 

Thank you again, Your Excellency. May God bless this Parliament of Uganda and may God bless Uganda. May God bless your Excellency, the President, may God bless the Rt Hon. Speaker, and may God bless all of you. I say this for God and my country. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Jacob Oulanyah. Your Excellency the President, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, Your Excellency the Vice-President, the Prime Ministers and members of Parliament. Under Rule 10 of our Rules of Procedure, the President, while occupying the Chair of State, may make a presidential statement, which shall be heard in silence and not followed by any comment or question.

Secondly, he shall not otherwise participate in the proceedings of the House in any way; that is why I did not allow him to raise a point of order. I now invite His Excellency the President to make his remarks before we close this activity

3.40
HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Gen. (Rtd) Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): The Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga; the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament, Jacob Oulanyah; H.E. the Vice-President; the Deputy Prime Ministers; all the ministers, though they are not yet - they have not yet expired until I appoint new ones; the honourable members of Parliament. I congratulate the Rt Hon. Speaker on her election unanimously –(Applause)- by Parliament and initially by the NRM central committee, the NRM caucus and eventually by the whole the Parliament. I congratulate her. (Applause)

Rt Hon. Kadaga has been with me in Parliament; initially, I was Speaker - these people took my job – but now I come here in a different capacity. Hon. Kadaga has been with me since the NRC days in 1989. She is one of the few survivors. I, therefore, congratulate her on this mandate. 

I congratulate the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah, on his election as Deputy Speaker. (Applause) I have heard people say that Oulanyah is a puppet. I know what goes on in all those places of yours, so that is what I have been hearing. However, if you are looking for somebody who is not a puppet, then Oulanyah is the right person. He has played a very big role. You heard about what he did when he was head of the legal committee, –(Interjections) - even when he was still in UPC, and you know what he has been doing ever since he was elected Deputy Speaker and even when he was outside Parliament. 

This is a young person and as somebody said, this is the type of person who can be a bridge between us, the grandfathers, and you, the grandchildren. This is a Government of three generations: grandfathers - a few others and I are here; you, our children, are there; the grandchildren like the Rwabwogos are also there, and the other honourable member from West Nile. 

Therefore, I congratulate the Rt Hon. Oulanyah on his election and I congratulate all the members of Parliament, first of all, on your election and also on swearing in. (Applause)  However, if you could swear in more cheaply, it would be good for your welfare, which hon. Nsereko was talking about. I do not know how we shall develop a culture of frugality because I am a bit worried about these big parties –(Interjections)- Do you like them? Okay. If they do not erode your pocket, then I have no problem. If you could go home and cut your banana bunches and cook some nsujju and people eat, that is oaky, but money - that is a subject for another day –(Interjection)- Kololo is a national cerebration; it is not personal. Hon. Bakireke is always missing the point.

I congratulate this Parliament for passing the test. You have now passed the test. (Applause) I came and sat there to see whether you would pass or fail the test. You will recall that we, in the NRM, did not believe in multiparty politics. Initially, we said, “Why doesn’t this multiparty politics wait?” However, some people insisted. My sister, Cecilia Ogwal, insisted; she said, “We must have multiparty politics now.” I was not convinced but we agreed that if that is what you want, then let us go multiparty. The Constitution was amended and we had a referendum and the country moved from individual merit to multiparty politics. 

Now, to go to a party caucus and you take a legitimate decision and then you come to Parliament and go against it would be a disaster for democracy in Uganda. (Applause) The question would then be, what do we do if you say you want to run the country on a multiparty basis, but you do not respect legitimate party decisions? I am emphasizing the word legitimate. If my party meets in a caucus and agrees that I should go and riot, I would not accept that decision, because it is not legitimate. We, in the army, talk of legitimate command - lawful command. Although I am the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces and a General, I cannot order an army officer to go and kill somebody and he carries it out. It is an order but illegal. The order must also be lawful.

Therefore, if a party takes a lawful decision, which is based on the Constitution - I do not have time to quote the articles; you know them - then somebody comes to Parliament and says, “no, I am here as an individual” yet you were elected as party member, that is really a disaster. Independent from the beginning is okay; that is why we provided for it. I am actually the one who insisted on it because although we moved to a multiparty system, I was not sure that the parties were as yet very well run. I am the one who insisted that we should leave a window in case somebody is not happy with their party, let them be somewhere. I am the one who put it the Constitution. (Applause) 

However, even the independents belong somewhere politically. My children are now adults and they are independent but they listen to the old man. When he says, “Please, my children, you are very big people but as your father, I think this is a dangerous thing”, if you hear a child who says, “I do not care about my father because I am independent” then you know there is something wrong with that child. They are independent legally. I cannot go to Muhoozi’s house and - it is his home but I am his father. Therefore, there should be a balance between that.

I congratulate you because I was wondering what we were going to do - do we go back to individual merit; how do we run the country if you do not respect what comes from the party caucus in the state? Therefore, I congratulate Parliament; mukulikeeyo banange. (Applause)

I decided to come with a picture of the First Parliament. Do not think that you are the first Parliament. We had a Parliament in 1962. The picture is not that clear but I will see how they can clarify it. If you see these people, they were all young just like you here; Ibingira was 28 years old, Nekyon was 28 years old, Obote, who was a bit old, was 35 years old - You know the history. You can see Muteesa sitting here very young; he was about 39 years. I want the picture to be made clearer and I give it to you all as a souvenir. (Applause)

However, in no time, as if there was omulogo or a witchdoctor bewitching Uganda, the whole system collapsed; Parliament collapsed and the whole Government collapsed. Therefore, when I was sitting here, I wondered, “Are these people going back?” I am, therefore, very pleased and I congratulate you for passing the test; not the test of supporting Oulanyah, but the test of supporting the Constitution of Uganda, because Uganda now is being run by a multiparty Constitution, on the insistence of some of the political players. I congratulate the NRM Party. (Applause) Banange, mukulikeeyo. I was wondering what was going to happen to this party. Therefore, I congratulate you. 

I also congratulate all of you again because I think you are beginning to move in the right direction. A political issue comes up but you hear people talking about somebody’s family matters. Oulanyah has a quarrel with his wife; I do not know what –(Interjection)– Oh, he does not even have one! I did not know that. (Laughter). I have been leading fighters and political activists for the last 50 years. You fail to run a constituency, which is a public enterprise, or run a school or public activities but you go into bedroom matters of other people; what sort of politics is this? I, therefore, congratulate you for concentrating on public affairs, because these are the ones that need your solution. Bedroom matters have other people to solve them - the reverends, the sheikhs, et cetera; that is their job. 

This Parliament is very lucky - we are all lucky and I am a very lucky man. We are now leading a Uganda that is collecting Shs 13,000 billion in tax a year and not the one that was collecting Shs 5 billion in 1986. On account of that, as you have seen, Uganda is now able to undertake so many projects using our own money and we are on the verge of becoming a middle income country. However, we have only two problems; one is corruption and the other is the delay in decision-making, especially by the public servants – bureaucracy. Therefore, we must fight corruption and we are going to fight it –(Interjection) - How? The way we fought other problems. You will see; just wait. Now that I got the mandate - I was sworn in the other day - just wait and see.

However, I would like to appeal to my Members of Parliament; do not allow corruption to come here –(Interjection)- Now listen to these people saying that I gave my NRM people Shs 5 million. This is because I must try to rescue my MPs. (Interjections) Politics has been messed up quite a bit by you, the new politicians. As I have told you, I have been leading struggles for the last 50 years. In all those struggles, I am either getting no pay or low pay, but I work and my colleagues work. They are here. You can see the ones from the army; we work for no pay or low pay. However, when we mixed with the population here, they had different ideas. 

There has been a problem on our side as the NRM. The NRM Secretariat has been weak. It has not carried out serious sensitisation to let people know that politics is voluntary and is different from money-making, which is in the private sector. Some people think that public service is about monkey-making. For a young country like Uganda, which is just coming up, it is a disaster if you think that public service is about money-making. The private sector is the one for money-making. You can go and make money in the private sector. 

The public service for a country like Uganda, which is just coming up, is first and foremost voluntary. If they can afford to pay you, they pay you; if they cannot, then you volunteer until they are able to pay you well. There are very good examples. If you want, you can go and study China. China is now the second richest country in the world. India has now come up. How did they come up? Go and see how they came up. Their history is there. You can go and read about how China and India handled their affairs. However, that is no reason to be corrupt.

Therefore, when I gave the MPs that – (Interjection)- NRM and NRM-leaning independents - it was because I know the pressures they are having because there is so much –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. Rule 10 requires you to listen to the President in silence.

MR MUSEVENI: That is not corruption. That is helping them to cope with the problems of the society. Therefore – [Ms Nambooze: “Where was that money from?”]- I raise money. I did not sell my cows but I fundraise for the party. Also, the Government gives all parties money, even the Opposition parties apart from when they get money from all sorts of sources, and you know that. Next time I will give you the figures when I come here. 

I am very happy that Parliament has passed the test and the NRM has passed the test. We are on the brink of take-off. You have come to the right place at the right time in history. 

My son, hon. Nsereko, talked forcefully and eloquently on the issue of welfare. Well, I thank him. I only want to help him move what in Parliament you call “an amendment” to his statement. The amendment is that you should talk about the welfare of Ugandans and of Parliament. (Applause) If you talk about the welfare of both, I will be wholly with my son, Nsereko, and those who think like him. However, if you only talk about the welfare of Parliament or public service or NRM, then you are not right.

I congratulate the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and all the Members of Parliament. The Rt Hon. Speaker talked about space. I will discuss with the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker about building a new chamber for Parliament. (Applause) We definitely need a new chamber because the existent one is an old one. I am responsible for the big Parliament and I have no apologies. This is because I travel a lot in the country and I see what the people need and when I come back, I propose some additional constituencies. 

I worked for, and I am glad Parliament approved, the Ik constituency. (Applause) I read a book about the Ik people in the 1960s at university. They were being described as the vanishing tribe of Africa – a tribe which was about to disappear because of disease, neglect and cattle raiding. However, if you went there now - you can see how that young boy is shining. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Can you please stand so we see you shining. 

MR MUSEVENI: This is the first time an Ik has been in Parliament. (Applause) I am not even sure that the Ik were in the district council of Kaabong –(Interjections)- Okay, it is not clear. I created the constituency of the Tepeth. Where is the Member for Tepeth? These constituencies are not mere constituencies; these are liberation constituencies. I am separating the Tepeth so that they cannot be swallowed by the Matheniko. It is the same issue in Kasese and in Bundibugyo between the Bakonzo and the Bamba. Therefore, this big Parliament is a Parliament of liberation. It liberates the whole country but also the sub-groups in the country. I have no apologies for that.

We shall cope with the numbers and I am very happy with that. The only thing I ask of the numbers is to think patriotically. If we have big numbers who are thinking unpatriotically, then it would be double jeopardy; we shall have more people who will create more problems. However, if they think patriotically, we are really on the right path. I thank you and I wish you good luck. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we thank His Excellency the President for performing his duty. However, Your Excellency, in the past you have delegated your duties under the Oaths Act to the Chief Justice or other people; so I request that this being a historical occasion, we assemble on the steps of Parliament for historic photographs of this day, if you have time.

Honourable members, starting on Tuesday and Wednesday next week, there will be orientation on the Rules of Procedure to take place here, in the conference room. Therefore, we invite you to come here to be given a brief on the Rules of Procedure. Come on Tuesday and Wednesday, at 10 O’clock so that you can be given orientation.

I would like to also announce that the State of the Nation Address, which is also the official opening of Parliament. It will take place on 31 May 2016 at 1400 hours at the International Conference Centre. Please, keep it in your programme that we shall have the State of the Nation Address on that day.

I invite the Independent Members of Parliament to write to me; in case there are those who would like to serve on the Appointments Committee, so that we can allocate them.

For members of the Ninth Parliament, tomorrow evening, there will be a ceremony to award you with certificates of service. It will take place tomorrow here at the South Wing car park at 6.00 p.m. Therefore, Members of the Ninth Parliament, please come and receive your certificates of service for the work done in the last five years. 

I adjourn the House sine die. When I need you, we shall inform you. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I congratulate both of you for being elected to maintain the status quo that we all prayed for. May God bless you. 

I am rising on a point of procedure. I have been reminded that, as the outgoing Opposition Chief Whip, I need to explain to Members; after these high profile elections, where do we meet? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, consultations are going on and very soon, you will be advised where we shall meet. (Laughter)

The East African Community anthem.

The National anthem.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to request you to rescue the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, who are now impecunious, by assisting us to take Members to Club Guvnor tomorrow night. (Laughter) 

Hon. Ogwal, we will proceed to Club Guvnor tomorrow night after the ceremony here. Shall we go to the steps for the photographs?

(The House rose at 4.18 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 
