Thursday, 13 May 2010

Parliament met at 11.00 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this morning’s sitting. I will only make a slight adjustment to the Order Paper to allow the acting Leader of Opposition to make a statement most likely in the afternoon. That is the only amendment I am going to make for now. Hon. Toskin, you had something to say?

11.02
MR TOSKIN BARTILLE (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to express a matter of national concern and this is about my district, Bukwo. For the last two weeks we have continued to receive unprecedented amounts of rain; we had storms and heavy rainfall to the effect that almost all the rivers and streams which flow from Mt Elgon have been filled up and are flooding, which has caused a lot of damage in Bukwo District.  

Almost all the bridges have been swept away and as we speak now, access to Bukwo is impossible whether through Kapchorwa or from the alternative route that had been created from Chepskunya up to Bukwo. Almost all the culverts and the bridges have been swept away. So, Bukwo is almost a no-go area now. 

Again it is very disappointing that the only route left for the Members of Parliament going to their constituencies is through Kenya, which we had abandoned for almost one and a half years now. 

Concerning the bridges, the Ministry of Works must come in immediately. They had been trying to fix some of the bridges like the Bukwo Bridge but it has also been swept away. And there is a very dangerous one bordering Kapchorwa and Bukwo called Siti Bridge, which was built in 1956; it is going to fall any time. I call upon the Ministry of Works to take an immediate step to repair that bridge.

The most unfortunate thing is that on the 9th at about 6.00 p.m. two children were swept away by water but right now only one body has so far been recovered and it was buried on the 11th. The body of the other child called Chelangat, about ten years of age, who was a pupil at Sosho Primary School, has not yet been recovered. So, the people are still looking for the corpse.

Apart from that, many people have been displaced - about 200 families have now been displaced especially those who are living along the banks of River Bukwo and many others and about 600 other families are threatened especially those who live on the slopes of the mountain. If the rains are going to continue the way they are, it is very likely that we are going to experience mudslides and landslides, which are also very common in these areas.
 
Of course like it has been done in Bududa, I think it is high time that when such situations arise, people are forced to move away from the areas, which are threatened. Otherwise we may wait only to respond to calamities. 

Also in this regard, we call upon Government and humanitarian agencies to come in and help settle the people who have been displaced and provide them with humanitarian items like food, drugs, clothes and any other assistance. Those are the issues, which I wanted to raise this morning and to call upon Government to come in immediately so that we can be able to support the people. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 
  
11.06
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My colleague, hon. Toskin, this is a very critical matter resulting from heavy rains, which has given way to displacement of people and destruction of roads and bridges. I would like to assure hon. Toskin that the Prime Minister’s Office has taken note of this. We shall be in position to get our teams from the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and the Ministry of Works so that they can go on the ground to determine the extent of the damage that has been occasioned and the level of support that is required so that we can put in place pertinent interventions. I thank you. 

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS (AMENDMENT NO.2) BILL, 2010

11.07
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Rt Hon. Speaker, I have received communication from the Minister of Public Service to the effect that she should be in position to table this in the afternoon if permission can be granted. 

11.07
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Hoima): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on behalf of the Board of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme and members on that item. I wish the Minister of Public Service were here but since we have the Minister of Finance, we can get clarifications.

We did apply for a certificate of clearance for our amendment and now we have been in abeyance waiting for that certificate. We were assured that we had been granted a certificate last week but I was surprised yesterday to see the Minister of Public Service moving to respond to what Parliament rightly raised that before the Presidential Emoluments Bill is passed, the Speaker and Deputy Speaker are provided for. 

My concern is, one, for us in the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme, we have not got our certificate to enable us move our amendments.

Two, I want evidence of their certificate because Parliamentary Pensions Scheme’s money is our hard earned money and cannot – without evidence of money coming from the Consolidated Fund - take the burden of these well intended privileges of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. 

I really want even before the Bill is pushed to the committee to first know why our certificate is not coming, and two, how can this be brought to a scheme which is members’ money? I do not think that the Executive has a right to even plan expending on that Bill. Madam Speaker, we need that clarification from the Minister of Finance before the Minister of Public Service can move. I thank you so much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, you know I have seen two Bills, one for the Parliamentary Trust and the other from the Ministry of Public Service. So, I do not know to whom you issued the Certificate of Financial Implications. So, I hope you can clarify on that before we have the reading in the afternoon. 

11.10
MR ALBERT ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, we need to be very honest with each other. This Bill being proposed to be brought here is being brought because of pressure from Members who vowed that we will not deal with the emoluments of the President, Prime Minister and Vice-President until we see a provision for the Speaker and Deputy Speaker.  

Now we put here our request for leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill on the 1st of February but since then, even when the Bill is already printed – it is here – it is ready for first reading and this is a matter of benefits of everybody who is here, including the staff. But since then, even when the Bill is ready, they have put this aside. What they are now trying to do is to clear the way for the re-introduction of the other matter of the benefits of the President, Vice-President and the Prime Minister. I, therefore, think this is not honest at all. 

Let us first have the Certificate of Financial Implications for a Member to benefit. I have had the chance to quickly go through what is going to be introduced. This is my copy which I got from the printery. What is going to happen is that Government is now bringing the benefits of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker to be funded by the benefits of Members –(Interjections)- yes, that is what is there. I speak not as a shadow minister but as a trustee – I am a member of the Board of Trustees –(Interjections)- yes. It is bringing in a charge on Members’ benefits without proposing where the money is going to come from –(Laughter)- what is in the Members’ fund is their contributions and the percentage contribution by Government – yes, that is what is there.   

MAJ. (RTD) GUMISIRIZA: I do not know what hon. Mukitale and hon. Oduman are debating because we do not have the Bill here – we are speculating - certainly we shall not allow it. We do not want to waste time in between discussing something –(Interjections)– well, it can be in the pigeon hole but let us really be procedurally correct. Let us not speculate - when the minister comes in the afternoon – suppose she turns up now with all that we require? In the mean time, we are wasting time.
    
MR ODUMAN: My proposal is as follows: if we are to be honest with each other, let us deal with first things first because the proposals in the Private Member’s Bill which is supposed to be tabled are far ranging in terms of operationalisation of the Members’ fund which is not operational up to now. Let us deal with that first and Government delays the introduction of this other Bill until we deal with the substantial issues which are raised in this thicker Bill that has been presented by our chairman. Until we finish the first Bill, I would plead that we put that on hold.

11.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Jachan Omach): There are certain issues that we wanted the Ministry of Public Service to clarify and we just received the clarification this morning. So, the Certificate of Financial Implications of this proposed Bill is being worked on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For both? Anyway, hon. Minister, is it the Bill for the Trust or the Bill by the Ministry of Public Service?

MR OMACH: This is on the Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill 2010. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Anyway, let us wait until they are tabled and then we can discuss it.

MR ODUMAN: Just as a background – the way you amend a Parliamentary Pensions Bill or Act – before we introduced our Bill, we had to undertake an actuarial study of the implications of whatever change you want to introduce to the parent Act – you hope that Bill comes here, Mr Minister. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, next item.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE SPECIAL AUDIT OF THE COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING (CHOGM) EXPENDITURE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

11.16
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. I have looked at the Order Paper and have seen all reports apart from the CHOGM report appear as, “Presentation, consideration and adoption of the reports.” I am at pains to understand why the CHOGM report is just for purposes of laying – the rest is presentation, consideration and adoption. So, what is the difference? What is the difference between this and other reports? 

Having said that, I say first and foremost, I think it will be ideal that I present this report. The reason is just simple that for all reports in Parliament, the debate can be deferred but the most important is to present it – and this is only the Executive Summary. If you allow me – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Members, you know that report which you brought to me yesterday has over 200 pages and the Members of this House have frequently complained when we are making presentations when they have no copy – no, no. It is the clerk to distribute copies to the Members – 150. No hon. Member, lay it and we shall give you time to present it. Let the clerk distribute the copies and we shall give you your time – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want you to allow me to just make the summary and that will be done –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is it? I do not even have it. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, only the Executive Summary. There are more copies – give them more copies. I can assure you, Madam Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not even have your Executive Summary. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Members, there are more reports here. Can you distribute those ones? Can you give more and also give the Speaker another copy?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not even have a copy of your Executive Summary. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is part of the report. It is on the top and then the rest is additional –(Interjections)- give more there – they just kept them.

MAJ. (RTD) GUMISIRIZA: The practice in the House has always been that reports of committees are given to Members and depending on the sensitivity or importance of that report, the chairperson can lay the document on the Table –(Interjections)– call it presentation. But reports have ever been laid here on the Table and on the prerogative of the Speaker, a decision is made and Members are given sufficient time to read and internalise the report and then an exhaustive discussion ensues. In your wisdom, Madam Speaker, it is up to you to guide us as long as we have copies, which the majority of us do not have – at least the Front Bench I can see has - we do not have reports and so we are asking for the indulgence of the Speaker and the House to make a ruling so that we can move on.

11.21
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Madam Speaker, first of all, I thank you for giving me this opportunity. I think this matter should not be a matter of a do-or-die. The precedent in this House has been that a report is presented and a debate takes place later. For example, my committee presented two reports and I was asked by the Speaker – because the reports were bulky - to summarise and we did summarise. Because Members had not read the contents of the detailed report, the Speaker directed and said, “Members, go back and read the details of this report. We shall put it on the order paper for detailed debate.” So, I think it should not be a matter of do-or-die. If an opportunity can be given to the chairperson of the committee just to summarise without going into the details that would be it. Therefore, the debate can take place afterwards when we have read the details of the report.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the problem I am getting is that I would have added all the other reports, which have been presented but not debated; including yours for which I have been trying to create room throughout this whole week so that they can be got rid of. So, do you want us to add more on the list of presentation and no debate? But you are adding to the problems of – hon. Nandala, let us do this. You ensure that there are sufficient copies. You will present in the afternoon. I think that is a good compromise. Make enough copies and ensure that there are enough copies for everybody. We shall give you time in the afternoon. 

Hon. Nandala, how will the clerk run the copies if you run away with your papers? (Ms Betty Amongi rose_)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you have told me that I will present in the afternoon. I am ready to do it in the afternoon and the copies – yesterday we brought 150 copies and we have brought more today. Even in your mail boxes they are there. We are even making it in a better form; we are binding the reports. By next week, you shall have one on your shelves. Since you have allowed me to present in the afternoon, let me wait for the afternoon. I thank you for that. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION
AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF
THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE
SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE,
SCHEDULE NO.2 FOR FY 2009/2010

11.25
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here as the Chairperson of the Budget Committee to present a report on Supplementary Schedule No. 2 –(Interjections)- hon. colleagues, the copies are being distributed. They are with you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, the copies are being distributed. Proceed.

MS AKOL: Hon. colleagues, in accordance with Article 156(2) of the Constitution, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development tabled to Parliament on 29 April 2010 the Supplementary Schedule No.2 for the Financial Year 2009/2010 amounting to Shs 88,042 billion. 

The summary Table 1 below, on page 2, shows the composition and proportion of the supplementary expenditure categories. It also includes Supplementary Schedule No. 1 already approved and appropriated by this Parliament.

In this table, the total approved budget for the Financial Year 2009/2010 – I beg to correct that one - is Shs 7,588,495 trillion. 

The three percent provision under the Budget Act, 2001, which the Executive can spend without approval of Parliament, is Shs 227,654 billion. Now the total for Schedule 1, which is already approved, was Shs 457,935 billion. 

Schedule 2 before us for approval has recurrent expenditure of Shs 61,360 billion and development expenditure for approval of Shs 26,682 billion. The total for Supplementary Schedule 2 is Shs 88,042 billion and the grand total for both Supplementary Schedule No. 1 and Supplementary Schedule No. 2 is Shs 545,977 billion.

The Schedule was referred to the Budget Committee for scrutiny and the committee, therefore, wishes to report as follows.

On 23 March 2010, Parliament approved and appropriated Supplementary Schedule No. 1 for the Financial Year 2009/2010 amounting to Shs 457,935 billion. This represents approximately 6.035 percent of the approved budget for the Financial Year 2009/2010.

Supplementary Schedule No.2 for the Financial Year 2009/2010 amounting to Shs 88,042 billion represents 1.16 percent of the approved budget. This, therefore, increases the supplementary expenditure requirements for the Financial Year 2009/2010 under both schedules 1 and 2 to Shs 545,997 billion or 7.195 percent of the approved budget for the Financial Year 2009/2010.

Section 12(1) of the Budget Act, 2001 provides that the total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources above what is appropriated by Parliament shall not exceed three percent of the total approved budget for that financial year without approval of Parliament. 

The supplementary expenditure of Shs 88,042 billion brings the total supplementary expenditure requirement to 7.195 percent of the approved budget and this therefore requires approval of Parliament as provided for by Section 12(1) of the Budget Act, 2001.

Methodology

The committee held a meeting with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Minister of Internal Affairs, Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Minister of State for Ethics and Integrity and their respective technical personnel; chairpersons of the various sector committees whose votes were affected by this supplementary and the State House comptroller were also in that meeting. 

We took this decision to hold just one meeting convened by the Budget Committee other than the sector committee inviting their respective ministers and technical personnel because of the short time frame, very well aware that Parliament was supposed to be prorogued within a very short time – by then a period of one week.

Sources of funding for supplementary Schedule No.2
 
1.	The supplementary request for Shs 13.32 billion which is a wage salary shortfall and teacher salary arrears will be funded from savings within the wage Bill. 

2.	The supplementary request of Shs 20.099 billion for servicing the debt for the new presidential jet will be funded from proceeds of sale of the old presidential jet. In other words, this is a technical supplementary. 

3.	A total of Shs 2.361 billion is non-resource supplementary expenditure. 

4.	A total of Shs 52.262 billion supplementary expenditure request will be funded through a draw down from Bank of Uganda. 

The committee has on various occasions recommended that draw down from Bank of Uganda to fund supplementary expenditures that are not of emergency nature should be discouraged. 

Content of supplementary schedule No.2

The total supplementary expenditure for Schedule 2 amounting to Shs 88.042 billion is composed of Shs 61.360 billion as recurrent expenditure and Shs 26.682 billion as development expenditure. 

Attached as appendix one is a table which provides a summary of supplementary expenditure requirements under Schedule 2 for financial year 2009/10. That schedule is attached right behind this report as appendix one. 

Observations and recommendations 

Vote 002: State House
The committee noted that Shs 20.098 billion is required to settle part of the outstanding balance on the new presidential jet loan. The above sum is equivalent to $10 million realised from the sale of the old presidential jet. 

The committee further observed that State House continues to request supplementary expenditure for activities which would ordinarily be captured during the normal budgeting process. For example, purchase of vehicles, renovation of state lodges et cetera. 

The committee recommends that prudent budgetary practices should be observed by all sectors including State House. Supplementary expenditure should be for activities that were not foreseen during the normal budgeting process or arose as a matter of emergency.

Vote 006: Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Contribution to international organisations

Madam Speaker, Shs 10 billion is being requested for to settle outstanding obligations to international organisations. This amount is to settle the outstanding arrears up to December 2008 and partially the assessments of 2009. Details of the international organisations to be paid are attached as appendix 2: contributions to international organisations.

In addition, Shs 0.028 billion is required for the CAA lighting of the packing apron at the airport in preparation for the AU Summit in July 2010. However, the committee is concerned that during CHOGM preparations, Entebbe Airport received a major face-lift and this item should have been taken care of. The same applies to the weather equipment under the Meteorological Department for which a request of Shs 0.222 billion has been made. 

The committee recommends that Shs 10 billion being requested for in settlement of outstanding international obligations be approved. The committee further recommends that international organisations to which Uganda subscribes be reviewed and that the Minister of Finance should annually budget for payment of our obligations to international organisations especially those which are beneficial to this country. 

Vote 009: Ministry of Internal Affairs

The National Security Information System
The committee noted that Shs 27 billion is additional funding required to pay for the National Security Information System. However, the committee is concerned that there are critical institutions and user departments which have not been brought on board in the whole process of design, procurement and implementation of the system. For instance, the Ministry of ICT and National Information Technology Authority Uganda (NITA) which are critical in the collection, storage and transmission of the data have not been brought on board. 

The committee recommends that Shs 27 billion be distributed to the following sectors as follows:

1.	Shs 13.5 billion to Ministry of Internal Affairs.
2.	Shs 13.5 billion to Ministry of ICT to enable it create the IT infrastructure to house the district data centres, the regional data centres and to provide for infrastructure for the primary data centre at the headquarters. 

On this Shs 27 billion, I have been further advised – and I think the Minister of ICT will have something to say about this - that they have made a new arrangement. The Minister of ICT will promptly inform the House on what was agreed upon. It was the view of the committee that it is important that the ICT Ministry is brought on board because they have the technical expertise being requested for as salary shortfalls and arrears. And this is to be funded through savings from within the wage Bill for Financial Year 2009/10.

Appendix 3 attached gives details of supplementary recurrent expenditure on salaries that is to be funded from the Shs 13.32 billion. 

The committee observed that salary arrears have become a perennial part of the supplementary funding request. The committee has always recommended that during the budget process; sectors should indicate their recruitment plans so that salaries for employees are captured during the normal budgeting process. The committee will in future be constrained to recommend approval of salary arrears under supplementary funding.

In conclusion, the committee recommends that this House approves the supplementary expenditure Schedule No.2 for Financial Year 2009/10 as follows:

Recurrent supplementary expenditure Shs 61,360,128,086; development supplementary budget is Shs 26,681,500,000. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, very much. Hon. Members, the report has been signed by the minimum that is more than one third of the Members. So you are free to debate it. 

11.40
MR TOSKIN BARTILLE (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to use the same opportunity to thank the Chairperson of the Budget Committee for the report given to us. I want to respond to one thing as mentioned by the committee. We spend a lot of time during the budgetary period and our Budget Act gives us enough time to deal with almost every other expenditure foreseen. It is surprising that every now and then, we get requests for supplementary expenditures even in areas which are really known like paying salaries for teachers. 

It has become common that every other time, teachers’ salaries become a shortfall in the payments. Many teachers get their names out of the payroll almost every other month and when you go to the Ministry of Finance, you will find that the request for payment of arrears is always common. 

Like the committee has indicated, it is very important that during the budgetary process, we include almost all these foreseen expenditures as much as possible because sometimes, the Minister of Finance and all those concerned use this as a chance - especially contributions to some important organisations.

We, who come from the Pan African Parliament, sometimes get embarrassed because our country actually delays in their contributions to these organisations, to the AU and it makes work very difficult and yet these are foreseen and they are known. Why should they not be planned for? I would have liked the Minister of Finance to give us an explanation and give us ways to avoid some of these supplementary expenditures which are expected. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.43
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson and the committee for this report which has clearly shown us the money is wanted and the sources. But what we should ask ourselves is whether the supplementary money they are asking for is in national interest and is it in party interest or individual interest. In my view, this money is being requested in the interest of the nation. So, we should look at this request in this aspect of national interest.
 
When you go through this report, you see issues of safety; when they talk of CAA, we have talked about safety several times here - it is a very important thing and we cannot joke about safety. Moreover, if you remember very correctly, Government owes CAA I think over Shs 75 billion. I think by providing some money through this supplementary the issue of safety is being handled.

When you look at page 6 where they are talking about the Ministry of Internal Affairs, there are issues of security. We can talk of anything but if there is no security, nothing can go well in this country - we may not even sit here. So when we are asking for money in the direction of security and peace for this nation, I think we should not hesitate to pass it. They are trying to get information; if you do not have information on security, you cannot execute it well.

When you look at internal affairs, they are trying to get data. There are things here we are doing wrong because we do not have data but if you have data you are empowered and you can talk with authority. You can make good decisions for this country. That is why I said these things are being done in the interest of this country. With this, I strongly recommend that this Parliament approves this request to Government. I thank you.

11.46
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for coming out with this report and I also request this House to pass this supplementary budget.

I want to raise my concerns on page 5 on contributions to international organisations. As Vice-Chairperson of the Foreign Affairs Committee of Parliament, I want to express a lot of concern on this issue. You can even see the supplementary budget that we are going to pass will not make us up to date. We shall still have arrears and this is brought about by the budget ceiling by the Ministry of Finance. I would like to request the Ministry of Finance that when they are setting their budget ceilings, they should consider some of these salient issues so that we are not embarrassed as the honourable Member from the Pan African Parliament has put it.

Secondly, on page 6, I would like to support the committee on recommending that there should be an element of inter-ministerial or inter-departmental cooperation and for bringing the Ministry of ICT on board. Yesterday, we met the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission and we expressed a lot of fears because the gadgets which are in the field - if they go on at that rate, I do not think the update exercise of national registers will meet the deadline. Some of these gadgets are faulty and I wish the ICT Ministry could provide some experts to boost or to assist the Electoral Commission. 

Otherwise, I would like to support this supplementary budget and pray that this Parliament passes it. I thank you.

11.49
MS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the efforts put in by the committee in producing this report. My concern goes to appendix 2 under the heading, “Contributions to international organisations”. We know very well that Uganda is a member to the international community under the UN which has various agencies. One of them is the International Labour Organisation and it is true that Uganda is not up to date in terms of paying the membership for the International Labour Organisation which is a tripartite body for the government, workers and employers. I just wonder why it is not being depicted here under those ones which are urgent and must be considered. Thank you very much.

11.50
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE (Mr Charles Oduman): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have debated the issue of supplementary budgets and agreed that by its very meaning it should cover matters that could not wait and could not be foreseen. But what is happening is a repeat of the past where we bring matters under supplementary which should have been foreseeable. We need to help Government and the time is now. The time has to come when this House should be able to say, “No to this one,” especially on operational issues like salaries.

At the beginning of the year, you know the staff that Government has and you know them by name. What happens in the middle of the year? We are only one month away; what happens? You recruit new staff. Could that not be foreseen? What happened? Had you forgotten somebody who should have been on the pay roll? The committee should really take interest in this matter. What creates additional salary arrears?

There has been a debate in the media about how institutions and State House spend money. They are debating that State House spends Shs 300 million per day. Now, a lot of that is on operational expenditure -(Interjections)– yes. I can take information. 

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you honourable member for giving way.  When you go to page 5, State House is talking about purchase of vehicles and renovation of state lodges. But when you go to Appendix 1, shortfall in operations budget, it is Shs 14 billion. When you go to appendix 3, general staff salaries, it is Shs 467 million. Now, were these expenditures not known during the time of budgeting? That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR ODUMAN: Without the spending entity presenting a list of new staff that have now come on board to justify additional salary appropriation, we can never be certain what we are approving - this thing called salary supplementary. You will never be sure about it.

What evidence does the committee have that these are actually arrears without having a list of names of new staff members that have come on board? Without having justification of how staff salaries have been enhanced, what brings about the salary increase? You have a salary increase; you have new staff. What is it? You will never be sure. That is why the budget for these institutions is going up arbitrarily and is being annexed under salary arrears. This is our suspicion, Madam Speaker -(Member timed out) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, let us hear from hon. Ekemu and then we get a response and close this matter. We have a lot of other business on the Order Paper. 

11.54
MR CHARLES EKEMU (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report and I want to make some remarks. 

On page 4 under sources of funding for supplementary expenditure schedule No. 2 and item two, it is said that the supplementary request of Shs 20.099 billion for servicing the debt for the new presidential jet will be funded from proceeds of the sale of the old presidential jet. I thought the committee should have informed this House in this report, how much the old one was sold at so that we know the proceeds from that sale because the media was awash at one time with this story and we got the impression that the sale that was realised was actually a nominal value of the actual cost. So, we thought this is critical information especially if it is to appeal to this House and to other Ugandans who want to know whether we are prioritising and appropriating our budget well.

Again, that is a lot of money. Is it just to settle the outstanding balance on the new presidential jet? What was the actual cost of this jet? These are some of the simple questions that I thought should have come out of this report. 

The committee recommends prudent budgetary practices but then I am surprised that after it does that it goes ahead to approve the supplementary expenditure of more than Shs 60 billion. What a contradiction! They are not convinced that this expense on the presidential jet and other items should have actually been made. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the chair or the minister wish to respond very briefly?

11.57 
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank honourable colleagues for the various questions raised and for the compliments that we have received as the Budget Committee. I just have one issue to respond to and that concerns the presidential jet. 

There is a letter from Bank of Uganda and this letter is to justify - or it was given to the committee and it says that Bank of Uganda received the US$ 10 million, equivalent to Shs 20,098,500,000, on 16 February 2010, being proceeds from the sale of the old presidential jet, and there are details. It is in the MoU between Bank of Uganda and State House. Also, the details are here, that this money be set aside or when it is received, be utilised in reducing the outstanding balance on the presidential jet. So, that is exactly what is being done and that is why, in our report, we called it a technical supplementary.

Maybe for purposes of the House, I beg to lay this letter on the Table. As for the rest, the minister will explain. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Members for fully participating in the debate on the supplementary schedule 2 for the Financial Year 2009/2010. 

On the issue of Shs 27 billion to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, we had a meeting with the Minister of ICT and we have agreed that this total of 27 billion goes towards the payment for the financing of the Information Communication Technology with the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the first payment was given through the Electoral Commission - 30 billion and this is an additional 27 billion to make it 57 billion to be paid as a first instalment for this equipment, which is supposed to be a total of Euros 23 million.

The second issue is on salary arrears. We had a meeting of all accounting officers from all -(Electric power interruption)- on the issue of salary arrears, we met all the accounting officers from all the districts of Uganda yesterday and we have instructed them on what to do. 

This meeting was organised by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Public Service to see how best we can clean up the issue of salaries and wages. We have also given all the personnel officers equipment, including computers, to ensure that henceforth, we shall minimise issues of salary arrears from ministries and departments. 

On the issue of arrears to international organisations, we have –(Interruption) 

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the issue of salaries appearing in the supplementary has been an annual thing. I remember last year, if we could check the Hansard, the ministry did pledge that it will never –(Electric power Interruption)- because the issue of salaries is a predictable expenditure that is known. During the budget process, they should be able to identify the cost of all the predictable expenditure, including the staff that are planned to be recruited. If that cannot be captured in the budget process, it means that there are some of our bureaucrats who are not doing their work. I want the minister to pledge that this is the last time – because it has been happening every year. Can we now be assured that Parliament will never again see this issue of salaries coming in the supplementary? I thank you.

MR OLENY: Thank you very much. I wish to thank the minister. The clarification I would like to seek from the minister is that given this persistent trend, moreover against a background for which Uganda is known, especially in the Commonwealth countries, for having one of the most elaborate budget processes in the world, I am now wondering whether these persistent demands and presentations of supplementaries is not killing the whole purpose of this elaborate budgetary process that we have in this country. Very soon as we appropriate money in the coming budget – actually the budget cycle starts immediately. 

We have been told – this was again a matter of debate in this House - this House would benefit if the minister would update us on how far they are moving in bringing to this House the Contingency Fund Bill. Thank you.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, hon. Cecilia Ogwal is a member of the committee and she gave that very recommendation while she was in the committee. We definitely are in position to talk to all ministries, in particular the Ministry of Local Government through the districts to ensure that we clean up these salary arrears issues. We are also in very close contact with the Ministry of Public Service because what we, Ministry of Finance, pay comes from the Ministry of Public Service. 

As I said earlier, we had a meeting of the stakeholders and we are trying to see how best this can be handled. We cannot say with certainty that come next financial year, we may not have these arrears. For instance, there are some areas like in Karamoja where money which has been budgeted for, salaries and allowances, the people who are recruited do not stay or they do not get the requisite people. 

We have issues in areas surrounding Sudan. A number of our employees are being taken to Sudan leaving our employment empty. So, these issues may continue and that is why there is need for us to see how best we can handle issues of hard-to-reach areas, how they can be remunerated so that we can retain our workers. 

In regard to the issue concerning the Bill on the emergencies, we are in the process of submitting this to Cabinet and once Cabinet handles it, we shall definitely bring it here to Parliament.

Finally on the issue of the outstanding payments to international organisations, Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Foreign Affairs are going to sit down to see how best we can clean up this. 

I would like to thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the request made by the chairperson be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO.2 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/2010

Recurrent Supplementary Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I propose that the sum of Shs 61,360,128,086 be provided as recurrent supplementary expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/2010. 

MS NAMAGGWA: Madam Chair, I would like to request you to refer to – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Aren’t you a member of this committee?

MS NAMAGGWA: I did not sign and my name is not there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, that is not the issue. Are you a member of the committee?

MS NAMAGGWA: I am not. By the time this report was made, I was not a member. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, hon. Member, you cannot say that sometime you were a member and that at other times not. When the Speaker assigns you to the committee, you run with it either for the two and a half years or the sessional committee. Are you a member?

MS NAMAGGWA: Madam Chair, the report can tell – there is evidence from the report.

MS AKOL: Madam Chairperson, allow me clarify. Hon. Sauda Mugerwa Namaggwa was allocated to the Budget Committee when we lost our dear colleague, the late hon. Balikoowa. By the time the supplementary was referred to the Budget Committee, she was already our member only that she was not included on that list. Otherwise, she is a member and she participated in the debates.

MS NAMAGGWA: Madam Chair, thank you for the observation, but there is evidence that I did not participate in the discussion in regard to this report. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, hon. Member, do not split hairs - either you are a member of the committee or not. You cannot say I will participate in this meeting and so that for those in which you participate you are a member and not a member for those in which you do not participate. That is not right. Are you a member of this committee, hon. Sauda Namagwa Mugerwa?

MS NAMAGGWA: No, I joined this committee later –(Laughter)- no, Madam Chair, there are a lot of reports from this committee, which will not reflect my presence because by then I was not yet a member. I request that you allow me make my observations as far as this report is concerned because I did not participate in its discussions.

On page 3, schedule No. 1 – I want to find out from the Minister of Finance why Shs 28 million is allocated to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for lighting the airport. Further, I would like to know whether that ministry has got the capacity to do this work. Why is this money allocated to Ministry of Foreign Affairs instead of Ministry of Works and Transport or any other ministry that deals with infrastructure? How can the Ministry of Foreign Affairs start dealing with infrastructure at the airport? 

Finally, can I find out from the chairperson of the committee –(Interruption)

MR BARTILLE: Madam Chairperson, I know the honourable member has a very strong point to put forward but sincerely we have gone through the debate process and now we are at the Committee Stage. We cannot start going back to that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put he question that the sum of Shs 61,360,128,086 be provided for as recurrent supplementary expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/2010.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development Supplementary Expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a sum for Shs 26,681,500,000 be provided for as development supplementary expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/2010.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

12.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chair, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

12.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered Supplementary Schedule No.2 for the Financial Year 2009/2010 and passed it without any amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

12.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this House do adopt the report on the Supplementary Schedule No.2 and do pass it. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that this House adopts the report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE MOTION FOR THE CREATION NEW MUNICIPALITIES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to call upon you to join me in welcoming a delegation of leaders from Rwamata sub-county in Kiboga District being represented by hon. Nankabirwa. You are welcome. (Applause)

12.18
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT GOVERNMENTS (Ms Emma Boona): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, on 05 May 2010, the Minister of State for Local Government moved an amended motion for a Resolution of Parliament, under Article 178(4) of the Constitution providing for the headquarters of regional governments and Section 7(2)(a) of the Local Government Act providing for the creation of municipalities. 

The ministry received requests from the town councils of Mukono, Kasese, Hoima, Iganga, Masindi, Bushenyi, Bushenyi-Ishaka, Ntungamo and Busia for elevation to municipality status. The motion was referred to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government for consideration and thereafter to report back to Parliament. 

Under Section 7(2)(a) of the Local Governments Act, Cap 243, a district council may, with the approval of Parliament, create a municipality within its area of jurisdiction and in accordance with paragraph 32 of the Third Schedule of the Act.

According to regulation 32 of the third schedule of the Local Government Act, before an area is declared a municipal council, it must have:

1.	A population, which is above 100,000 inhabitants;
2.	Capacity to meet the cost of delivery of services;
3.	Suitable office accommodation;
4.	A master plan for land use; and
5.	Accessible and reliable water sources.

Other requirements may include having:

(i)	A reasonable financial base (local revenue);
(ii)	Social services like health facilities and education institutions;
(iii)	Potential for creation of lower administration units, that is, municipal divisions; and
(iv)	A viable land area for effective planning and future expansion. 

Since the report is very big, I will highlight the important features that we considered as a committee. 

Methodology

The committee undertook fact finding visits to Hoima, Kasese and Mukono town councils to verify the viability of the request for elevation to a municipality status.  The committee, however, was unable to visit Iganga, Masindi, Bushenyi, Ntungamo and Busia town councils but held meetings with Members of Parliament from these areas and scrutinised the district council resolutions. 

The committee now wishes to present its findings, observations and recommendations:

We start with Kasese District and on page 2, we find –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chair, I just want clarification, did you say that the committee did not visit Iganga Town Council?

MS BOONA:  Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On this occasion or even on the previous occasion?

MS BOONA: Even before, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Really! Okay, proceed.

MS BOONA: Kasese District is a fast growing commercial, industrial recreational and residential hub in Western Uganda. As I said, I will not read it verbatim but only look out for the salient features. 

Findings

1.     Kasese District
The committee visited Kasese District and held meetings with the district leaders, residents, business community and stakeholders. The committee was informed that:
 
Kasese town is located 420 kilometres from Kampala via Mbarara and 70 kilometres from the Uganda border with DRC. The town has developed from a town board in 1959 and attained a town council status in 1974 with the creation of Kasese District. 

It is a fast growing commercial, industrial, recreation and residential hub in western Uganda. The town owes her growth from the copper mining in Kilembe, salt mining from Katwe, the railway line, limestone mining for cement from Hima, the QUEPA (Queen Elizabeth Protected Area), and fishing on the rift valley lakes, the Rwenzori Mountains ranges, a rich agricultural hinterland and border trade with Democratic Republic Congo.

Kasese Town is supported by a well linked communication network by air, road, and railway together with a rich hinterland in terms of natural resources such as limestone, cobalt, copper, water resources, and fertile soils to support agriculture. This makes Kasese a big potential to develop into a metropolitan city.

Land Area
The town currently occupies a total land area of 18 square kilometres distributed as follows:

•	Residential land use 		50 percent
•	Commercial land use 		20 percent
•	Industrial land use 		20 percent
•	Recreational land use 		5 percent
•	Institutional 		5 percent

The extended planning area structure plan covers a total land area of 74 square kilometres excluding Kilembe Valley, which is estimated to be 20 square kilometres. This will increase the total land area to 94 square kilometres.

Population

The population increased from 18,750 residents in 1992 to 53,907 in 2002 making Kasese Town the seventh most populated town in the country. With an annual growth rate of nine percent, Kasese Town is the third fastest growing town in Uganda coming after Mukono at 15 percent, Kitgum at 10.3 percent and Lira 10.1 at percent (UBOS 2002).

The extended planning area summed together with the population of the old town makes a total of 94,611 people (UBOS 2002). At a minimum annual population growth rate of 3.6 percent for Kasese District, the afore-mentioned resident population is expected to have increased to 116,976 people in 2008. This population excludes the transit and or day population and when schools are in session it is estimated at 30,000 people per day. The above summed up together makes a total population of 146,976 people.

Administration

The town has nine administrative wards and 29 cells. Kasese Town Council is composed of 32 councillors including a chairperson. It has four standing committees namely executive, works and natural resources, social services and community development, and finance planning and administration. Under the municipality arrangement, the parishes will increase to 18 with 42 cells.

Municipal Administration Arrangement

The Ministry of Local Government recommended for the creation of three divisions out of these parishes in order to minimise administrative costs. The following proposals have been agreed upon by the stakeholders and the affected councils during the consultative process:

Division I, Kasese Central Division has the following parishes: Town centre, Base-camp, Kamaiba, Kilembe, and Nyakabingo II. Total population is 25,633 people (UBOS 2002). At a growth rate of 3.6 per annum this population is estimated to have increased to 31,693 people in 2008

Division II, Bulembia Division has the following parishes: Namuhuga, Katiri, Kyanzuki, Nyabaingo I. The total population was 14,105 people (UBOS 2002). At a growth rate of 3.6 per annum this population is estimated to have increased to 17,439 people in 2008.

Division III, Nyamwamba Division has the following parishes: Nyakasanga II, Nyakasanga I, Kisanga, Kanyangeya, Kihara, Rukoki, Scheme and Katoke Kemihoko. 

The total population was 54,873 people (UBOS 2002). At a growth rate of 3.6 per annum, this population is estimated to have increased to 67,844 people in 2998.

Staff Functional Capacity

The staffing establishment is 86 with 56 positions filled. The administrative units annexed to the municipality also have competent and qualified staff who can be absorbed within the municipality administration.

Road Network
There is a total motorable road network of 82.3 kilometres of which 72.3 kilometres is maintained by the council and distributed as follows; 
•	Tarmac 		17.3 kilometres
•	Gravel		27.8 kilometres
•	Earth road		38.1 kilometres

The road network is expected to increase to 172.2 kilometres after taking over roads from the extended planning area under the municipality administration. 

Health Services

Kasese Town Council currently has five health centres of which two are fully run by council and three co-managed by faith based organisations and private individuals. The municipality has also integrated Kilembe Hospital, Rukoko Health Centres III, Kilembe and Scheme Health Centres II.

Education

There is a total of ten UPE schools, 30 private primary schools and two USE secondary schools. Under the municipality arrangement, the council will manage a total of 29 UPE schools, 39 private primary schools and four USE schools.

Sanitation

The main disposal method of liquid wastes is through septic tanks. National Water and Sewerage Corporation designed a sewerage master plan for Kasese Town Council in 2005. The plan covers both on site and sewerage sanitation infrastructure. The sewerage system component cost is estimated at Shs 5 billion. Plans are underway to have it implemented.

Solid Wastes 

Presently, the town generates 160 tonnes of solid wastes of which council disposes of about 70 percent daily at the garbage composite site using an assortment of equipment funded by World Bank through NEMA and others locally procured.

Existing Industries

Kasese District has the following industries: RECO industries for mattresses and food processing, three cotton ginneries, Kasese Cobalt Company Ltd, Kasese Industrial Minerals Ltd, Kasese Nail and Wood Industry, Nyakatonzi Cooking Oil Processing Plant, maize mills, and coffee hullers.

The extended area shall include Kilembe Mines, rice hullers at Mubuku Irrigation Scheme, and lime processing plants.

The Justification for a Municipality

The Legal Framework

The Local Governments Act, Cap. 243, empowers local governments to initiate the process of upgrading existing local governments and the parameters of creation of towns.  The Town and Country Planning Act Cap. 246, provides the framework for the declaration of planning areas by the Town and Country Planning Board.

The consultative process to agree on boundaries

Kasese Town Council initiated and approved the proposal under Min.2/2002 of 14th November 2002. Muhokya sub-county surrendered Kilembe Parish under Min. 9/2003 of 21st March 2003.  Rukoki sub-county surrendered Scheme Rukoki and Kihara parishes under Min 6/2003 of 11th April 2003. Bugoye sub-county agreed to surrender three villages to Rukoki in respect of what it would lose to the Municipality under Min.9/2003 of 9th April 2003.

Kilembe sub-county initially agreed to surrender the whole sub-county to the municipality under Min. 4/2003 of 3rd April 2003. This has been reviewed to include only the parishes of the valley including Katiri, Namuhuga and Kyanzuki under Min. 3/2008 of 10 December 2008.  

Kasese District Local Government Council approved the boundaries of the municipality and proposal to upgrade the town to a municipality under Min. 9/2003 of 25th to 27th June 2003. The Town and Country Planning Board under Min. 19/2004, approved the boundaries and issued instrument No. PPD/139/202/01 to declare the extended area into a planning area.

The Master Plan for Land Use/Structural Plan

Following the approval of the planning area, Kasese Town Council reviewed and developed a new structural plan in 2004/05 in line with the approved, extended planning area. This plan was developed using a participatory process as provided by the Town Council and Country Planning Act, and approved on 23rd June 2008 at its 282nd meeting. 

The Minister for Urban Development has assented to the structural plan. The plan covers a total land area of 74 square kilometres. 

Key Features of the Master plan for land use/Structural plan for the Greater Kasese 2008 – 2018

i)	The structural plan indicates that there is physical space capacity for urbanisation to accommodate 490,000 people.
ii)	The space available will accommodate urban and non-urban activities, the requisite infrastructure, open spaces and environment protection areas.
iii)	The proposed spatial planning area structural plan and the distribution pattern of activities are influenced by planning and design principles. These include: design of separate urban districts each with 30,000 people.
iv)	Grouping of community facilities as shopping centres, employment centres, school, community centres, and recreation centres among others at the most convenient locations.
v)	Indicates a linked open space and green corridor system separating urban districts and neighbourhoods. 
vi)	Providing recreation and linking it with the countryside, diversity in housing; road network system that is hierarchically structured and interlinked.
vii)	Distribution of satellite employment centres.

Integration of Kilembe Valley parishes to the Municipality

Following an inspection of the proposed municipality boundaries, the MoLG recommended that the municipality should be extended into Kilembe Valley due to the following reasons;

i)	That Kilembe valley was more urban than rural. The infrastructure in the valley such as roads and water system was beyond the capacity of the rural sub-county to manage.
ii)	That there was need for mandatory services such as solid waste management and sewage disposal that needed an urban local government attention.
iii)	That the revival of the mining activity in Kilembe Valley would boost the revenue base of the municipality.
iv)	The process of declaring Kilembe Valley as a planning area by the county and town planning area is ongoing and will be concluded soon.

Local Revenue Base

Adequate revenue is essential to meet the costs of service delivery and sustain local government investments. The local revenue budget has increased from Shs 150 million in 1995 to Shs 800 million in 2008/2009 financial year.

The town has a strong potential of developing into a strong industrial, tourist and commercial hub in the western region after the revival of the railway system, Kilembe Mines and upgrading of the airfield to an international airport. This will attractively improve her revenue base.

The total local revenue presently accounts for 40 percent of the total budget of 2.6 billion for the financial year 2008/2009.

Water Sources

The National Water Sewerage and Corporation (NWSC) which supplies the main town with water is currently producing 1,700 cubic metres of water daily which serves 3,623 units comprised of 593 commercial, 2,838 domestic, 114 institutions, 25 local authorities and 53 parastatals/ministries.

The NWSC has a maximum capacity of producing 2,400 cubic metres per day for which 70 percent (1,700m3) is being utilised. The network length is about 64 kilometres giving service coverage of over 85 percent. 

Kilembe Mines has two gravity flow schemes, which include Kyanzuki and Kanyaruboga and these serve only Kilembe community and the cobalt plant. Kanyaruboga Gravity flow scheme can produce up 50,000 cubic metres and Kyanzuki can produce up to 5,000 cubic metres. Other areas are supplied by gravity flow schemes and boreholes especially Kihara gravity flow scheme and Kilembe gravity flow scheme.

From the above, the new boundaries have adequate water sources that can sustain the industrial, commercial and domestic requirement in the municipality for the next 20 years.

Office Accommodation

Municipal Offices

The Council has set aside Shs 520 million in the 2008/09 financial year budget and a substantial amount has been mobilised to start on the construction of a municipal hall by April 2009 with a view of having the ground floor completed by October 2009.

Division Office

Kasese Central Division shall be housed at the present Boma Ground, Nyamwamba Division at Nyakasanga Parish headquarters and Bulemba Division at the present Kilembe sub-county headquarters.

Power Supply

The town is served by power from three major sources, Umeme national grid supplying the main town with 3.5 MW, Mubuku I for Kilembe mines power station supplying Kilembe Mines and community, as well as Hima Cement Factory with 6 MW, Mubuku III power station supplying KCCL with 10 MW.

Currently there is a new power station being constructed (Tronder power, Mubuku II) with a capacity of producing up to 12MW. This implies that Kasese Municipal Council has adequate power supply sources to support the projected industries.

The Desired future of Kasese Municipality

The vision of Kasese District is “To have a well planned, clear, green and poverty free municipality by 2025.” This vision is also guided by an overall goal of having a metropolitan city stretching from Hima to Kikorongo in the long run and it will be realised through the following:

a)	Physical Planning
b)	Infrastructure Development
c)	Industrialisation 
d)	Promotion of the Tourism Industry 
c)	Environment Protection
d)	Improvement of house hold Income
e)	Local revenue enhancement

2.  Mukono District

In accordance with Article 179, sub-section (3) and (4) of the Constitution of Uganda and the Local Government Act (1997), Third Schedule, Section 32(1), Mukono District Council resolved to create Mukono Municipality out of the merger of Mukono Town Council and Goma sub-county. It has two divisions as seen from here. 

The population on page 13 according to the National Population Census (2002), the proposed municipality has a total population of 93,971 people excluding the day-time population. Considering data from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, the population growth rate of Mukono Town alone is estimated at 17 percent per year. This implies that the required total population of a municipality has already been attained over the years.

Administration

It has administrative offices and that is the road network of 167 kilometres which are motorable and there is a table on page 14 about the roads. There is also information about the health services in the table on page 15. The health centre IVs, the health centre IIs. The health centre IVs are in the two divisions; Mukono Division and Goma Division.  

Education

The proposed municipality has a number of schools both primary and secondary. Then we have the industries for Economic Infrastructure which is very important for a growing centre. The following industries are found in the proposed municipality; Century Bottling Company, Rwenzori Mineral Water, Rocky Industries, Poly Fibre, Bukomo Poultry Breeders, Biyinzika and so many others.

In addition, the development of Namanve Industrial Park is hoped to give a big boost to industrial development in the municipality.  

We also have financial institutions in place. It is well served by many financial institutions as you can see, every bank has a branch. We have the local revenue base and from the above sources of the local revenue bases, business licenses/permits, property rates, market charges, local hotel tax and so on. From the above sources in the proposed municipal area, a total of Shs 412,806,782 was actual revenue collected from local revenue for the financial year 2007/2008 and Goma sub-county also collected Shs 65 million. So these are the actual figures of both divisions. 

The proposed municipality has two prominent hotels; Colline Hotel and Rider Hotel both in Mukono. 

Those are the water sources - there is division office accommodation. There is power supply from Umeme and they also have proper waste management. The councils secured eight acres of land for land filling activities. NEMA and the World Bank joined hands with the town council and the area was fully developed into a modern composite yard handling big volumes of garbage.

This is the desired future Mukono Municipality on page 18. All the details are given like physical planning, infrastructure development, industrialisation, tourism industry and environment protection. We were also given improvement of house hold income on page 19. Then the local revenue enhancement to promote commercial and industrial activities, develop the service industry, carry out property valuation especially in property rating, improvement in revenue assessment, collection and so on and so forth.

3. Hoima Municipality

The proposed Hoima Municipality is located in Bugahya County in Hoima District. These are the findings: 

Hoima District Local Council sat and under that minute 41/2008 resolved to create Hoima Municipality. The District Executive Committee in accordance with the Local Government Act widely consulted the sub-counties of Busiisi, Buhanika, Buhimba, Bugambe, Kitoba and Hoima Town Council on the creation of the municipal boundaries, divisions, wards and cells to constitute Hoima Municipality. The sub-county councils equally submitted their council resolutions in support of ceding their areas to constitute the new boundaries.

Four divisions were proposed and we can see them on page 20 and the details of even the cells are also provided by this report. The district council proposed Hoima Municipality boundaries to be expanded to include other administrative areas. So, the municipality will have 124 villages and 14 wards. The details of these cells and divisions are on page 20 and 21 and more details are on page 22. 	

On page 23, we have the population of the proposed municipality. It has a population of 116,000 people with 57,000 men and 59,000 females as you can see. The estimated area that the proposed municipality will occupy is over 100 square kilometres. There are four divisions and the details are provided on page 23.

Revenue Generation

The main sources of locally generated revenue and we can see them - land fees, property income and Local Service Tax. These are estimated to raise about Shs 640 million out of a total budget of Shs 1.47 billion. In the Financial Year 2007/2008, the local revenue went up to Shs 530 million.

Service Delivery

It is here and it is provided. The schools are also given in detail. We have 21 secondary schools and health services which are also provided on page 24. On page 25, we are given the details of these health centres which are private and Government for the purpose of giving us the details of the municipality.

We have roads on page 26 which is very important. Hoima Town Council has a road network of 162.7 kilometres although 6.7 kilometres is the only road coverage with tarmac. 

However, there is a new development - the tarmacking of Hoima-Busunju Road and the proposed Hoima-Kaiso-Toonya road, and Masindi-Kyenjojo roads will greatly improve accessibility and reliability of the road network and its related economic attractiveness to investment. 

There is sufficient water supply under National Water and Sewerage Corporation. They have a site for waste management. There are ample administrative offices. On page 27, Hoima Town Council has five private local FM radio stations, one local TV station and the UBC station all important for ICT services.

We have energy. New energy is being provided and there is a huge potential for energy development. There is a mini HEP project at Wambabya and so on. That is the personnel on page 27 and on page 28 we have financial institutions. Hoima Town has a number of commercial banks namely; Centenary, Posta, KCB, DFCU and many others. 

Now on page 29, we move to Busia Municipality. That is the fourth one:

4. Busia Municipality 

Busia District Council under minute BTC LG 28/2006, resolved to upgrade Busia Town Council to a municipality. This request was forwarded to the Ministry of Local Government for consideration in February 2008. 

The justifications for the request for a municipal status included:

a)	The town council covers approximately 33 square kilometres of land.  
b)	The population of Busia Town Council was 37,842, according to the population census of 2002.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not know why you are holding additional meetings in that corner, and very loudly! 

MS BOONA: The population projection is 40,988 and the population growth rate is 2.75 percent annually. 

c) Capacity to meet its cost of service delivery:
(i) We have personnel of key posts in place.  
(ii) The revenue and expenditure plan is also in place.  
d) 	Busia Town Council has three buildings used as offices; they are also in place. 
e) 	Water sources of Busia: there is provision of boreholes out of which seven boreholes serve pipe water and other water sources.

f) Classification of Urban Councils into Municipalities.

According to the revised copy of the Public Service Commission Report (2005) on restructuring of local governments and staffing levels, Busia Town Council is classified as a municipality and being regarded as a municipality. The staff structure being implemented in Busia town is model 3, which is of a municipality nature.

There are two divisions proposed; eastern and western. Busia hopes to benefit from the following, if granted a municipality status:

a)	Improved and widened service delivery. The division councils will be created, thus widening delivery of services both politically and technically.
b)	More jobs will be created at the divisional council and as such, improve the employment scheme.
c)	A municipal contracts committee will be established to offer procurement services.  This will save the town council from the district bureaucracy which takes a lot of time.
d)	The Central Government grants will be received directly by the municipality authority without going through the CAO’s office.  This will save time and unnecessary delays in processing funds. 
e)	Strengthening the East African regional federation, which is very important with the municipality counterpart in the Republic of Kenya, will be a special benefit for development partnership and strengthening of the region.

5. Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality

Bushenyi-Ishaka Town Council resolved to elevate the town council to a municipality in a meeting held on 24 June 2004 under minute 29/2004. 

The committee was informed about the justifications for a municipal status and got convinced that:   

i)	Bushenyi-Ishaka Town Council has since its inception in 1974 grown at a very fast rate, especially in terms of urbanisation.  It has six civic centres like Nyakabibirizi and so forth.  These are all well-built areas and well-serviced with social services.  

ii)	The population is expected to be, with the neighbouring areas joining this municipal council, 83,616 people. The population is estimated at above 100,000 people. The population growth was over-stretching the capacity of the town council to deliver adequate services to the people using locally-raised revenue.  

iii)	The town is at the hub of the international routes to Rwanda, Congo, Mbarara, Ntungamo, Rukungiri and the tourism destination areas of Bunyaruguru, Kasese and Queen Elizabeth National Park.

iv)	Bushenyi-Ishaka Town Council has a good financial base. In 2009/2010, it was anticipated that the town council would fund over 50 percent of its budget.

v)	It has enough accommodation and it has been growing.

vi)	Bushenyi-Ishaka Town Council has a new structure plan like many other municipalities. The municipal status will enhance implementation of the plans through better resourcing and having more qualified personnel.

vii)	The economic activities include: businesses, banking and other educational institutions. 

viii)	In addition, Bushenyi, being at the hub of the routes to several districts and countries and the tourism potential areas, has unutilised potential to attract people to stay in the areas. The municipal status will provide more infrastructural support, including, better roads, health facilities and so forth.

ix)	Bushenyi-Ishaka Town Council has an economically-viable hinterland to support the growth of the town. It has tea estates in Kyamuhunga and other products like the banana cake, the coffee production and so forth. 

x)	Bushenyi Town Council has an opportunity for future expansion. The surrounding areas will subsequently and greatly benefit from the growth of the town in terms of employment opportunities; markets for the agricultural products.

xi)	A municipality status will, therefore, facilitate a deliberate effort to plan and foster rapid urbanisation.

6.	Masindi Municipality 

Masindi District Council sat on 7 and 8 May 2009 under minute 216/05/2009 in which it was agreed to create Masindi Municipal Council. The resolution was presented to the committee.

The proposed municipal council covers 78 villages with an estimated population of 114,600 people.

These are some of the justifications to elevate Masindi to a municipal status:

a)	The population growth is 8.3 percent and it demands more resources. 
b)	Masindi is located within the oil rich Albertine Graben area where oil exploration is ongoing with the early production scheme anticipated to commence within one calendar year. Oil discovery calls for rapid expansion of the town, requiring proper physical planning which can well be achieved through a municipality. 
c)	It also has financial institutions, as we see. 
d)	It has regional offices for lands, High Court, Police Training School and Prisons.
e)	It has reliable local revenue, currently contributing 70 per cent to the total annual income of about Shs 1 billion.

7.	Iganga Municipality

Iganga District Council sat in 2007 under minute 36/03/2007 and approved a resolution by Iganga Town Council under minute FC/ITC/24/09/06 to elevate Iganga Town Council to a municipality.   This resolution was presented to the committee.#

The justifications for a municipality are also included: 

a)	It is a fast-growing town in Eastern Uganda.
b)	It covers 4.53 square kilometres.
c)	The day population is 120,000 and the night population is lower; the population growth rate is 4 percent per year.
d)	It has land for expansion, which is very much available.
e)	It has main district hospitals Nakavule and others. 
f)	It also has educational institutions. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Really, hon. Okecho!

MS BOONA: The Town Council hoped that if granted municipal status, it would benefit from proceeds such as: improved governance, central Government funding, creation of more jobs, enhanced planned development, attraction of investors, and improved service delivery.

8.	Ntungamo Municipality 

Ntungamo town attained town board status in 1983. It was later accorded the town council status in 1994. It is situated in Ruhama County, 65 kilometres from Mbarara town along Mbarara-Kabale Highway and covers an area of 56 square kilometres. 

The Ntungamo District Council sat on 11 May 2010 under Minute NDLGC.27/May 2010 and resolved to create Ntungamo Municipality.  

Ntungamo Municipality upon approval will comprise of the following divisions: Eastern Division, Western Division and Central Division and wards.

The Population

According to the 2002 population census, Ntungamo Town Council has a night population of 13,342 people.  Considering the estimated population growth rate, it is projected to be 19,504 people currently. For the administrative set up, we are giving the details: six wards and 26 cells.  

Infrastructure 

There is a road network; a garbage collection; two government-aided health facilities and we have educational institutions in place. 

Justification of the request for municipality status:
 
i)	Capacity to meet the cost of delivery of social services.

	The analysis of the budget performance for the past five financial years demonstrates the town council’s capacity to raise revenue adequate to meet the demands of the services by the population.

(ii)	Office space and equipment. The town council has got an administration block with 20 office rooms and a council hall with a sitting capacity of 50 people that has been built for a period of 5 years using locally generated revenue. There is also enough space for expansion because the offices are located on a 2.5 acre piece of land that is rightfully owned by the town council.

(iii)	Presence of a master plan for land use; and

(iv)	Presence of water sources: there is piped water system generated from two sources, that is, around Ntungamo. 

Concern

The committee noted with concern that some districts and municipalities that qualified and had applied for elevation to a city status were taking too long to be considered. The districts/municipalities cited where Mbarara, Gulu and Jinja.

Conclusion

Having held consultative meetings and conducted field surveys of some of the proposed municipalities, the committee is satisfied that all the requirements stipulated under regulation 32 of the Third Schedule of the Local Government Act, for the creation of a municipality have been met by Hoima, Mukono, Kasese, Iganga, Masindi, Bushenyi, Ntungamo and Busia town councils. The population is sufficient; the capacity to provide services is sufficient; the economic potential exists and there is a high rate of urbanisation and expansion.   

Elevation of these town councils to municipality status will be consistent with Government strategy to address challenges of rapid urbanisation through elevating fast growing town councils into viable and planned municipalities. Furthermore, it will facilitate proper physical planning, development control and sustainable service delivery to the population. 

Recommendations

The committee now recommends that be it resolved by Parliament that: 

1.	Hoima Municipality to cover the current Hoima Town council: Busiisi sub-county, the villages of Bulera, Kitagi and Kisweka in Kinogozi Parish from Buhimba sub-county; the villages of Kigabu, Kirubika, Wabiku, Wakyoya/Kiduma and parts of Kiriisa, Kihamba, Kihungura, Nyarugabo in Nyarugabo parish from Bugambe sub-county, the villages of Bujwahya, Kyesiga East, Kyesiga West, Kijwenge, Buhiiga, Parajwoki, Bulemwa, Mwendate area, Kikere area, Karongo area, Bubare and Budaka from Kitoba sub-county; the villages of Mparo West and Mparo South, Kyaruiru and Bulinda, Bwanya and Kyedikyo, Kiryabana and Kichwamba, Bucunga and Kihembe, Butanjwa and Kihanga, Kyentale, Kidoti, Kyakapeya, Kikwatamigo, Butebere, Kitinti, Nyakambugu, Mbogwe, Buhanika and Kihule from Buhanika sub county in Hoima District, be upgraded to a municipality to meet the requirement of Article 178(4) of the Constitution;

2.	Mukono Municipality, to cover the existing Mukono Town Council and Goma sub-county in Mukono District be created;

3.	Kasese Municipality, to cover the existing Kasese Town Council and Kilembe Mines in Kasese District, be created;

4.	Iganga Municipality, to cover the existing Iganga Town Council in Iganga District, be created;

5.	Masindi Municipality (to cover the existing Masindi Town Council and Karujubu and Nyangahya sub-counties and 14 villages of Miirya, Kyeema, Kyakoto, Bigando, Kyamwiti, Nyabinyira, Kikonya, Kigulya - Kyetegya, Nyakalogi, Kisanja, Isimba, Kyakasozi, Kyamujwara and Goroora villages from Miirya sub county in Masindi district) be created;

6.	Bushenyi–Ishaka Municipality to cover the existing Bushenyi-Ishaka Town Council and Mazinga Parish from Kakanju sub-county, Kashenyi and Buramba parishes from Nyabubare sub county, Rwenjeru parish from Kyabugyimbi sub-county, the villages of Kayojo, Rwandaro Kikuba Central, Masya, Nombe Kichwamba, Mabare, Kamira, Ruharo central and Kyabumbaire all from Ruharo Parish in Bumbaire sub-county and villages of Ruyaayo, Rwengoma, Rweibare, Bunyarigi, Kashekye central and Rwakagina from Bunyarigi Parish in Ibaare sub-county in Bushenyi District be created;

7.	Ntungamo Municipality, to cover the existing Ntungamo Town Council in Ntungamo District be created;

8.	Busia Municipality, to cover the existing Busia Town Council in Busia District, be created; and 

9.	That the effective date for the eight municipalities be 1 July 2010.

10.	The Ministry should expedite the process of elevating all the districts/municipalities that qualify to a city status, and to plan appropriately to ensure that there is a balance in urbanisation throughout the country. Madam Speaker and Hon. Members, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. As you recall, last week - we have actually debated the request - what was actually remaining was justification, it is not a new matter. So, can I put the question to it?

1.01
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County, Kibaale): Madam Speaker, there are municipalities that we debated, if the original motion had come the way it was, I would have no problem with you putting the question, but there are municipalities that have just been inserted in -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The reason I sent this matter back to the committee was to deal with those which had been added. There is nothing new here.

1.01
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr John Arumadri): Madam Speaker, I rise to give information as Shadow Minister of Local Government. When I sat in this committee, many of the Members listed here did not sign; not that they were not available but we had some misgivings because the committee did not revisit some of the requests being made by the minister here. 

So, our view was that ample time should be given to the committee to visit those areas, which we have not considered. But at the time of this report, the eye can even see that one or two need not to be visited. Like Iganga, not that, Madam Speaker, your route to Kamuli is through Iganga but the eye can see that Iganga is a big place and it does not need visiting. Like Masindi; Masindi is a big place, it is long overdue but the minister’s position was that these are places which were applied for.

My position as shadow minister is that municipalities should not be given or granted like districts where people wish. Urban areas develop naturally; studies should be done periodically to see over the last five or so years, which town board has developed sufficiently to qualify to be upgraded to a town council.

In the same period, town councils should also be reviewed to see if they can be upgraded to municipalities; this study needs to be done over a period of time but what is happening here is that people have demanded. It means I can come and say, “Okolo in my village or Rhino Camp in my village should -(Interjections)- yes, if we are using the same yardstick. So, my view is that Parliament should not be in a hurry to pass some of these areas, which have not been visited because we are creating —

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of procedure, hon. Baryomunsi.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure citing our rule. Our rules clearly state that once the majority members have signed the report and you disagree with some of the recommendations, then you generate a minority report, which is annexed to the main report and it is presented. 

Is it procedurally right for my friend hon. Arumadri to argue when he failed to generate a minority report? (Interjections) Yes, but he is a Member of Parliament. Is it procedurally right for him to fail to generate a minority report and then claim to present a minority report, which is not written? Is it procedurally right? I want to be guided.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Arumadri, you are a Member of this committee, if you had disagreements really you should have indicated them in the normal way because that is part of our rules.

MR ARUMADRI: Madam Speaker, we are dealing with colleagues. We do not want to appear to be blocking requests by colleagues. Consensus is the best thing to do. If I come here with a minority report and a municipality or a district is left behind, I will be in the bull’s eye that, “If it were not for this man from Madi-Okolo, we would be home and dry”. That is not good. I am just giving this as a background to what transpired in the committee. You can either take it or leave it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Arumadri, we appreciate your observations but I think the failure in policy should not be used as a bar to now stop the process.

1.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Perez Ahabwe): Madam Speaker, certainly I appreciate the concerns and possibly new innovations from hon. Arumadri but the procedure for the creation of urban entities is laid down under the Local Government Act, section 7 sub-section (2)(a), which reads as follows: “A district council may, with the approval of Parliament, create a municipality within its area of jurisdiction in accordance with paragraph 32 of the third schedule of this Act”.

This is very plain English; it is not even a matter of law. Once a district council has decided that this urban entity qualifies to be elevated, they submit a request and then we use our technical expertise to assess and then we come to Parliament for approval. If you want to change the procedure, then I think you change the law. That is my view. Thank you.

1.08
MR JIM MUHWEZI (NRM, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Since we adjourned on this matter of municipality creation, Rukungiri District did resolve and applied to Government and all the necessary consultations were made and the committee responsible for Local Government has been consulted. All the data necessary for the creation of a municipality for Rukungiri Town Council has been submitted. By far, Rukungiri is bigger than some of the municipalities created. 

The district of Rukungiri was created in 1974, it has a population of 107,000; it has 48.2 square kilometres; it has the capacity to meet its financial requirements; it has got a brand new block of four storeys; it has got infrastructure, hospitals, health centres and many institutions [MR TINKASIIMIRE: “Airport.”] -(Laughter)- I beg that the minister be allowed as he intended to do, to amend this motion to include Rukungiri Municipality. (Laughter)

1.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Perez Ahabwe): Madam Speaker, honourable colleagues, it is true I received submissions from Rukungiri. Unfortunately, the committee has already made their report. I widely consulted some leaders in Cabinet and when I looked at the law, it is actually the district that is mandated to create municipalities and it is the mandate of Parliament to approve. 

As far as Government is concerned - and I am emphatic that as far as Government is concerned, we have no objection. We have the money to finance the municipalities. We are only seconding this proposal to Parliament and once approved, we have no objection, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yeah, hon. Members, I appreciate the desire of the people from Rukungiri to get a municipality, but if we permit amendments from the Floor, all those who have applied are going to want to - so can I ask the minister, yes, to take note of these requests and bring another proposal? 

Yes Minister, hon. Kiryapawo is complaining and others are also complaining. No! Otherwise I shall be forced to allow other Members of Parliament to make their requests. It is not a good precedent. No, hon. Members, I appreciate your desire; I support you and I also want to support all the other Members but we must go through the right channels. If I open the gate, where will I stop? No. Minister, please take note of the requests and come with another proposal. For now I want to put the question.

I put the question that the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the creation of Kasese, Hoima, Mukono, Iganga, Masindi - 

HON. MEMBERS: One by one. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Wait. Yes, Bushenyi, Ntungamo and Busia Municipalities - 

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate that you are putting the question on the report of the committee. But I also want to draw your attention to Article 179 sub-articles (2) and (4). I think this is an alteration of a boundary -(Interjections)- Ok, I withdraw.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that this House adopt the report of the committee as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE ASSESSMENT OF THE FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT PROJECT, ADB LOAN

1.16
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Oliver Wonekha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members, this is a continuation of the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, on the assessment of the utilisation and implementation of the fisheries development project loan.

Before I was rudely interrupted, I was on page 10 of the report and I was referring to the Auditor-General’s report on the special audit of the fisheries development project. Addressing ourselves to the Auditor-General’s report, the committee interacted with the Auditor-General on the following: 

i) 	The special audit report on the Fisheries Development Project.
ii) 	The financial statements for the project for the year that ended 30 June 2008.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, referring to the extension of the Fisheries Development Project to 2010, this is just to remind you that the project should have ended by now. So, there was need to extend the project.

The committee observed that whereas the Fisheries Development Project’s life had been extended to 2010, it needed to be backed by written evidence. 

The accounting officer submitted a letter of undertaking, which indicated the extension of the project and the reference is as given in the report from the African Development Bank. It is dated 17 August 2009. It is here in this file, laid on the Table, Madam Speaker.

The Verification of the Letter

In consultation with the Auditor-General, the committee noted that the project was properly extended to 31 December 2010.
 
The Un-funded Landing Sites 

i)	Thirty landing sites were planned to be constructed along lakes Victoria, Kyoga, Albert, Edward and George. It was noted that only 10 were under construction; two had tenders awarded in January 2009 and the balance of 18 markets had not been tendered out.

ii)	The committee further noted that since the project was closing in January 2010, the construction of the 18 landing sites might not be fully undertaken. It was also noted that out of the ten under construction, four were behind schedule.  

The accounting officer’s response was that:

i) 	Twelve of the 30 landing sites were being constructed. The project had experienced a gap in financing of the civil works component. Also the African Development Bank had noted, through the Project Mid-term Review Mission, that the fisheries infrastructures were under–costed at project appraisal level. 

ii) 	In addition to the above, construction of civil works under the project was affected by the price escalation of civil engineering materials.

iii) 	Over 75 percent of the project funds were meant for infrastructure development. Hence the above factors had grossly affected the civil works component especially the fish landing sites which were tendered out late.

iv) 	Tendering out of lot III could not be undertaken until the Government of Uganda and ADB had agreed on the revision of the project budget at mid-term review, which was completed in April 2008, hence, 18 landing sites remained unfunded.

The contractor who was awarded the contract for the construction of four landing sites that were behind schedule had his contract terminated recently by the Ministry of Agriculture on the advice of the supervising consultant who cited failure to perform and to provide security to back extension of his contract. The ministry was in the process of consulting with ADB to identify a new contractor. 

The mid-term review report, which is here on the Table, on page 21, section 4(2)(6), recommended a reduction in the landing sites to be constructed from 30 to 14 due to inadequate resources and price escalation. 

He added that later this number was further reduced from 14 to 12. A copy of evidence to this effect was provided in an aide memoire which is also laid here on Table. It was aide memoire of the Agricultural Portfolio Improvement Plan Mission of 11 – 23 August 2008; all that is contained in a letter that is also laid here on the Table.

After consultation with the Auditor-General on the response of the accounting officer, the committee noted that there was a mutual agreement to reduce the landing sites from 30 to 14 and thereafter to 12 because of budgetary limitations. 

The cost of supply and installation of flake ice equipment was Euros 649,574.96.

The committee recommended that delivery, installation and commissioning of the flake ice equipment should be followed up in the next audit.

On utilisation of the funds for the markets which were not to be constructed, the committee noted that 20 out of 21 markets were constructed, which raised concern over the utilisation of funds for the work not done. 

The accounting officer stated that Kalangala District decided to relocate the landing site from Lutoboka to Mwena, the same site where the fish market was originally supposed to be constructed. As a result, the construction of the market was dropped as it was found no longer necessary. The construction of the additional market was put on hold awaiting an assessment of the project finances especially the ongoing civil works.

The accounting officer further stated that the original budget for construction of 21 markets stood at US $507,360. Actual construction of 20 markets stood at US $1,344,640. Should there be any balances on the overall civil works vote after procuring a contractor to complete the remaining works under the contract that was terminated; the issue of the remaining market shall be tackled. 

On the completion and upgrading of the markets beyond the original intended completion period; the committee observed that there were markets, which were handed over although substantially incomplete, since they did not have the required amenities like water, electricity, sewage systems and coolers.

Under the construction of fish markets, the upgrading of Katwe Market, which was later shifted to Bakuli, was to be carried out in addition to establishing model fish markets in ten rural towns and ten urban areas.

The accounting officer’s response was that at completion some critical snags, including lack of water and power in the markets, were identified. These led to the delay to hand over the markets.

In collaboration with the various local authorities, the Ministry of Agriculture has conducted sensitisation workshops to discuss proper utilisation of the facilities with the local authorities and leaders of the market vendors. 

The progress of the construction of the markets was affected by floods in the North and Northeast; war and Ebola outbreak in Congo in the Southwest; the post-election violence in Kenya and change of site from Katwe to Bakuli in Kampala. This led to delayed completion of the works. However, these markets have all been completed and handed over. The accounting officer provided a detailed status report of the 20 markets constructed. The list of those markets, Madam Speaker, is right here.

After consultation with the Auditor-General on the accounting officer’s response, the committee noted that confirmation of the status of the 20 markets requires physical inspection which could not be undertaken in a short period of time. At that time we could not do it, Madam Speaker.

The committee recommends that the matter should be followed up in the next audit.

Mpondwe Fish Market in Kasese District

The committee noted with concern the construction of Mpondwe Fish Market beyond the boarder post towards the Democratic Republic of Congo.

The accounting officer stated that the district authorities of the benefiting districts provided the land where the markets were constructed and that the site was agreed upon and was considered suitable by Kasese District authorities. 

The accounting officer further stated that the hon. Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries had written a letter to the two line ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and that of Internal Affairs regarding the matter with a view of finding a solution.

After consultation with the Auditor-General, that is our consultation on the accounting officer’s response, the committee noted that the intervention of the honourable minister to have the problem solved is welcome. In fact the letter she wrote is also laid here on the Table. 

The committee recommends that the customs post should be moved or shifted back to its original position.

The Ministry of Agriculture should seek for a commitment letter of understanding between the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Uganda Revenue Authority on the matter so as not to inconvenience the market users.

The outcome of the above intervention should be followed up in the next audit. The letter was written, Madam Speaker, and as I said it is right here.

On the facilities on the ice plants, hatchery and laboratory equipment which had not yet been procured at the time of the audit, the committee noted that it was planned that eight ice plants with capacity of 8 metric tones per day would be installed in the eight Class 1 landing sites. These landing sites are: Bwondha, Kiyindi, Lolwe Islands, Mwena, Lwampanga, Bukungu and Butiaba. 

In addition, storage facilities were to be constructed at all landing sites. However, at the time of audit in January 2009, the ice plants had not been procured.

The accounting officer’s response was that the procurement of the above equipment was to be initiated after substantial completion of the civil works under which the equipment would be sheltered to avoid storage problems.

The contract for supply of the eight ice plants was signed on 23 June 2009 and the items were expected in the country in November 2009. 

The tenders for supply of hatchery and laboratory equipment were advertised. However, no response was received. The matter was discussed by Government of Uganda and African Development Bank and it was agreed to disaggregate the items into separate lots; to make it easy for the suppliers. This exercise had been completed. A copy of the signed contract for the ice plant facilities was submitted indicating that the items had been re-tendered. That copy is here. The committee dropped the matter.

The patrol boats which do not meet the technical specifications (They were supposed to be fitted with gun mountings)

The committee noted that the project procured eight patrol boats from M/S Sinnuatic BV International of the Netherlands at a cost of Euro 1,235,910.  The boats were procured under the quality assurance component for purposes of improved monitoring, control and surveillance, and for the enforcement of the necessary regulations for the sustainable management of the resource. The boats were delivered, however, a swivel front and rear gun for a light machine gun were not fitted as required in the technical specifications.

The accounting officer stated that the supplier required the specification of the gun in order to fabricate the suitable swivel gun mounting. Such specification could only be provided with knowledge of the type of gun to be mounted. Since the department was planning to depend on various security agencies for provision of security cover, it was not necessary to provide specification for a particular gun - this was not one of the critical parts. It was dropped and the supplier did not include it in the quotation.

The accounting officer further stated that the supplier did not quote for gun mounting. This is evidenced by the mid-term review report, page 34, that reflects a saving of UA 78,840 on procurement of boats, and the letter from the supplier indicating omission of the gun mounting in his quotation. 

After consultation with the Auditor-General on the accounting officer’s response, the committee noted:

a)	That the supplier was allowed to proceed to submit their quotation for the supply of patrol boats without the gun mounting because the specifications were not provided for in the agreement.

b)	The above changes would create a saving of UA 78,840 on the procurement of these boats.

The committee observed that in spite of the savings, there is a risk that the lives of the security personnel on patrol could be endangered if the boats are not fitted with gun mounting that are relevant for patrols on water.

The committee recommends that the boats should be fitted with gun mountings that are relevant for patrols on water.

Delay the signing of civil works contracts

The committee noted that the project became effective in 2003. However, there were delays in commencing civil works. The contracts for civil works were only signed in June 2007.

The accounting officer stated that the civil works could only be undertaken after completion of the architectural and engineering designs. The design consultants could only start their work after Government of Uganda had secured proof of land ownership to the sites of the works.  During project appraisal, the districts promised to provide land free of encumbrances and with proof of ownership.  This was found not to be the case at the time of implementation, hence the delays.

The Government of Uganda counterpart funding obligations and diversion of some of the releases to non-project activities

The committee noted that the Government of Uganda was not adequately meeting its counterpart funding obligations. For the period under review (2003 – 2009), Government of Uganda was supposed to contribute Shs 9,594,800,000 as counterpart funding. However, only Shs 2,260,704,200 had been released. This affected the timely implementation of project activities.

In addition, it was noted that out of Shs 2,260,704,200 released, only Shs 406,926,756 was disbursed to the project. No evidence of authority to divert the funds was provided.

The committee further noted from the Auditor-General’s report that:

i)	No ledgers were maintained for the Government of Uganda counterpart expenditures. The Auditor-General could, therefore, not confirm the accuracy of the amounts reflected as counterpart expenditures in the financial statements.

ii)	There were instances where funds were spent on questionable activities in respect to appointments that were not within the approved staffing structure and payments to the executing ministry departments and staff. These expenditures were not legible for payment under the project and should not have been included in the financial statements.

iii)	The Auditor-General was unable to carry out audit tests on remittances amounting to Shs 199,211,502 released –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe, hon. Chair, you will state the problem and recommendations. These responses of the accounting officers, I think, are not necessary.

MS WONEKHA: Okay, the Auditor-General’s complaints are there. Now let me move to Government of Uganda counterpart funding obligations and I think it is important that –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They are important?

MS WONEKHA: Yeah! So, the next issue is about Government of Uganda counterpart funding obligations. 
In consultation with the Auditor-General, the Government of Uganda was supposed to contribute funding to the project as follows – I think this is important because Government counterpart funding hardly ever comes on time and this is one example where Government really fought us to make project implementation very difficult.

The committee observed that Government was not fully complying with this provision of the agreement, as the counterpart funding disbursed to the project was always less than the agreed percentages.

The committee recommends that Government should fully comply with the provision of the agreement for counterpart funding, and disbursements should be made on time.

The enactment of the Fish Act

Madam Speaker, I would like to report that up to date, the Act in place dates back to 1964.

The committee recommends that the Fish Act, 1964 should be expedited and brought to the House as fast as possible.

Delay in finalising contracts for construction of four regional fish fry centres in Kajjansi, Bushenyi, Gulu and Mbale 

The committee observed that there were delays in finalising the contracts.  Whereas the contract was signed in December 2007, work only commenced in April 2008.  At the time of audit in January 2009, civil works were estimated by management at 45 percent for Gulu, 50 percent for Bushenyi and 35 percent for Mbale.

The commencement on the implementation of this sub-component, fish pond and hatchery construction design and works supervision contract, was signed between the Government of Uganda and a Canadian Fisheries Consultant on 2 February 2006. This contract is laid here.  

The contracts for the construction of ponds and hatcheries at Kajjansi and the three regional fry production centres at Bushenyi, Gulu and Mbale were signed on the 11th December, 2007.

After designing, the consultant withdrew from the contract due to rejection of his request for additional fees by Government of Uganda and the ADB. The construction works could only commence in April 2008 (five months after signing of the contracts), after an interim supervision arrangement had been put in place.  In addition, the contractor for the Mbale site failed to execute the advance guarantee and performance bonds in addition to failing to perform, leading to termination of the contract. The works were re-tendered and are currently progressing. 

The contract for the construction of ponds and hatcheries at Kajjansi and three regional fry production centres at Bushenyi, Gulu and Mbale were signed in December 2007 and is hereby laid on the Table.

Committee recommendation
 
MAAIF should expedite the process of acquiring land titles for all projects under the project, fish fry centres inclusive. 

Failure to provide microfinance to the fisher folk

The project was also supposed to provide microfinance to fish farmers, traders and processors. The resources allocated to this activity amounted to Shs 3,922,580,000. It was observed at the time of audit that this activity had failed to take off.
	The accounting officer responded that:

a)	This component was to be managed through direct negotiations between MAAIF and the Rural Microfinance Support Project (RMSP) which was later restructured to Microfinance Support Centre Limited (MSCL). This component, in short, never took off. 

b)	The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (MFPED) in collaboration with the ADB deemed the MSCL’s capacity at that time not sufficient to achieve the set project objectives. They, therefore, advised MAAIF to open up the procurement of the management of the credit through competitive bidding.

c)	Two attempts made to engage financial institutions to administer the funds failed as the recruitment processes did not produce any credible financial institutions. The problems include the scarcity of institutions with rural outreach; the lack of agricultural sector credit products; the management weaknesses of existing institutions; and issues relating to interest rates and credit conditions which were embedded in the loan agreement.  Government’s proposal to ADB to allocate the funds under this component to the Prosperity for All programme was rejected by ADB. The Government and the ADB agreed to reallocate the funds for micro-credit (UA 1.39million) to finance infrastructure to cushion the shortfall in the financing of the works under the component.

Recommendation

The committee dropped the matter.

NEMA Clearance for construction of the landing sites

The committee noted that section 5.2(1) of the project loan agreement required the project to provide evidence that land required for the construction of fish landing centres and fish markets had been officially allocated and cleared by NEMA within six months of signing the agreement. 

However, it was observed that the project had not secured clearance from NEMA authorizing them to construct the land sites. Construction of landing sites was ongoing contrary to the NEMA regulations. As it is now, the certificate of clearance from NEMA was provided. So, that is no longer an issue.

There was a risk that construction of the landing sites may be delayed and funds lost in case NEMA did not clear the activities.

The accounting officer provided a certificate of clearance from NEMA authorizing the construction of the land sites. 

Verification

After consultation with the AG on the AO’s response, the committee noted that the project met the required approval to enable constructions to be undertaken.

Committee recommendation

The committee dropped the matter.

Rate of implementation of project activities being slow

The committee noted that the rate of implementation of project activities was slow. As at 30 June 2008, the project had utilized UA 5,004,713 out of UA 22,000,000 implying that 23 percent of the activities had been implemented. The project was expected to close in December 2009.

The accounting officer recommended that:

i) 	The civil works component made up over 75 percent of the project.  The civil works could only be undertaken later in the project than earlier because of the preparatory studies followed by actual designing which had to be undertaken.

ii) 	The project design was such that the technical designs and studies were supposed to be undertaken in the year 2000. However, these activities were only undertaken after project effectiveness in 2003. This led to delayed implementation of the civil works and subsequently delayed disbursement of project funds. As earlier indicated, the technical designs were also delayed by the absence of proof of land ownership.

iii) 	The disbursement rate stood at 70 percent and should reach 90 percent by closure of the financial year 2009/10. Over 95 percent of the funds had already been committed in form of signed contracts.

Committee recommendation

The committee dropped the matter.

Non-remittance of statutory deductions (The VAT component on the contractor’s claims)

The committee noted that VAT totalling to Shs 3,341,404,937 had not been paid to Uganda Revenue Authority by the Government of Uganda as part of its obligation. This is contrary to the VAT Act and was bound to attract penalties for the Government, and hence, increase the overall cost of the project.

The accounting officer responded that:
 
i) 	The MAAIF budget ceiling under the MTEF did not provide for adequate funds to the project to meet the tax obligations. In recent meetings between MAAIF, MoFPED and ADB, this matter had been discussed and as a follow-up, arrears of taxes had been audited, compiled and submitted to the Ministry of Finance for necessary action.

ii) 	The contract staff were paid from Government counterpart funds under the IFMS. The NSSF deduction was, therefore, transferred by EFT and not by cheque.

iii) 	Cheques for With Holding Tax (WHT) and PAYE deducted from staff paid from donor funds could not be delivered because they would be reflected on the financial reports as payment of taxes from donor funds, contrary to the project agreement. They have since been cancelled and the cashbook adjusted accordingly.

iv) 	Subsequently, in 2008/2009, a meeting was convened by the accountant-general involving URA and a way forward was agreed upon.

Committee recommendation

Subsequent audits should confirm the above claim.

The national project coordinator working as head of fish quality assurance, hence, not spending adequate time on the project

The committee noted that the national project coordinator was still working as head of fish quality assurance unit in the department of fisheries resources, hence, was not spending adequate time on the project contrary to ADB’s recommendation. 

The accounting officer responded that the project coordinator had been relieved of other duties as recommended by the ADB.  In addition, a deputy national project coordinator was appointed to improve on project staffing and hence, project implementation.

Committee recommendation

The committee dropped the matter.

The financial statements for the project for the year ended 30 June 2008

The committee noted that the AG carried out a review on the project system of financial management and the following shortcomings were noted:

Book keeping:
•	The cash book for the special foreign exchange account was not up to date.
•	No cash book was maintained for a revolving fund account.
•	No ledger was maintained for Government counterpart expenditures.
•	No fixed assets register was maintained contrary to the requirements by the bank’s disbursement handbook.

The accounting officer responded that: 

i) 	The project kept two cash books for each account; one electronic spreadsheet and the other manual. At the time of the audit, the electronic cash books were all up to date. A manual cashbook was maintained alongside the electronic one.

ii) 	A cashbook was not maintained for the credit revolving fund because the revolving fund was never operational. The money was supposed to be loaned to fisheries stakeholders through a microfinance institution (MFI) at the prevailing market interest rates. The MFIs were not attracted to the terms of the fund. The credit funds were reallocated to infrastructure.

iii) The project kept electronic ledgers from which financial statements were prepared. The project kept an electronic asset register. This register was printed out and audited. Movements of assets were recorded in the stores records. An asset schedule as at 30 June 2008 was provided.

iv) 	The project kept both manual and spreadsheet records of financial dealings. The first entries were made on the spreadsheet ledgers and memorandum accounts before being transferred to the manual books. Copies of the spreadsheet ledgers could be certified as actual entries of financial transactions.

The accounting officer further stated that: 

a)	At the time of audit, the manual cash book was updated up to only April 2008, but the electronic cash book on the spreadsheet was up to date.

b)	At that moment, all required books of account were maintained and were up to date.

Committee recommendation

The committee dropped the matter.

Cash Management

No bank reconciliations for the special foreign exchange account were prepared during the year. In addition, the bank reconciliation for the special local currency account was only prepared during the time of audit.

Instances were noted where cheques ready for issuance to suppliers were not distributed.

No follow-up was carried out on cheques that had been outstanding for a long time.

No evidence of independent review was made on accountabilities submitted. Those were the observations of the Auditor-General. 

The accounting officer in his reply on pages 31 and 32 stated that:

i) 	It was the practice in the ministry that all payments transit in the manual cashbooks from project coordinators to the permanent secretary and principal accountant. On the IFMS, there was always an up to date reconciliation statement. The payments were accompanied by bank reconciliation statements and bank statements for the previous month. This was done to ensure timely bank reconciliation.
 
ii) 	The bank reconciliation statements were maintained on electronic sheets. Replacement of two copies which were missing from the cash book were printed out during the audit. This did not construe non-preparation of bank reconciliation.

iii) 	The project did not distribute cheques. Payees are informed by phone to collect their cheques. All cheques had been collected by the time of audit except for Cheque No.168 of Shs 158,860 dated 10/06/08 and drawn in favour of UPPC. The cheque was later collected, but became stale during banking processes. Stale cheques have been reversed. Since the introduction of Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT), the issue of collections/distribution of cheques has been resolved. A copy of the electronic cash book was provided.

iii) 	Accountability for advances received for activities were submitted to the ministry at the end of the activity and were initially verified by MAAIF’s internal auditors before the advance was retired.

Committee recommendation

The committee dropped the matter.

Project monitoring: 

Instances were noted where funds were spent on questionable activities in respect to appointments that were not within the approved staffing structure (Shs 28,887,240) and payments to the executing ministry departments and staff (Shs 18,502,935).

There was lack of adequate monitoring, control and surveillance of fisheries activities by use of fisheries patrol boats.

The accounting officer responded that:

i) 	Voucher 133 payment to the Minister of State for Fisheries: The minister provides oversight and political guidance. The report was provided.

ii) 	The other payments were made to members of staff within the department of fisheries/project. Evidence was adduced to the effect that the fuel was meant for day-to-day operations of the project staff, which does not result into a monitoring report as indicated by the auditor. The accountabilities for fuel were done and were available. 

iii) 	It was not true that only one patrol activity was undertaken; several patrols were made, but the optimal usage of the boats during the period under review was curtailed due to budgetary constraints. The boats were delivered after the budgetary process for that financial year was concluded. The boats had a high fuel consumption capacity because of the patrolling needs.

Committee recommendation

The committee dropped the matter.

Project disbursements

There was no advance register maintained to monitor project advances. Advances are not accounted for in a timely manner as was evidenced by advances to the project coordinator not being accounted for during the audit.

Allowances were paid to staff while conducting their routine normal duties.

Government of Uganda counterpart proceeds not utilized for project activities (Shs 199, 211,502).

Payments amounting to Shs 60,743,499 were not supported by payment vouchers, but rather by loose minutes.

The evaluation and selection process for M/S Classic Clearing & Forwarding Ltd was not in line with the approved procurement procedures. The supplier was paid Shs 42, 089,068 in respect of clearing the Fisheries patrol boats.

Five inflatable dinghies and seven outboard engines paid for fully (Shs 38,850,269) had not been delivered at the time of audit in November, 2008.

There were instances where project funds were used to repair non-project vehicles.

The accounting officer responded that:

i)	There was an electronic advances ledger maintained.

ii)	It was not true that there was an outstanding advance.

iii)	The figure of Shs 1,640,000 and US$ 353 relate to funds paid to the Project Coordinator (PC) as per diem while travelling to Tunis for an ADB meeting. The auditor contended that the PC was paid subsistence allowance in excess by one day. However, the flight connection to Tunis from Dubai had one day delay for which the airline was aware, but the organizers of the meeting were not ware. A travel itinerary was provided.

iv)	The Shs 6,729,200 was an eligible expenditure paid to project staff as sitting allowance whenever they were part of the evaluation committee for bids in accordance with Circular Standing Instruction No.4 of 2008 regarding duty facilitating allowances. A copy of the circular was provided to the committee. 

v)	 The payment vouchers accompanying the approved requisition totalling to Shs 60,743,499 for Government of Uganda counterpart expenditures were captured on the IFMS system and were accessible by the Auditor-General on the IFMS system for verification. Evidence to this effect was provided.

vi)	The payment requests for project activities were routed through the project coordinator and were approved by the accounting officer. All approvals were done on the requisition minutes. The vouchers for these payments were automatically generated and retained on the IFMS system. They were and can be printed on demand.

vii) 	The project secured the clearing agent through the ministry contracts committee. The contracts committee submission and approval was provided to the committee and the amount charged was within the set range, based on the clearing services required. Payment was done after delivery of the boats and accessories. However, during the verification of the items delivered, an error was made and instead of ten pairs of a dinghy and an engine, only five were delivered. This error was discovered when the items were being taken on charge, but this was after payment of the supplier had been cleared. The supplier was notified and the remaining items were delivered.

viii) 	The design of Fisheries Development Project (FDP) was such that the project was integrated with the MAAIF staff structure and operational programmes. Vehicle No.UG 1432A referred to, belongs to the department of fisheries and was used by the project. The vehicle broke down while performing project activities, hence the need for it to be repaired using project funds.

Committee recommendation

The committee dropped the matter.

Project staffing

It was noted that the ministry made a number of appointments that were considered unnecessary and not in line with the approved staff structure of the project.

The accounting officer responded that the fisheries development project did not have its own structure. Project staff were drawn from within MAAIF. In the same way, contract staff were engaged and treated as MAAIF staff. They were recruited as MAAIF staff and sign annual contracts which are renewable depending on satisfactory performance and need.

Committee recommendation

The committee dropped the matter.
 
Conclusion

The review shows that the project has not been implemented on schedule and that there has been inadequate counterpart funding from the Government of Uganda. There is a risk that the project may not meet all the intended objectives. This can be noted from the fact that the credit component with allocated resources of Shs 3,922,580,000 did not take off. In addition, out of the 30 fish landing sites planned for construction, it is apparent that 18 were likely not to be constructed. It was also noted that there were delays being experienced for the fish landing sites under construction.

General recommendations

The committee recommends that in the interest of ensuring timely completion of the project -
 
1.	MAAIF reviews the project operations with a view to developing an action plan to ensure that the project meets the objectives for which it was intended, as well as expediting the remaining activities of the project. 

2.	MAAIF should expedite pending works relating to landing sites and construction of the markets.   

3.	Where possible, the project should consider sub-contracting civil works that are behind schedule.

4.	Poorly performing contractors should be terminated.

5.	Government should ensure that commitment, especially on provision of counterpart funding for completion of civil works, is complied with accordingly.

6.	Future Government projects concepts, design and appraisals should be reviewed every five years, and the following   aspects, aimed at improving performance should be highly considered:

a) 	A paradigm shift from projects to programmes in development activities.
b) 	Strengthening the monitoring and supervision.
c) 	Encourage greater participation or involvement of district and sub-county local leaders.
d) 	Exploring the concept of a pre-project-funding system which greatly enhances designing and assessment of the project viability.
e) 	Government counterpart funding should be timely.
f) 	Continuous revision of the project design and appraisal of feasibility of resource availability, in addition to utilization. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much hon. Chair and your committee for that very elaborate report. I now think we need to suspend the House for an hour so that Members can take a short break. We shall reconvene at 3.00 p.m. in the afternoon. House suspended.

(The House was suspended at 1.52 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.28 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this morning, we received a report on the ADB fisheries loan. It is a fairly lengthy and detailed report, but I think we may not have time to discuss it today. So, we will allot Tuesday morning for that debate.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS (AMENDMENT)(NO.2) BILL, 2010

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Madam Speaker, I wish to move that the Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment)(No.2) Bill, 2010 be read for the first time. I beg to move.

I wish to lay on Table the Certificate of Financial Implication.

3.30
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Masindi): I had earlier in the morning raised a concern on behalf of the members of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme because we had not seen a certificate of clearance confirming where the money will come from. Our worry was that it could eat into our money.

I would like to request, through you, Madam Speaker, that Finance gets us our certificate of clearance because we do not intend to ride our Bill on that amendment. Ours should stand unilateral; it is the original one. How I wish we got the certificate so that our Act, which is now in abeyance, can operationalise our scheme which we badly require.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, why haven’t you given us our certificate? Minister of Finance, we applied a long time ago; that, I know.

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): My colleague, the Minister of State for General Duties mentioned in this House - the Certificate of Financial Implications is required and he is working on it. It will be ready tomorrow or Tuesday when the House resumes. It was promised today, but he is working on it; that is why in fact he is not here. Thank you.

3.32
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Madam Speaker, the matter which is on the Table is a very serious matter, and especially when it touches on the emoluments of Members of Parliament. It is for this reason that hon. Mukitale and his colleagues saw it fit to seek leave of this House to introduce a Private Member’s Bill so that the terminal emoluments of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker are clearly spelt out and guaranteed by Government. I think it is only fair that these two Bills go one after the other, and it is, therefore, of great concern to us that the honourable Minister of Finance is telling us that they are not ready and that we should wait for next week.

We have been in this House for some time now, and we know how Government operates. How sure are we that we are not going to be hoodwinked to proceed with a Bill, which is on the ground, without giving us a Certificate of Financial Implication for us also to push the other private members’ Bill through? Please, can you help and assure us –[Prof. Kamuntu: “Order”] - okay, bring it.

PROF. KAMUNTU: There seems to be an ill motive by implying that the Ministry of Finance or Government is hoodwinking Members of Parliament on a Certificate of Financial Implication. Why would anyone want to impute a wrong motive when I have confirmed to this House that the Minister of State for General Duties is working on it? Is it in order for hon. Kassiano Wadri to impute wrong motives on this side of the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the certificate is a really simple document. Our Bill is also ready. Can you bring it during the course of this afternoon? (Applause)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I definitely respect your ruling. I was only begging that the Certificate of Financial Implication will be ready by, but not later than Tuesday. Thank you very much.

3.36
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House that this matter has been a subject of intense discussion since it first came up on the Floor. This morning, we reached an understanding that the Prime Minister’s Office together with the Ministry of Finance work together to make sure that this certificate is here so that the Executive does not run into any problem with the Legislature. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I will commit the minister’s Bill to the Committee on Presidential Affairs, but you must produce our certificate so that our Bill also goes for scrutiny. (Applause)

STATEMENT FROM THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

3.37
THE ACTING LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity, in the first place, to thank you for giving me the chance to make this statement, which I believe is very important, not only to us the Opposition, but the entire country.

First of all, I would like to take this opportunity of welcoming back my colleagues from the Opposition into the Chambers of Parliament. 

What happened the last two days was unprecedented and regrettable. As a Parliament with two sides of the House, we need to show respect to one another as individuals and/or organizations; be tolerant to one another; and allow dissenting voices, space to be heard. It is my prayer that such acts should never be repeated.

We, on the Opposition side in this august House, have decided to address you on the current struggle for electoral reforms because of its great importance to our motherland. The struggle we are talking about has been going on for the last 30 years, that is, since 1980, and this struggle is not intended to benefit just this generation, but also all future generations of this country.

Uganda has had eight general elections: One in 1958, another in 1961 and in 1962, which were organised by colonial rulers, and those of 1980, 1989, 1996, 2001 and 2006, which were organized by the post-independence governments of Uganda. The first elections were generally free and fair, but all the post-independence elections have been hotly disputed, in terms of results.

Madam Speaker, our country should not forget that the 1980 parliamentary elections were conducted by the Government under the late Paulo Muwanga and Mr Kaguta Museveni, now President of the Republic of Uganda, who at that time was the Vice-Chairman to the late Paulo Muwanga.

However, Mr Museveni was the first one to complain that the elections were fraudulent, and decided to go to the bush for a five-year guerrilla war in the Luweero Triangle, which took the lives of over 500,000 Ugandans; that is, from 1981 to January 1986. 

Writing in 1997, on page 120 in his autobiography in his book entitled, “Sowing the Mustard Seed”, President Museveni stated: “With the elections rigged, as we had predicted, we had to start preparing to fulfil our pledge to go to the bush and fight the injustices that had been inflicted upon the country.” 

So, when his guerrilla group, that is, the National Resistance Movement, took over power in 1986, many Ugandans expected him and NRM to spearhead the electoral reform movement in this country. If this had been done, we would not be standing here today lobbying for such reforms.

The 1989 elections to expand the National Resistance Council, which had transformed itself into Parliament, was also chaotic. Many new NRC members were elected through electoral colleges in which financial bribes were used to manipulate the few voters who were involved. 

Worse still, the 1996 presidential and parliamentary elections were characterised by intimidation of voters, by paramilitary groups which included Kalangala Action Plan. Above all, the 2001 and 2006 presidential and parliamentary elections were grossly mismanaged by the Uganda Electoral Commission, as was pointed out by the Uganda Supreme Court, international and local elections observers. Yet between 2006 and November 2009, the Uganda Government did not take any serious effort to correct the numerous flaws in our electoral processes.

Madam Speaker, it was the party presidents in the Inter-Party Cooperation, that is, the Conservative Party, Forum for Democratic Change, JEEMA and UPC, who on 14 May 2009, presented to the Speaker of Parliament, Hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, 80 copies of electoral reforms, which he advised to be copied to all MPs. In addition, the IPC leaders sent copies of the same reforms to other presidents in the East African region, the US Ambassador, the European Union, civil societies, religious leaders, the media fraternity, universities and Ugandans in the Diaspora. This was done because the reforms were prepared to promote basic human rights, good governance and democracy for all Ugandans.

In August 2009, the IPC leaders presented to the Leader of Opposition and Shadow Attorney-General, five specific electoral amendment Bills for presentation to Parliament.  These Bills were:

1.	The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2009
2.	The Uganda Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2009
3.	The Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2009
4.	The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill 2009, and
5.	The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2009

The same Bills were discussed exhaustively in the Inter Party Organisation for Dialogue, commonly known as IPOD, which consists of all political parties in Parliament. The three NRM delegates to IPOD accepted virtually all IPC/IPOD proposals, which were in turn presented in March this year to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee.

We agree that the recent parliamentary debates between the Government and Opposition on the amendment Bills concerning the Uganda Electoral Commission Act, Presidential Elections Act, Parliamentary Elections Act, Political Parties and Organisation Act, the National Youth Council Act and the National Women Council Act, which was concluded on Tuesday, were cordial. We are indeed grateful for that spirit of give and take.

But, Madam Speaker, it is extremely important for every honourable Member of Parliament in this House to understand that the core electoral reforms in this country are connected with the Constitutional (Amendment) Bill, which our Shadow Attorney-General hopefully will present in due course of this session to this august House on behalf of Ugandans. 

The Bill seeks, among other things, to:

a)	Amend Article 60(1) so that the power of appointing members of the Electoral Commission is taken away from the President and given to an impartial Judicial Commission to increase the Electoral Commission’s independence.
b)	Urgently restore Presidential term limits in the Constitution under Article 105(2). 
c)	Remove Army officers from Parliament because they have failed to remain non-partisan in our multi-party Parliament as was envisaged in Article 208(1) and (2) of the Constitution. 

Furthermore, Parliament is under obligation under Article 78(2) to review the representation of the Army, youth, workers and persons with disabilities, before the end of 2010, and to ensure that the Electoral Commission retains the powers in Article 61(1)(c) to re-demarcate constituencies after publication of results of a census of the population.

The Opposition still insists that the Uganda Electoral Commission as presently constituted, is incapable of organising free and fair elections in accordance with the law. It is well known even beyond Uganda’s borders that it is not independent and has no will to uplift its performance standards.  In short, if it is not overhauled or reconstituted, it will not be able to organise credible elections in 2011. Take, for example, the on-going exercise of updating the voters’ register, which I am told was a matter of concern to this House last Tuesday. 

The commission planned to import 4,000 cameras for taking photographs of 3.5 million new voters, but has so far secured only 2,000 cameras, many of which are not in good working condition. 

The personnel employed to do the work were inadequately trained and others have deserted their work because of poor remuneration. 

The time allotted to this exercise from 3 May to 4 June 2010 is definitely inadequate because registration officials at various polling stations cannot manage to register more than 10 persons a day. In our opinion, the exercise has already failed to take off.

The Opposition strongly urges this honourable House to rise above party politics and be on the right side of history of this country and pass the remaining electoral amendments with one accord, for the good of all Ugandans. We want to bring positive changes in the management of our country and save it from more chaos and turmoil.  

We definitely do not need another brutal guerrilla war to bring such changes.  That is why we shall not associate ourselves with any electoral laws, which will make us slaves in our own country.

As I wind up my statement, I would like to address my mind to the events of the past two days and set correct the records of the Hansard.

Madam Speaker, we have come a long way with the electoral reforms so far considered by Parliament, but it is very unfortunate to note that the long mileage we have made was about to be derailed by the events that unfolded over the last few days.  It is my humble prayer that you, the Rt Hon. Speaker, interest yourself in this matter.

I believe all of us, hon. Members of Parliament, have this country, and the image and integrity of this Institution of Parliament at heart. We also find it very unacceptable and unprecedented, the falsehood in the media that the doors to the Parliamentary Chamber were broken by the Members of the Opposition.  We equally abhor the act of locking the doors of the Chamber to the Members of the Opposition.

We are also in total dismay of the conduct and falsehoods labeled against the Opposition that the happenings in the Parliament over the last two days were pre-meditated. Madam Speaker, we the Members of the Opposition would like to disassociate ourselves from the exhibits of stones laid on Table last evening that were purportedly found in the bag of un IPC woman with the intention of assaulting the person of the Speaker.  This was a very unfortunate occurrence, which I strongly condemn.  

However, I pose the following questions that will assist us in the investigations:

1.	How did the suspect beat all the security checkpoints of Parliament to access the Gallery with the stones in her bag?

2.	Is it normal that a suspect is arrested with exhibits, her particulars are not obtained, let alone be arrested for questioning? 

3.	Who was the arresting officer, who in my opinion acted irresponsibly, by not arresting the suspect?

All these questions among others will assist us in the investigations. I call upon Government to take immediate action of investigating these allegations so that the truth can come to pass. 

I further condemn the heavy deployment of security personnel in uniform and civilian attire in Parliament.  It was uncalled for and our workplace should be demilitarised.   

I would like to assure you, Madam Speaker, that my honourable colleagues and I, are committed to this cause and pray that we expeditiously bring to a halt this impasse that has put into ridicule and disrespect, the institution of Parliament.

I, furthermore, pray to you, Rt Hon. Speaker, that as a parent and leader whom we hold in high esteem, consider rescinding your decision of the suspension of the five Members of the Opposition from the House.

I thank you Rt. Hon. Speaker, for this opportunity, and hon. Members, for having given me audience. I beg to move. (Applause)

3.55
THE PRIME MINISTER (PROF. NSIBAMBI): Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, I would like to say that Government will study this statement before making the necessary reply on Wednesday. I thank you.

3.56
MS JUSTINE KASULE LUMUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Parliamentary Commission – the Member who is also a Member of the Commission by virtue of being the Leader of the Opposition, has made allegations implicating the Parliamentary Commission. So, I also request that you allot us time on the Order Paper on Wednesday, as the Commission, to also respond to the issues that have been raised in this statement.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST TO BORROW US$ 100 MILLION FROM CHINA, EXIM BANK FOR THE ACQUISITION OF ASSORTED ROAD EQUIPMENT, SANITARY AND FIRE-FIGHTING EQUIPMENT FOR DISTRICT AND URBAN COUNCILS

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Birahwa Mukitale): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, on behalf of the Committee of National Economy, I would like to present the Report on the Request by Government to borrow US$ 100 from the Export Import Bank of China for the acquisition of assorted road equipment, sanitary and fire-fighting equipment for districts and urban councils.

The request was presented to this House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and accordingly referred to the committee for consideration in accordance with Article 159 and Rule 152 of the Rules of Procedure.
In our methodology, we held meetings with officials from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, as the lead ministry; Ministry of Local Government; the Inspector General of Police; the Members of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure –(Interjections)– the copies are being distributed. Members will bear with us – the printer broke down; so, we did the photocopying from outside.

The committee studied and made reference to the following documents:

i)	The project appraisal document;
ii) 	The implementation plan;
iii) 	The Minister’s brief to Parliament, which all of you Members should have received – I actually placed more copies on the table yesterday; and 
iv) 	Field visits to the different districts of the country to assess the situation of the Police fire stations, the mechanical workshops of local government, garbage yards like the ones in Gulu, Bugembe, Kampala, Masaka, Mbarara, Kabale, Kasese and Mubende, where we did move jointly with the members of the sessional committee on Physical Infrastructure and that of Local Government.

Background

The district roads

The country road network totals 80,000 kilometres of which 21,000 are national roads managed by the Uganda National Roads Authority. 18,750 kilometres consist of district roads, which are under the responsibility of the local governments; 4,800 kilometres are urban roads under which the mandate lies with urban local governments; and approximately 35,000 kilometers consist of community access roads.

The main reasons district roads are falling into disrepair is because many of them have reached a state where they are unmaintainable. The roads in such state, which comprise a rehabilitation backlog comprise of 10,000 kilometres.

Urban roads

Rapid urbanisation has created a high demand for services in the urban councils. The most critical services include a good transport infrastructure, solid waste management, and modern and efficient fire-fighting equipment. There is a critical network of 1500 kilometres, which needs to be resealed and reconstructed to bitumen standards. These need to be rehabilitated before any meaningful routine maintenance can be carried out. Most of the roads were rehabilitated between 1989 and 1996 through the Feeder Roads Rehabilitation Project mainly financed by development partners. The mode of implementation at the time was predominantly forced on account.

After rehabilitation, the roads were handed over to the district local governments for maintenance. And after the project came to an end, the equipment were distributed to enable them carry out further rehabilitation over the unrehabilitated roads, using locally generated revenue, though it has been declining; hence, local governments have been unable to continue with this rehabilitation.

There have been a few programmes through which a few urban roads have been resealed, reconstructed or improved to bitumen standards. However, maintenance of these roads haa continued to pose a challenge to urban and local governments. 

Government has since then come up with transport policy objectives in the urban areas, which are:

Improve access to transportation services and link urban areas to the rural areas with a view to reducing poverty;


Improve quality and safety of the transport system in a country’s towns;

Check environmental degradation arising from transport infrastructure development and activities; and

Improve the economic performance of the transport sector and enhance the capacity of urban local governments to plan, manage and maintain their road infrastructure.

I will try to summarise by highlighting most of the important issues.

Solid Waste Management and Disposal

This is a big problem to all urban areas. The unsightly heaps of garbage are attributed to urban councils’ lack of equipment to collect and transport the garbage, to tip and maintain the garbage disposal sites/land fields. Less than 20 percent of garbage generated in urban areas is collected and disposed of. Kampala City Council, for example, through a recent EXIM Bank loan procured ample refuse collection and disposal equipment from the Government of the People’s Republic of China, which has now enabled it to raise the garbage collection and disposal capacity by only half the required capacity. The equipment that is required for solid waste management are: Tipper trucks; tractors with trolleys; and in bigger municipalities, a bulldozer at a tipping site.

Fire Hazards

Fire outbreaks in urban councils and across the country are on the rise due to congestion, poor designs and urban planning, and lack of adequate equipment to fight the fires. Whereas the Local Government Act mandates the urban councils to offer fire-fighting services in their areas of jurisdiction, they are lacking in capacity. Similarly, the only fire emergency services provided by the Police Fire Brigade, cannot contain the numerous fire outbreaks countrywide. A case in point is Mbarara, where one of the teams went – the only fire equipment acquired during CHOGM, a Leyland Ashok from India is serving 20 districts from Bundibugyo, Fort Portal to Kisoro and Isingiro. The committee could not believe that a vehicle that runs at 30 kilometres per hour is able to put off a fire at Bunagana border post.

There are eight other fire stations at Mbale, Jinja, Entebbe, Tororo, Gulu, Mbarara, Hoima and Masaka though equipped with old vehicles and equipment, which are in a state of disrepair and impair the capacity of the Police to respond to emergencies.

Further, the capacity is limited by low financial and manpower capacity. Actually, we found out that as the country is building storied buildings, we have no single equipment to fight fire in a storied building.

Project Overview

District and Urban Roads

Starting from the FY 2007/2008, the budget for district roads maintenance has been rising considerably. However, if modalities under which the road works are executed are not reviewed, little will be achieved. Hence, it is necessary to explore alternative methods of road maintenance that could be more effective, amongst which is force account using equipment and road gangs. This is an old tested method which was very effective. Government has accordingly worked out modalities for the re-introduction of force account in district and urban roads rehabilitation and maintenance, and the consequent financial implications.

Though every district would desire to have a full road construction and maintenance unit, it is not viable for most districts whose networks are less than 350kms to own and maintain a full road unit as the cost of maintenance would be too high.

It is proposed that works in urban councils be planned and executed with equipment procured for all the district roads, while the district local governments concentrate on manual and light mechanized routine maintenance, and the central government evolves a scheme to rehabilitate the backlog and undertakes periodic maintenance of roads. The district local governments will employ the use of road gangs to avoid the current problems associated with contracting at the local government level.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I would want to summarise but because roads affect all our districts and urban councils, some of these points are very important and it is at times hard to skip them.   

Fire-fighting Equipment

70 percent of fire incidents occur around Kampala Metropolitan area covering Kampala, Mukono, Wakiso and Mpigi. The Police Force plans to establish stations within a radius of 10 kms from the city to enhance faster response to fire rescue. This is the Police’s plan but not what we are currently ready for. 


The areas to be covered are: Natete, Nansana, Kawempe, Ntinda, Bweyogerere, Mukono, Bugolobi and Kajjansi. In addition to retooling the existing stations, new fire stations will be established in the municipalities of Lira, Kabale, Fort Portal Arua and Soroti. 

Further, fire stations will be established at key border towns of Malaba, Busia, Mpondwe, Katuna and Kisoro, and in the key highway towns of: Luweero, Kiboga, Iganga, Kasese, Mityana and Bundibugyo. These require attention to respond to highway accidents, especially from fuel tankers. 

The oil belt of Buliisa, Amuru, Kanungu, Hoima and Masindi, too require fire stations with specialised equipment - the recent incidence in America is fresh in our minds and I would not want us to have such a problem. Similarly, Kalangala owing to its unique remote peripheral location will too, require a fire station. Of course, they will have challenges of connecting from one island to another.

Project Components

The project is focusing on mainly three components:

i)	Improving road maintenance in the districts and urban councils;

ii)	Improving waste management in the urban councils; and

iii)	Improving the fire-fighting capacity in the Local Governments by Police.

The Project is going to be implemented by three institutions:

i)	The Ministry of Works and Transport, which is responsible for roads maintenance;

ii)	The Ministry of Local Government, which is responsible for garbage collection; and

iii)	The Ministry of Internal Affairs, specifically the Uganda Police, which is handling fire-fighting on behalf of local governments.

The loan being sought is for procuring equipment to enable the local governments deliver the relevant services in a more efficient and effective way.

Project Implementation

While all the activities mentioned above will take place in the local governments, the line ministries or agencies are mandated to monitor and give technical support to the works being undertaken in the districts and urban councils.

The project implementation modality will be as follows for the three aspects:

Road Maintenance will take Shs 142.4 billion equivalent to US$ 68.436 million.

I do not know whether with this summary, I should just mention the component and the figures without reading the equipment.  

The new road maintenance methodology shall use the force account method for routine maintenance by districts and urban councils’ works departments. This will be possible after equipping the local governments with light mechanized units. The road gangs will be reinstated to handle the manual maintenance works on the district roads.

Six zonal/regional units each for 20 districts shall be set up to handle the heavy road rehabilitation works in the districts, and bitumen resealing works in the urban councils. These types of works are very expensive and technically involving, requiring heavy road plants. The zonal units will be managed by a private firm who will enter into contracts with the local governments to rehabilitate a number of roads that are not in maintainable state. 

Consultants will be hired to ensure that the works are done to acceptable standards and hence value for money is attained.

Financial implications for road maintenance
The conditional grants and Road Fund disbursements to the districts and urban councils will be used to finance operations of the equipment that will be purchased.

Waste management will take Shs 43.52 billion equivalent to US$ 20.9 million. 

Urban councils have neither been equipped with garbage equipment nor extended financing for garbage collection from the Consolidated Fund. 

It is proposed that urban councils are equipped with garbage equipment to enable them handle waste management more effectively. The big urban councils shall be availed with garbage trucks/dump trucks while the small ones shall be equipped with tractors with trailers.  

Financial implications for garbage collection

Waste Management is critical for a clean town, but very expensive to manage, and, therefore, it is proposed that Government starts extending financial support to urban councils for this purpose. The Ministry of Local Government shall coordinate this activity.

Three Fire-fighting services will take Shs 28 billion, an equivalent of US$ 13.46 million.

Because the project is implemented by three different ministries, it was important right from the appraisal how they would coordinate the three ministries, that is, of Works, Local Government, and Internal Affairs, which houses the Police. 

This is a mandate of local governments, but the Police has been handling it since the 1960s because it has the mandate of protecting the people and their properties - Article 212(a) of the Constitution. However, the capacity of the Police Fire Brigade is now overwhelmed by the number of fire outbreaks in the urban councils due to high urbanisation and informal construction.

The proposal under this loan is to procure more fire-fighting units so as to establish more stations in the fire prone areas.

Financial cost

These operations of the new equipment will be financed under the normal Police budget.

Coordination 
A policy committee headed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been set up to coordinate the activities of the project. The composition includes representatives from the Ministry of Works and Transport, Police and Ministry of Local Government. 

A Technical Committee comprising Ministry of Local Government, as a lead user,  Ministry of Works and Transport, and Police, has also been set up to prepare details and technical modalities of the project. This committee will also monitor and supervise the operations of the new initiative of improving service delivery in the local governments, and report to the policy body periodically.

Sustainability

In order to ensure that equipment of suitable specifications is delivered by the Chinese suppliers, inspections for pre-production, pre- shipment and delivery shall be instituted. What the committee is emphasising here is that since we are going to China, like the whole world is, we need to have very serious technical teams, which make the right technical specifications so that when we are procuring from the giant China, we get what is best for us.

Roads and garbage equipment 

The zonal workshops shall be equipped to handle all mechanical repairs for both the district and urban equipment. The firm that will be engaged to manage the zonal units will have the responsibility of carrying out the necessary repairs of the plants. Three of the workshops already exist and three new ones shall be built by the private firm who will undertake the management contract.  

The suppliers of the equipment will be compelled to establish local accredited agents in the country to ensure proper after sales services for the equipment supplied to the project. 

Staff shall be recruited and trained to man the new equipment by the suppliers.

Fire-fighting equipment

The supplier of the fire-fighting equipment shall be tasked to re-equip the Police mechanical workshop in Kampala to be able to adapt to the technology of Chinese manufacturers.

Project cost and financing

Estimated cost of required district equipment

I had mentioned it as per components but Table 8.0 on page 11 provides in terms of the machinery. We have motor graders, taking Shs 460 million; dump trucks taking Shs 170 million; pedestrian rollers taking Shs 30 million; pickups taking Shs 70 million; motorcycles taking Shs 5 million - that is the cost per unit; but the total required is mentioned.

The initial intention was to target every district - the 112 districts - that is why the number goes to that. 

Estimated cost of equipment for urban councils

We expect 19 graders, 125 dump and garbage trucks, 46 pedestrian rollers, 46 bitumen boilers – those who remember long ago, the few towns had their own bitumen boilers – 46 hand compactors, 107 tractors with trailers, 153 four-wheel double cabins at a total cost of Shs 54 billion.

Equipment for periodic maintenance at zonal level 

We did mention the zones in which they are going to put on – the minister will give further clarification. Bulldozer, 3 wheel loaders, six motor graders, six vibro rollers, one excavator, one low bed, one cargo truck with three tonne crane that should be self-loading, dump truck, eight pickups, 12 motorcycles, one mobile workshop, 20 tonne mobile crane, three pedestrian rollers, one pneumatic roller, one bitumen sprayer, one bitumen heater, two chips spreader, two mechanical brooms and one agricultural tractor.

For the Police fire fighting equipment, we have 20 fire tenders, 20 water tankers, two aerial ladder trucks, four water turrets, four fire boats and 2, 100 assorted equipment.
 
Loan terms and conditions 

The loan amount is US$ 100 million. 

The maturity period as per the Chinese bilateral arrangement is 20 years, including the five years of grace. 

The administrative charge shall be 1 percent per annum, and the interest rate at 2 percent per annum.

Conditions attached to the purchase and supply of goods

A technical team from the Uganda Government will visit China F.A.W. Group Import - Export Corporation to confirm quantities, technical specification of goods and delivery arrangements prior to shipment. Such inspections will include pre-production inspection plus pre-shipment inspection at the customer’s cost. We are emphasising the right technical specification prior to order.

Delivery period

The supplier undertakes to make the goods ready to be shipped from a Chinese seaport to Kampala within maximum three months from the date when the supplier receives the down payment. And as we have always cautioned, as the Committee of National Economy, borrowing is one thing, but what is most important is that those in charge of implementation should make sure that the money – they supervise and monitor the project where money has gone.

On page 15, we have inspection of the goods.

Goods must conform to the buyer’s technical specifications as detailed in the attachment of each item. Any delivery of quality or quantity items that do not conform to the technical specifications will not be accepted, and the customer will indicate it to the supplier who will replace the goods with the quality and quantity approved. The customer shall at their own cost be entitled to conduct an inspection of the equipment in China before shipment of the goods, and at Mombasa Port after receiving the supplier’s notice, such inspection shall be certified and authenticated by the representative of the customer, and customer in this case is the Government of Uganda. 

An inspection certificate shall be signed between the representatives of both the supplier and the customers upon the successful inspection, which indicates that the goods under this contract are accepted by the customer. We have already mentioned that the total contract value is US$ 100 million.

Observations and recommendations

The committee observed that the loan is in line with the National Development Plan that identifies road infrastructure as a structural bottleneck to economic transformation.

The committee commends Government on factoring in the loan, the need for training of technicians to operate the new emerging Chinese machinery and equipment, though cautions that emphasis should be taken to ensure that the operational manuals are written in the English language. We have had earlier supplies from China where manuals are in Chinese and it has also happened to Members when you buy your own vehicles from Japan.

It was noted that there is lack of a comprehensive plan from the sector ministries for the service and maintenance of zonal equipment. The committee recommends that concerted efforts be made towards the service and maintenance of zonal equipment. I will share with you our finding in Masaka and Mbarara; when we went for outsourcing and contracting, we completely lost the equipment and facilities we had in our districts. I think we should, as Parliament, support the intention of having our zonal equipment without waiting for contractors.
  
The committee noted the lack of a clear management policy on sharing and maintenance of equipment. It is recommended that a rational and standard mode of distribution of equipment be developed and a holistic integrated plan to support zonal equipment be developed as well.

Note was taken of the poor maintenance of water channels which      leads to flooding and eventual damage to the roads. Apart from road repairs, the question of drainage is still a big challenge. The committee recommends the regular maintenance of road drainages and channels as this will go a long way in protecting the roads from further damage. 

Furthermore, the committee recommends that Government clarifies further on the usage of the funds from the Road Fund and the role of UNRA, given that most of the roads, especially those in the city, are in a state of disrepair. It is even worse with the current rains. 

Solid waste disposal

The committee noted the financial and management challenges involved in garbage collection, especially in the local governments. Note was also taken of the vote for garbage collection not being prioritised, especially as it is lumped under other holistic votes. This has always been an observation even from the Committee of Natural Resources. The committee recommends that a separate vote, specifically for garbage collection, be created.

It was further noted that the issue of waste management is as much, too, a function of the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) and this may lead to duplication of functions with the local governments. NEMA can only enforce if the local governments are willing and organised. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Local Government and NEMA come up with a comprehensive plan on waste management and disposal.

Further, the committee recommends that Government comes up with a policy on garbage disposal and management and sensitise the general public about it. A legal framework to enforce non-littering should be prepared, which offers incentives to whistleblowers. 

The committee noted the lack of a comprehensive policy on sustainability of the solid waste disposal project. The committee recommends that Government develops a policy on recycling of garbage to produce manure and bio-fuels for sale. The proceeds got from these sources can be used for sustainability of the project. There is a saying that, “Garbage is wealth if well used.”

Fire-fighting equipment

The committee noted that the Police Department did not have a separate emergency call centre number for fire emergencies. The 999 that is available is slow at responding; there are diversions where one is referred to, hence so much time is lost that this ceases to be an emergency call number as it was intended.

The committee recommends that the Police institutes a separate emergency call centre number to deal with fires in order to improve the response time.

Further, the emergency response unit in the Police should be enhanced to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the response time. 

The committee noted that the fire-fighting equipment to be procured does not include specialised fire-fighting equipment that may be used to put out fires related to oil in the oil-producing areas I mentioned earlier, and in high-rise buildings. 

It is recommended that Government explores the option of further investing in the procurement of specialised fire-fighting equipment for high-rise buildings with aerial ladder trucks, and oil-producing areas, which I have mentioned right from Amuru down to Kanungu, in order to curb the problem when and if it occurs. The same specialised equipment should be extended to the border areas earlier mentioned of Busia, Malaba, Lwakaka, Bunagana, Katuna and others, where there is heavy congestion of expensive goods and oil tankers.

The committee further noted that normally, the area with water hydrants are obstructed due to poor planning. First of all, they are not known and where they exist, they are obstructed by developers because of the poor planning of the city or towns, hence congestion and lack of access roads to these water hydrants. That creates a problem of accessibility even when there is need. 

It is recommended that the Ministry of Water and Environment, specifically the National Water and Sewerage Corporation, generates and avails both to the Police and public, a map showing the location of these water hydrants for ease of identification and planning in every community. 

It is also recommended that intermediary service points be set up to substantiate fire hydrants. 

Note was taken that a concrete policy on service and maintenance of equipment was lacking.

The committee recommends that a policy be generated by the respective sector ministries on service and maintenance of the equipment after procurement, since this is a major hurdle. 

The committee further noted that there was lack of a legal framework regarding the extent of operation and management of private fire-fighting companies. 

Government should come up with a comprehensive law or policy regarding the extent of private fire-fighting companies. In an event that they go to a private property, and to put off fire, they need to break the property, who is liable to pay for the repairs?

Further, the committee noted that the Police are not consulted by the urban planners during their town planning; they are rarely consulted. This poses a problem of congestion and accessibility of roads by the Police when trying to access the areas where fires may have broken out for quick response. 

It is recommended that town and urban planning units work hand-in-hand with the Police and security when drawing up plans, in order to try and come up with a comprehensive plan agreeable to all parties involved. 

It was noted that there is lack of access to information by the pubic regarding the findings of fire investigations. There have been so many fires, but not all findings have been made public. The committee urges the Police and Government to publish findings of the fire investigations in order to curb public speculation.

The committee noted that fire trucks are not normally accompanied by water trucks. So, it means that the moment the water in the tank is over, the truck has to run back to look for water. That in itself is a problem. 

We recommend that fire trucks must always be accompanied by water trucks to substitute water hydrants in cases where they cannot be located. 

In conclusion, the committee has noted the big challenges being faced by the local governments in road maintenance; by the Police and local governments in fire-fighting; and by the urban authorities in garbage-collection. The challenges are both managerial and financial, and the efforts that have been put in place to try and mitigate these challenges.

The committee, therefore, supports and recommends to this House to approve the Government to borrow the much needed US$ 100 million from the Export-Import Bank of China for acquisition of assorted road equipment, sanitary equipment and fire equipment for district and urban councils. 

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I want to reiterate the committee’s earlier request that borrowing is one thing and how the money is used is another. It is not a responsibility initially of Parliament – the Executive and the line ministries should do that - but where they do not, the sessional committees should come in handy to do the oversight role, to ensure that this is well done.

I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. chair, on the list of the districts, I do not see Buyende District –(Laughter)- there are new ones here.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, we received this loan when some districts had not yet been pronounced; but the minister will explain. He is targeting providing equipment to all the districts; so we could do nothing as a committee to –(Interjections)- but the Minister will – that is for the Minister to answer.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I have found it. It is somewhere down here. It is not in alphabetical order.

4.35
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr John Arumadri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am not going to make a lengthy rejoinder, but only one or two comments. I want to pray that future generations will not hang us for this incessant borrowing. Borrowing is up to our throats now. We must find a way of getting out of it. I must say that we are very lucky that this request for a loan is coming before the consideration of the CHOGM report; otherwise, many Members would have developed cold feet and said, “Why are we borrowing when so much money is being lost as we have heard?”  But we will come to that.  

There is a saying that if you are a beggar, you cannot choose but this is a loan. This is not a grant or a gift. We must have the freedom as a country to choose where we procure the machinery from. I have read here that a technical team is going to visit China, which surely means that the equipment is coming from China. If the specifications are right and we have got the technical know—how to know what is sub-standard, I will have no problem.  But we have a lot of junk in our yards of hardly three-year-old equipment coming from this country. A few days ago, I visited Mbale Municipality about this same loan; we found there trucks from another country which are over fifteen years old and are still very strong. But equipment from the country where we are going to procure these will be waiting to be boarded off in less than three years. 

The spirit of this loan is good, and I support it; but once it gets in our hands, let us have our hands untied and do shopping on the international market –(Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Member for giving way. I want to share some information regarding some trucks from China. In my former portfolio as Minister of State for Defence, we got Jiefang trucks from China and actually they are the trucks the UPDF military are using. We bought more than 72 pieces which are performing very well. So, I would like to tell you that it depends on how the user handles the equipment. 

Secondly, in the Sixth or Seventh Parliament, there are Members of Parliament who benefited in loans and bought Jiefang trucks. Some of them changed the tonnage and the trucks ended up where they ended up. But those of us who used these trucks very well found them good. My point is that it depends on how the user handles the equipment. Thank you.

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I also want to thank hon. Arumadri. The information I would like to give is that China is a very complicated country; and it depends on the buyer. If you go to them, they give you two options: “Do you want original or duplicate?” (Laughter) So, my appeal is that our people should not go there and ask for duplicate items because they will not last. 

MR ARUMADRI: Madam Speaker, I want to say that once this loan gets in our kit, let us have free hands. The world market will include China. If we can get good equipment from there and the professionals identify them, so be it. But I have seen equipment of less than three years ready to be discarded and those from other countries are fifteen years and more, yet they are going strong. So, the option should be ours and our hands should not be tied. 

If I came to you and said, “I do not have food in my house, please lend me some money”, and then you say, “Oh, you want food; I will give you Shs 10,000. But there is Matooke in my garden and you must start with my Matooke”. That is not good; Let me have free hands. If I go round to the neighbourhood and find that your Matooke is the best, I will definitely come to you. That is my prayer. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the bulk of these requests are those that this House has been demanding for. You have been complaining about fire-fighting equipment in this country; you have complained about absence of road equipment for the districts; you have complained about solid management – do we really have to debate this matter? These are the things you have been asking for.

4.43
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We agree we want this equipment, but there are basic clarifications that the minister must give us. This loan is a tied loan; and in the twenty first century, that Uganda is still getting tied loans, is a very complicated matter. 

So, while I need fire-fighting equipment for my district and for this country, I would like the hon. Minister to answer the following questions; the supplier is already reported about as available in this report. How will the Auditor-General ensure value for money for this loan? I think it is a very important question. 

The second very important question is, how are the suppliers going to pay taxes due to this country, now that we are already procuring them?

Thirdly, how will this loan conform to the procurement provisions provided for under the PPDA – those are the things that must be answered? 

The last and final question is, the committee refers this loan to the procurement as in conformity to the National Development Plan. Madam Speaker, you know this House was denied the opportunity to approve the National Development Plan. How can we now allude to a National Development Plan which the National Planning Authority Act provided that this House should consider, approve and adopt? Now we are reporting about it; I do not even know this document called the National Development Plan. So, I need the equipment – I need it badly; but I need answers to taxes, procurement and value for money. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.46
MS BEATRICE AMONGI LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. I support the loan because as observed, we all need this equipment. But my concern is, one; the question of maintenance. As a country, we are not known for good maintenance of what we have. So, I want to find out from the Minister of Transport; once upon a time, in this country, when we had only 56 districts, the Government of Uganda tried to give districts road equipment to maintain the roads. I want to know the fate of this equipment; I want to know whether there is any district in this country which is still maintaining this road equipment. 

Some few years ago, I had the opportunity of visiting Cuba. What surprised me in that country was that there were vehicles on the roads of 1950s and they were still in use. How come in this country we have equipment that does not last? I thought that road equipment were such durable things; when I look at those rollers and caterpillars; they are such heavy things that are supposed to last for a long time. So, hon. Minister, what happened to the road equipment that we had for the districts? 

4.48
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to ask the minister whether we did not have an opportunity to negotiate the terms of the loan because here, I see we have a 2 percent, which is really very high. Couldn’t we negotiate and get a better deal than that?

Secondly, hon. minister, you only talked about fire equipment for two categories of fires. You have not taken care of bush fires which have played a very big role in destroying property in this country, especially those of us who come from village constituencies. Bush fires have destroyed properties and now you are putting only two categories. You would put one in Pader where we experience bush fires and these bush fires have claimed a lot of lives because these -(Interjections)- Can I be protected, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MS AKELLO: Because every year, my district loses many lives and property to bush fires. Since we already have this opportunity, instead of only allocating this fire-fighting equipment to oil areas, we should also extend to these villages.

My last point of clarification is about the zonal districts. The zoning of the districts was not very fair and did not take care of some districts like those in Northern Uganda, because there are only two districts in Northern Uganda, especially in the Acholi and Lango sub-regions -(Member timed out.)

4.50
MS SYLVIA NAMABIDDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek clarification on page 6; the chairperson has said that every district is going to benefit but in this very report, he says that though every district would desire to have a road construction maintenance unit, it is not viable for most districts whose networks are less than 350 metres to own and maintain a full road unit, as the cost of maintenance would be too high. When you look at the report, there is no annex indicating which districts are going to benefit. (Interjections) No, at least I do not have it on my copy.

4.51
MR NORMAN MUWULIZE (Independent, Buikwe County West, Mukono): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the loan, although I would like to request the minister for clarification. On page 6, there are some highway towns that are mentioned. I request that he takes note of Lugazi Police Station. That place, being on Kampala-Jinja Highway - as we know Kawolo Hospital - the place around there is very accident-prone and some of these accidents have actually always had fire problems. So, I request that we take note of this. I thank you.

4.52
MRS RUTH KAVUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): I thank you, Madam Speaker. As I support the loan, I have a small problem, and that is districts like Kalangala. We already have a full road unit which was given by the oil palm project. It is there; it is not doing anything because we cannot support it and at the same time, we happen to be on this list. Some of the districts put on the list for money to be - I do not know what to call it and yet we already have - 

And then secondly, if it is fire equipment -(Interruption)

MR MAWIYA: Thank you very much, hon. Kavuma for giving way. To add to what hon. Kavuma is saying, about 33 districts have full road equipment and for another 22, we have information that they have graders. Instead of giving the 113 districts equipment, why don’t we have that money maybe for maintenance, other than using others in excess?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, what is the state of this equipment? How old are they? Are they new?

MRS KAVUMA: Madam Speaker, the ones for Kalangala District are about two years old and they are sitting at the district headquarters. I mentioned when the Minister of Agriculture was handing it over that it is very nice to have it, but I did not think at that particular time, that was what we needed, because we do not even have a theatre to operate on anybody. I mean, why don’t they give us something else instead of something like that which we cannot even maintain?

Secondly, if we look at the fire equipment for the islands, are we putting in provision a motor boat that would be able to get to the - because the fires do not happen on the main island. We hardly have any fires on the main island; all the fires are in the far off islands. So, how do we get there in order -

We have a big truck for fire-fighting and it will sit at the islands, and in the records it will be, “Kalangala District got something”. I do not think I am happy with that. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.55
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want for once, to thank the government –(Interjections)- for once for listening to our cries and attempting to address them. But I wish to support others who have spoken. The issue of quality must be looked into and the Chinese market supplies the third world and the developed. We should go for specifications which are acceptable in the developed world and thereby, we are likely to get better quality. 

There is a small matter that I felt I needed to clarify on the waste disposal. It is a question we have battled with within the municipalities for a long time, and through the help of the World Bank on another loan basis, most municipalities have a waste disposal, and are producing manure from that waste disposal. Except, the aspect of bio-energy has not been utilised and that is something which Government needs to explore in the area of renewable energy such that we can have a system.

But I am concerned on the road works because on a national level, we have roads which before they are officially opened, are falling apart. I have seen these repair works on the road that takes me to my constituency less than two years since it was completed. I am not even sure how we are going to be able to ensure that we get roads which last for a period of time. The quality of road works generally is a problem and the issue of maintaining equipment - there is a big problem here in that Lira Municipality has been surviving on trucks supplied in 1982  -(Member timed out.)

4.58
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, District Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek two clarifications. First, the committee has not given us detailed contract conditionalities. When you tie loans to equipment, there is a possibility that the suppliers dictate the terms and even the quality. I do realise that there is an administration and commitment fee of 1 percent and then an interest rate of 2 percent. That is already too high for the same organisation that is going to give you the loan and also give you the equipment. That is one clarification I would like to seek.

Secondly, the procurement procedure must be followed and the procurement procedure is that we must make sure that whatever we buy is competitive in terms of price and quality. We may be excited about this equipment which has been listed here, but we need to compare with the equivalent quality in other countries. How much does it cost? Sometimes we can be taken for a ride. 

Somebody was talking about Jiefang. This is a joke. The Members of Parliament who got Jiefang in the Sixth Parliament all cried. Some got Tata and they were able to carry an extra load. But how come that only Jiefang was able to collapse under the African load? 

So, I think these are issues we cannot joke about because the moment we have spent the money, we have already mortgaged this country to pay for that loan and we must take our time to scrutinise all the conditionalities. I thank you.

5.00
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for these one or two minute contributions because the money we are talking about is actually a lot, and if we are to put the question and vote on it without raising these concerns, we will not  be performing our work as the Legislature of this country.

I would like to raise two issues. We may borrow this money; buy this equipment; and yet not reduce the risk of fire-fighting because if you are to fight a fire you need holistic infrastructure. For example, what have we done to reduce the fire risk infrastructure? You go to industrial area where there is the main depot of all the petrol stations and just 100 metres from there, you have got a school. What are we doing about petrol stations at each and every corner in this country? What are we doing about it?

The physical planning of this country is really lacking. Do we have even an emergency lane? For example, if a fire breaks out in Bwaise at 6 O’clock, with all this traffic jam, can the fire equipment move from the fire station to Bwaise within 30 minutes? 

So, you may have this equipment and it will lie at the fire station and whatever you are doing will come to nothing. Therefore, if you are planning to buy this equipment, you need to look at other factors that will assist this country to reduce the risk of fighting fire. Otherwise, we are wasting time. 

What happened to the water hydrants? We have our ministers in charge of this. Do we have them in this country? (Member timed out.)

5.02
MS REBECCA AMUGE (Independent, District Woman Representative, Lira): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the loan. However, I would like to inform the chairperson that while you forgot to include Buyende District, there is duplication on No.50 and No.98. Under No.50, you have Maracha-Terego and under No.98 you have Maracha. So, I feel that is duplication. (Laughter)

My concern is that zoning 20 districts may not be viable. Why do I say this? Which legal framework are we going to use to bring these autonomous districts together to sign agreements with a private company? Is it under the regional governments? What exactly do we want to do? I want us to understand that because it can be a problem.

Secondly, I would like to find out if we have an engineering department for this fire-fighting equipment in the Police, and if it is there, what is its capacity?

I also want the issue of the maintenance clearly spelt out because this equipment can come and then in a few years it has a problem. 

I want to believe in the capacity of our engineers and the technical people who are going to negotiate; but I also want to warn, like hon. Okumu has said, that in China, the equipment is very good, but they ask you for the percentage of quality you want. You can choose 30 percent; you can choose 100 percent. We propose they choose 100 percent. (Member timed out.)

5.04
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion, but I would like us to critically look at two areas. First of all, there are those districts that already have road equipment and they are hiring it out to private contractors, and most equipment is idle; almost 80 percent of the time -(Interjections)- in all districts. 

When I look through this document, I see Kampala which was recently commissioned. All the divisions of Kampala got full equipment; it was launched by His Excellency the President just a while ago. So, instead of overshadowing other small districts that need capacity –(Interjections)- like Sembabule -(Laughter)- but also like these other new districts, why don’t we really be fair? The listing of districts was meant to put everybody on board. That is why they end up repeating districts. We are not children, hon. ministers; we can really understand. Once a district is omitted, we can understand; but not for the sake of putting the district so that you move in the bandwagon and for all you say, “Aye.” We can understand the capacity building and we can appreciate it.

I have only two last points. I can see the administrative charge shall be 1 percent per annum. Normally, the administrative charges are charged once. If it is an interest rate it should be added to the two so that it is three and it is known that it is 3 percent. But for you to put it as one administrative charge per annum, means that each year we shall be spending US$ 3 million -(Member timed out.)

5.06 
MS GRACE TUBWITA (NRM, District Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support the loan and I have a few observations. Hon. Minister, when you talked about the categories which are going to benefit from the loan under the new town councils, you left out Migyera Town Council and yet Migyera happens to be a very big town council which is growing very fast. It is even bigger than some of the town councils listed here.  So, I would like to request that Migyera Town Council is also considered among category (d) of the new town councils that are going to be considered.

I would also like to make a comment on observation 14 whereby the committee talked about the urban planners not consulting the Police. I would like to bring to your attention that when you are planning all categories of people are consulted. And after drawing the plan, it is displayed. But the unfortunate part of it is that when the plan is displayed, most people do not come back to check and see whether most of their issues have been incorporated. 

One big problem, which I see, is that our country is lacking planners in most urban centres and when restructuring was done, the position of a physical planner or town planner was  not made mandatory. Maybe what the ministries have to do is to ensure that this position is made mandatory so that all urban centres recruit physical planners to implement these plans.  Most of the plans we have are just drawings. (Member timed out.) (Mr Wamanga-Wamai rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You want to tell us about the 30 percent? Yes, you were recently in China.

5.09
MR WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The EXIM Bank of China, that is the Export and Import Bank of China, is quite different from the companies that make this equipment. The negotiators of the loan should have only negotiated to borrow money from China and buy equipment elsewhere. 

When I was serving in China, the Chinese were giving loans - the EXIM Bank of China was giving loans - at 1 percent interest per annum, but I was surprised when I looked at the paper and it talks of 1 percent service charge and then 2 percent per annum. That is a very high interest. 

Secondly, when you go to China and look at the roads; their roads are wonderful. But they import the equipment from Germany and Japan for the maintenance of their roads. The roads are of a very high class. So, the government or the negotiators of the loan should have gone there to borrow their money and not to attach the purchase of the equipment from these companies -(Applause)- because I know very well that the EXIM Bank of China can give you a loan without tying it to the purchase of equipment from China. We need fire-fighters, but then we cannot be ruled to buy the equipment because we are borrowing money from there.

Secondly, the Chinese have the highest population; they have high quality middle class and low class -(Member timed out.)

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I think it is very important that we clear the information from the previous speaker. It is very unfortunate for a former diplomat to say that.  EXIM Bank is an export-import bank; it is a bilateral intention of any country whether it is India to promote its imports and exports. So, I think it is a total lie for anyone -(Interjections)- who knows what EXIM Bank is. I thought it wrong to go to the extent of saying that a bilateral arrangement borrowing under EXIM Bank, which is purely export-import, can be intended to benefit another country. I think that was a misinformation. 

5.12
MR MOSES KABUUSU (Independent, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg for protection – as I rise to support this loan, it must go on record that it is to be procured to purchase road equipment for the districts of Uganda. I note that the road units in the districts of Uganda are grossly abused. The ministry should, therefore, put strict measures as we acquire this loan and make sure that there are technical staff at the districts ready to operate and manage this equipment. 

The second thing, is that we acquired fire-fighting equipment during the CHOGM period, but some of the officers at stations we have visited like Mbarara, said the machine was just two years old, but as they tried to alarm to clear the way, the machine broke down. And the people who were meant to clear the way volunteered to push them. But this was equipment that had just been procured two years ago. We must ensure value for money for what we buy, of course, tantamount to the interest and loan itself.

The negotiators of this loan could have negotiated, but even we who are going to oversee the implementation of the project should monitor, and ensure that we are not given fake machines like those ones we saw in Mbarara. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us get policy responses now; Minister.

5.14
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  For the local governments, which I speak for in Cabinet and in this Parliament, this problem is real. Lack of equipment to construct their roads is a real problem. 

A few weeks ago, I visited Pader District and as I was moving from Otuke to a place called Adilang, I could not access the sub-county headquarters of Kotmor simply because there is no road. This problem is everywhere in the country and Government has now introduced a policy we call “force on account”. Force on account is a method where a district is allowed to use its own funds and personnel to maintain its own roads. 

By last week, this Parliament had approved about 14 districts, which brings the total of all the districts in Uganda to a total of 112. We have just approved new municipalities, which brings the total number of municipal councils in the country to 20. We also have 140 town councils. All these are fully-fledged local governments which need equipment for both roads and for garbage collection. 

Madam Speaker, this loan comes at a time when Government has put up through this Parliament what we call the Road Fund. So, the money for this equipment, the money to maintain the roads, and the money for fuel, is available under the Road Fund. Just this third quarter alone, Government released through the Road Fund Shs 48.434 billion.  This money has been released to the districts - I have the releases here –(Interjections)- I wish hon. Kabuusu could follow the trend of things so that he can monitor service delivery in his constituency better. Kalangala District alone has Shs 78.943 million from the Road Fund for the third quarter alone. So, it is not correct that Kalangala does not have money to maintain its roads.  

Madam Speaker, for the districts that are missing –(Interruption)

MR ISHAA OTTO: I would like to seek clarification from you. When you raise the matter of giving funds through the Road Fund to districts - because last year, Government through the Ministry of Works took over 10,000 kilometres of roads and they were centralised and handed over to Uganda National Roads Authority. Up to date, all these roads have remained in the state in which they were. 

In my district of Oyam, all the districts are now impassable –(Interjections)- all the roads are now impassable -(Laughter)- you cannot now access the district headquarters; you cannot access the neighbouring districts of Apac and Pader using the roads which originally were under the district, merely because the Minister of Works through UNRA took over all these roads as central roads. I am, therefore, seeking clarification from the minister whether the money that you have extended to the districts through the Road Fund is going to cater for the 10,000 kilometres of roads which have been taken over by the central government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister.

MR MWESIGE: Now, of course, the Ministry of Works will answer the 10,000 kilometre road network that central government took over in Oyam –(Interjections)– but the money –(Interjections)– well, wherever it is, the Minister of Works will answer that. 

Now, the money that I was reading about from the Road Fund is not for that purpose. This is money which is availed to the district is for maintenance. The roads that were taken over by central government, the minister will confirm that they will be worked on by the central government and not using this money. The minister will answer. The point I am making is that there is no excuse that there are no funds to use this equipment for the districts and municipal councils to maintain these roads and, therefore, that is why I commend this loan for approval by this House.

MR WACHA: I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the hon. Minister for giving way. Hon. Minister you are putting us in a dilemma. Most of the roads that were taken over were feeder roads and if you now take away feeder roads from the districts like in Oyam – most of the roads which were taken over take care of almost all the roads in the district. Now if you take over all those roads and you do not maintain them, you put them in a miserable state. What is the money that you are talking about going to maintain?

MR MWESIGE: The Minister of Works is going to answer that, but I know that there are three types of roads; there are national roads; there are roads that central government took over from the districts; there are also district roads, which the district maintains in the district –(Interjections)– there are also community access roads which will be maintained by the sub-counties. Now, Government is giving money to the district to maintain district roads. Government is also giving money to the sub-counties to maintain community access roads – but the minister of works can clarify better.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Works -

5.21
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): I want to thank hon. Members for the overwhelming support they gave to this loan. I think that also reflects the concerns that we all have as a country – so that our roads are properly maintained. I also take note of the honourable members’ concerns about value for money for equipment and good maintenance of the roads. I thought I would give more clarification because I realised there may be some mix up of this whole concept. 

First of all, we have been carrying out a lot of reforms on the road sector – administrative reforms like UNRA; financing for maintenance like the Road Fund; and network reform – that is why we decided to take over literally double the national network. We no longer talk about feeder roads anymore - we have roads classified as national roads that are looked after by the central government, which is under UNRA, and which have now been doubled from 11,000 to 21,000 by taking over the 10,000 plus. 

Then we have district roads and the name reflects the authority. Those district roads are supposed to be maintained by the district. We also have urban roads which are maintained by the urban authorities including Kampala City Council, although I am always abused about Kampala roads, but actually Kampala roads are maintained by Kampala City Council and I want to take this opportunity to emphasise that Kampala roads are maintained by Kampala City Council, and I appeal to people to leave my name alone with regard to Kampala roads –(Laughter)

Then we have –(Interjections)- just let me finish this point. 

Then we have community access roads which are maintained by the community. Now, if I may clarify on hon. Ben Wacha’s concern; when you take over roads from the district to national, the district should look at its network that has remained and then also look at the community access roads and upgrade those so that it has a better network. We are modernising and improving so you should not say, “They have taken my roads and I now have no roads. What do I now need money for?”  No, you look at the community roads, upgrade them and then there will also be paths that will now qualify to be community access roads –(Laughter)

MR ISHAA OTTO: This is not a matter of explaining the category of roads – we know all this -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, you have already contributed -    

MR ISHAA OTTO: No, no. I am just asking the same question –(Interjections)– 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you have already used your two minutes. Let hon. Okumu speak.

MR OKUMU: I want to thank the minister of works for giving way. I am just seeking a very small clarification. What he has laboured to explain, most Members of Parliament know and understand. In Gulu, I know which roads belong to the district, the community and then the national roads. The clarification I want to get is, why is it that for example – I am competent about Gulu – that the district roads are well maintained and very smooth – they are actually okay and I would give credit to the Ministry of Local Government. But the national roads are in the worst state with some of them impassable. Why?

MR NASASIRA: Well, I do not know which national roads you use. Definitely from Gulu to Kampala, you must have passed on Gulu road –(Laughter)- but let me explain. I know the condition of district roads is worse off. Even when you see our policy – nationally - of course in Gulu, we have had many projects there where we have maintained those roads; the district roads. Gulu also happens to be in a very good area with lateritic soils – and if you go to the North, the district roads there are in a better condition than the district roads in any other region in Uganda –(Interjections)– that is true. I have been told about these roads and I know what I am talking about –(Interjections)– (Interruption)

MR GUTOMOI: Thank you hon. Minister for giving way. Hon. Minister, you recall my letter to you and copied to the district chairman that the road you are talking about – if I take you to Agweng, Otwal up to Oyam – this is the worst road in this country and so you cannot deceive us –(Laughter)– it is the worst road in this country and you can do your inspection. I thank you. (Interjections) 

MR NASASIRA: I want to beg Members to give me time and I clarify; otherwise, I will lose – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think if we talk about our roads –

MR NASASIRA: Of course we know there are bad roads and by the way, before we took over the 10,000, the districts were the ones begging the central government to take them all because they could not maintain them. (Interjections) You know the process; we consulted districts; we consulted MPs. And having taken them, there was no budget for them. We came to this House; you rated them; passed the 30 kilometres - the Shs 30 billion - and now as they say, stay tuned; you are going to see roads being maintained everywhere. (Interjections) Now, let me explain this loan so that we are happy. (Interjections)

Firstly, the roads – this equipment is for maintaining roads. There are two ways of maintaining. The regular routine maintenance and when the road needs re-gravelling. The problem we still have in Uganda is that we have not reached a stage where all roads are re-gravelled or the tarmac roads are tarmacked and maintained at the right time and then the cycle starts. (Interjections) Now, this equipment – let me say this point, I will forget it. This equipment - the zonal equipment will be for periodic maintenance; for re-gravelling. 

All the other districts – each district will get at least one grader depending on the length of its network, and a hand roller for doing culverts and minor repairs. Then it will also have gangs so that there is – gangs for manual maintenance. You will have a grader to grade your roads every year and when you get money from the Road Fund for re-gravelling your road; you have got this zonal equipment and you book or get into a contract and they come and re-gravel basing on known rates. We are also trying to cut the unnecessary high costs of the so-called tendering. So, the periodic maintenance gravelling, will be zonal; the grading per year will be by the district. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When shall we finish?

MR NASASIRA: Can I start with my friend here -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No; but hon. Minister, we have other business. Hon. Minister, we have other business on the Order Paper. Please, conclude so that finance can also speak.

MR NASASIRA: In the spirit of time, let me conclude so that –(Interjections)- Yes. Well, since I did not allow my good friend hon. Alice Alaso, I think we are going to – we have a draw so that – Okay; now, let me conclude in the spirit of time.

That cycle will change the status of roads in our country in a couple of years.

The maintenance of equipment, which Members of Parliament are concerned about; first, when we had the big districts with units, one of the biggest problems they had was maintaining that equipment. We found that the utilisation was about 25 percent per year of what was required. That is why we have changed just to a basic grading unit and the re-gravelling is managed. These zonals will be managed and maintained by a private company – the private sector. Your duty as a district is to go there when you have got your money from the Road Fund; put the money there and supervise those re-gravelling your road for a known distance. As long as the equipment is maintained well, it will last. Even our own bodies, if we do not maintain them well, they will not last. So, the biggest problem we have had is poor maintenance, which we want to correct through these zonals.

Now, the other one of value for money; we expect to take experts who know that the equipment that is bought is up to the standards. I think there is no point of inviting Members of Parliament to be part of the inspection team when this equipment is going to be inspected. (Interjections) There is no problem. We can do that and we will try our best to see that we get standard equipment. If I may answer hon. Reagan Okumu’s, do you want the good one or do you want the photocopy? 

Finally –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Finance is going to answer the other one.

MR NASASIRA: Finally, the issues of agreement and finance and so on and the conditions will be answered by my colleague from finance.  Thank you.

5.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING & ECON. DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, during a stakeholders’ meeting on Monday, the people of Sheema  passed a resolution thanking you for the way you have –(Interjections)- managed the affairs of this House and thanked Members of Parliament very profoundly -(Interjections)- for granting Sheema a district status. (Laughter) Yes; and they are looking forward to receiving a road construction unit to improve the service delivery in the district. And thank you and thank you. (Interjections)

Two; I just want to respond, specifically to the issues raised. The first issue, which was raised by the Shadow Minister for Works was the question of the impact of our continued borrowing on debt sustainability, and whether we are not mortgaging our future and the children to come.  On this, I just want to assure my colleague that I have taken trouble to look at the various factors that affect debt sustainability; basically about the cost of borrowing, the performance of the economy, the total export potential and the domestic revenue. On the basis of this calculation, a threshold, which measures whether or not debts are sustainable, and I can confirm to this House that in the figures that we have on ratios of solvency and ratios of liquidity, the debt so far incurred, is sustainable. So, that question is –(Interjections)- completely answered. (Interjections)

The ratios are: On solvency sustainability, if the threshold is 50 percent and your debt ratio is below 50, that indicates that the debt is sustainable and the current –(Interjections)- yes, and the current ratio – the cap is 50 percent and the current figures for Uganda are 16; and 16 is below 50; showing clearly that the debt is sustainable. 

The same is true about the liquidity ratio. The cap is 25; our current figure is 2.2. It is showing you again that you still have room for more borrowing. So, I just wanted to answer this question because it is constantly raised; about whether our continued borrowing is sustainable. I confirm to this House that so far, the debt is sustainable. 

The next question was a straight one about the terms.

MAJ. (RTD) GUMA: Those ratios and figures from Prof. Kamuntu about debt sustainability and liquidity and – all of us know as much as he does that the majority of the loans apart from budget support loans, are non-performing. They are non-performing, Prof. Kamuntu. Twenty percent, 30 percent - so, what exactly are you saying hon. Minister; that we have the capacity to absorb the loans? If so, the sustainability is a different thing. We may sustain, but he knows that the country is paying a big cheque in terms of punitive penalties; they are called penalties; a big cheque. Can you tell us how much Government is paying because of non-performance of a number of loans that we have passed? 

This Parliament here, in rare circumstances, have we refused to pass a loan for the Government, including loans which we do think in our own professional appreciation that they are bad loans; somehow they are pushed and we pass them. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: I know that hon. Guma has raised this issue of implementation and absorption of the money borrowed; and I also know - there was a paper presented in this House and I can bring an update on the absorption and rate of utilisation of all the loans that have been used if you give me time. But I want us to respond specifically –(Interjections)– yes, I can do this. I agree with him that when we borrow this money, it should be used; that is the whole purpose why we borrow. 

I want to confirm to you, that the loans so far borrowed have been allocated to the sectors with the greatest potential for growth and consequently again, making sustainable the debts we are incurring. 

The second question is related to what company is supplying these items. The company is called, “First Automobile Import and Export Company of China”. They have previously supplied trucks to KCC; they have also previously supplied trucks to Ministry of Defence. 

Again, I would like to confirm to you, that the mode of ownership in China is different. This company is 100 percent sponsored by Government and consequently it is an arm of the Chinese Government for promoting international relations with African countries. If I had time, I would also show you – in 2006, in the Afro-Chinese Summit Meeting, Chinese put US$ 5 billion in the hands of Africa as concessional terms. 

Therefore, this loan of 100 million which we are borrowing is part of that concessional loan fund that China has put for the use of Africa; we are competing for it. The terms are as follows: 

The amount is 100 million. The repayment period is 20 years and it is 5 years of grace. You have an interest rate of 2 percent; and there is an administrative charge. Anybody who is experienced in international borrowing would know that the terms given under this loan are concessionary. If you studied international borrowing, you would find there is nowhere else you could get these terms. Forty percent of the funds are allowed to procure items outside China. 

This is a Government of China loan to Uganda; so, when it comes to payment of tax –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I insist, with your permission that the minister tells me how the institution that is assigned to ensure value for money will be involved in a process that is more or less complete. The report of the committee tells me that the supplier has said that the goods will be delivered within three months’ time. 

So, as we approve this loan, it looks like we are just rubber stamping a process which has already gone ahead without the involvement of the Auditor-General who should ensure value for money. That is my first concern. 

My second concern was that I understand that there are provisions that govern procurement. If this company is a compulsory thing, as provided for in the loan, we should have been told that part of the loan terms is to purchase from this company. But even then, how do you deal with matters of procurement? We have had deals before in this country where negotiators of Government go and negotiate deals that are not good. Recently, we had a deal to do with Shimoni land. The President of this country told us that he was let down by bureaucrats who negotiated a bad deal and, therefore, the Shimoni land had to be given to another person. These are the things we want to avoid. 

So, the minister cannot just gloss over this matter because my little daughter will be one of the people going to pay for this loan in future. I am not going to take this matter lightly. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You realise that every loan that is contracted by Government is required by law to be approved by this House. How then can it be that we are asking this House to rubber-stamp; nothing can happen unless they approve it. Otherwise, we would not come here. 

On the matter of value for money, who defines the value for money? The procurement procedures are defined in the terms of the loans and the terms have been laid before this House. 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I want to draw the attention of Members to page 14 of the report – under quantity, quality and price of goods in the report of the committee. It states, “A technical team from the Uganda Government will visit China FAW Group, Import/Export Corporation to firm up quantities, specification of goods and delivery arrangements before shipment. Such inspections will include pre-production inspection plus pre-shipment inspection at the customer’s cost”.

Now, on the issue of the Auditor General, I did not know that ordinarily, the Auditor-General gets involved in such procurement at this stage; I could be helped. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think what the Members are inquiring is, how does the PPDA fit into this loan?

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, as the minister comes in, I want to lay on Table the detailed proposal on procurement of assorted equipment for districts and urban governments and fire-fighting equipment. 

In our report, first of all as a committee, we took a lot of interest in studying this document because we are aware of what hon. Okumu and hon. Akena raised, that China is the biggest lender to America and the biggest exporter, but what they import is quality and that is why in our report, we have gone further to mention good price, good quality and good quantity because we took trouble to make sure - and that is how in our report, we emphasise what is stated there that the technical specifications, the pre-production visit, and the pre-shipment visit have all taken place. I thank you.

5.49
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Charles Oduman): Madam Speaker, the issue Members are raising is that, you can borrow money but the concern is that we are borrowing money that is tied. That is the issue we are raising; that the borrowing has strings attached. That is the principle issue. Therefore, the issue is, why don’t we source borrowing that is not tied to supply? This is the whole issue.

In the report that we are about to receive which is not pre-emption, there are cases where we have entered into tied arrangements where the supplier determines the price and where you have a situation where you have one supplier determining the price. How do you ensure value for money? Value for money in the PPDA regulations is determined by competition. You want to run away from that. Why don’t we look for borrowing arrangements where the loans are not tied? How many lenders do we have in this world who can give us concessional loans? Are you saying EXIM Bank is the only one that can give us this loan on these terms? That is the principle question.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I want to provide the answer which, Madam Speaker, you have already hinted on. Under PPDA, how does the arrangement under this law conform to or comply with the PPDA? The law allows bilateral arrangements between Uganda and any other government. PPDA also permits conditional - [Mr Nandala-Mafabi: “Information”] - no, this is very clear. I have mentioned - I am speaking -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him explain.

PROF. KAMUNTU: What I am saying is - I mentioned it and I know it and I have been there. The Chinese Government has put US$ 5 billion concessionary to support government programmes. Under this programme, this US$ 100 million which we are borrowing, no country, and I challenge anybody in this House, which company and country can put US$ 100 million and give you 20 years of repayment with five years of grace at 2 percent? Name it. (Interjections) No, I am challenging him, let him name it. This is the most - apart from IDA conditions, this is one of the most concessional bilateral agreements Government of Uganda has reached with the Chinese to help in one of the most -

As you mentioned, one of the most binding constraints to our transformation is this infrastructural constraint and this really answers that problem, and I am surprised that Members -(Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)- but can you save me from hon. Nandala-Mafabi? No, I just wanted to conclude -(Laughter)- or if you do not want me to conclude, I can continue; but I just wanted to conclude.

I can confirm to this house-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order Members. Have you concluded?

PROF. KAMUNTU: I want to conclude by urging the Members of the House that one way of removing the constraints which are binding our economic transformation, and which will improve the conditions of the roads in your own constituency, is the approval of this loan. I beg to move. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members -(Mr Bayiga Lulume rose_)- you have been sitting there quietly, no.

I put the question that this House approves the request by Government to borrow US$ 100 million from the Export-Import Bank of China for the acquisition of assorted road equipment, sanitary equipment and fire-fighting equipment for districts and urban councils of Uganda. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE SPECIAL AUDIT OF THE COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING (CHOGM) EXPENDITURE

5.55
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for the opportunity to present a summary of the CHOGM report. I have brought 360 copies this time. We have sent this report to your email addresses in addition to what we are giving you. But before I make the presentation -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, is the summary the 360 or the main?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The main one is on email and the big one has been bound, it will be available here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is this the summary?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: This is a summary, Madam Speaker. I will run through it very fast, do not get worried-

MR MWESIGWA-RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, we have a number of procedural problems regarding the report and the chairperson now seeks to read the summary. His reading the summary may infringe upon the procedural aspects that we want to raise against the report. The procedure of the House has been that such reports are laid.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let him make his problem – no, let him raise it and we shall answer. 

MR RUKUTANA: The procedural aspect is that the reports are laid; they become the property of the House; and then Members express themselves when the reports have been laid. But in this case, when we have procedural aspects to raise, how can the chairperson delve in the summary? Is that procedurally correct?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, chairperson, that was my problem in the morning; that I want the whole report produced. What they are saying is that why are you producing a summary rather than the full report? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, in the morning -(Interjections)- please listen. In the morning, there were 100 copies then you said, “Let us have a summary.” Yesterday there were 150 copies kept outside and you said, “You come and make a summary.” I have made a summary for you. So, what?  Why do you fear?

MR ODUMAN: Madam Speaker, further information. The chairman had said that after circulating the bigger report, we come with the summary so that we can only read the summary. He had said that the entire thing was going to be properly bound so that it comes in totality as 100 and something pages. If you like, after the presentation of this summary, or if you so wish, you may wait to get the whole bound document for debate. The presentation of the executive summary should go on and then we can cross the bridge when we get there. But we need first to hear what the executive summary, which is part of the report, and which has also already been circulated, is saying. So, it is in circulation and we are even promising a bound one. What is the problem?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon.  Members, provided no debate ensues on the summary until the full report is handed to the Members - the full report.  

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker and hon.  Colleagues, I wish to seek your indulgence. In the first place, it is not the first time that committees have come up with thick reports.  It is also a common practice in this Parliament that when the report is thick and cannot be read overnight, Members are presented with the executive summary and given time to study the whole report. 

I beg that the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee be given an opportunity to present the executive summary of the 200-page document and thereafter the honourable  colleagues can take time and read the whole report and at an appropriate time, we can engage in the debate of the whole report. I beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker.     

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Today is just receiving. Let us receive it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I want to thank all the members of the Public Accounts Committee, all Members of Parliament, the Executive, all the public servants and the civil servants. And I want to thank the public. 

Madam Speaker, I just want to correct one impression that yesterday when I came to your office, I threw the paper. I was brought up with good manners and I remember I laid it very well.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: At least you are confirming that you brought it yesterday.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But I never threw it, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you have confirmed to the country that you actually brought it yesterday. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker that is okay. The other day when I came I said it was okay.

Madam Speaker, having said that, I have here documents which I will lay on the Table to help the Members to understand what we are talking about.  Our executive summary, given the fact that CHOGM was a very big report, has many pages - about 60 - but we shall try to summarise them further.

The Background 

The Government of Uganda hosted the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) from 23 to 25 November 2007. As a host country, the Uganda Government was mandated to put in place facilities that meet requirements of the Commonwealth Secretariat which were in accordance with the specifications contained in the Guidelines (Blue Book) and the budget on the organisation of CHOGM. 

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs was mandated to co-ordinate all CHOGM preparatory activities and was entrusted with all the funds to finance and implement the CHOGM activities. Due to the scope and technicalities involved, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs delegated most of the activities to the various committees headed by the Permanent Secretaries of various ministries, with all of whom they signed Memoranda of Understanding. 

Madam Speaker, as you are aware, Parliament in December 2007 directed Cabinet to request the Auditor-General to undertake a financial and value for money audit on all CHOGM expenditures. The objective of the audit was to obtain reasonable assurance whether the funds earmarked for CHOGM were properly budgeted, requisitioned and utilised for the intended purposes. 

His Excellency the President requested the Auditor-General to carry out an audit on all CHOGM funds and to report his findings accordingly. The Public Accounts Committee has examined the audit report on CHOGM and hereby reports its findings. Below is the summary with highlights. The committee has also made a number of recommendations for the attention of this august House.

Methodology of enquiry

The committee invited and interacted with key witnesses who were involved in CHOGM activities. These included members of the cabinet sub-committee, permanent secretaries of the responsible ministries, and the technical staff in the implementation of CHOGM activities. The committee also interacted with His Excellency the President and the Vice President. 

The committee further analysed and reviewed the relevant documents which included contracts and agreements made for delivery of goods and services, minutes of meetings of CHOGM preparations, several supporting correspondences and were guided by the relevant laws governing the use of public funds. The committee also carried out field visits to ascertain the works done. 
The committee interviewed all the witnesses that appeared before it. Some witnesses gave their testimonies on oath and others in camera. 

The committee, however, wishes to report that the hon. Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries, hon. Hope Mwesigye, one of the key figures in the organisation of CHOGM and specifically who was chairing the beautification and decoration sub-committees, was not interviewed by the committee. 

Earlier on and for reasons of other commitments on the part of the Minister, the committee had agreed to her request to reschedule her appearance four times. However, when the Minister finally appeared on 20 April 2010, she arrived at 10.28 a.m. and instead chose to walk out of the committee room after only three minutes before the meeting could commence. 

Members of PAC had waited for her from 10.00 a.m. and the chairman of the committee, hon. Nandala- Mafabi,   had even talked to her to wait as Members were coming in. The committee was not informed by the minister why she walked away before she could meet the committee. Since then, the press ran reports that hon. Mwesigye had accused the committee of being maligned. We have put for you Annex 1.  She, however, later wrote to the committee on the 3 May 2010, requesting to meet the Committee the same day at 10.00 a.m. 

In her letter, she had warned that if the committee failed to meet her that day, she would not be available because she was travelling out of the country on other national duty.  The committee could not postpone other meetings it had scheduled and, therefore, failed to meet hon. Mwesigye, the Minister of Agriculture. The committee, however, had required her to explain a questionable expenditure of Shs 617 million allocated for decoration activities of Shimoni grounds beautification under her ambit; and the beautification and the collections from Shimoni exhibitors and festivals.  If you look down, it was a mistake.

CHOGM 2007 Preparations 

In December 2003, a notification was made in Abuja for Malta to host CHOGM 2005, and Uganda to host CHOGM 2007.

The Cabinet meeting of 16 June 2004 on CHOGM approved the organisational framework for Uganda’s hosting of CHOGM in 2007, which included a Cabinet sub-committee and the National Task Force. The former provided the political framework through which the latter was supervised and guided. The National Task Force coordinated the implementation of all planned activities. 

Chronology of CHOGM 2007 Preparations

Madam Speaker, there is the chronology of how the preparations were done.

The Organisational Structure for the CHOGM Preparation Cabinet Sub-Committee

The Cabinet constituted a sub-committee, which consisted of a few Cabinet ministers to handle CHOGM preparations. The Cabinet sub-committee began its preparatory meetings on 6 September 2004 and agreed on the following issues among others:

Financing the preparatory work of the National Task Force (NTF)-
Approving competent officers to work on the NTF

The Cabinet sub- committee was chaired in most cases by the Vice President, H.E. Prof Gilbert Bukenya, except when the President, H.E Yoweri Kaguta Museveni attended the meeting in person. The decision of the Cabinet sub-committee in regard to CHOGM activities was final. In their absence, the Minister of Foreign Affairs hon. Sam Kutesa chaired the Cabinet sub-committee meetings on CHOGM and also hon. Kirunda Kivejinja chaired the Cabinet sub-committee meeting on CHOGM once.

National Task Force (NTF)

The NTF was headed by the Head of Civil Service and Secretary to Cabinet, Mr Mitala, but later on, the role was taken over by Ms Hilda Musubira when she was appointed the Executive Director of CHOGM 2007.  The NTF was entrusted with coordinating and planning the preparations for CHOGM 2007. It began its preparatory meetings on 14 September 2004. The NTF created several sectoral sub-committees working directly under it, which were chaired by the permanent secretaries of the line ministries. The sub-committees were thus as follows:

•	Infrastructure - Ministry of Works and Transport 
•	Security and Accreditation - Office of the President, 
•	Media and Publicity - Office of the President/Office of the Prime Minister   
•	Protocol, Hospitality, Events   and Immigration - Ministry of Foreign Affairs,   
•	Venues - Ministry of Foreign Affairs,    
•	Budget - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - that is the table which presents them.

CHOGM 2007 Secretariat

A secretariat to service the Cabinet sub-committee and the NTF was established to work on a full-time basis. The functions of the secretariat included:

•	Strategic planning, management and monitoring activities;

•	Co-ordination and harmonization of activities;

•	Promotion of the Meeting and dissemination of information to stakeholders and the general public;

•	Submission of regular reports on preparatory activities to the Minister of Foreign Affairs;

•	Mobilisation of the private sector as a strategic partner in the preparation for CHOGM 2007; and

•	Implementation of the decisions and recommendations agreed upon.

Unclear CHOGM Structures and Responsibilities 

The committee was informed that the technical aspects of CHOGM were headed by the Executive Director of CHOGM, Ms Hilda Musubira. However, when we put her to task to explain her role in the overall planning, management and co-ordination of CHOGM in relation to procurement flaws, she admitted her lack of control over political leadership. This was despite the President’s directive to her to ensure that Procurement Regulations are followed in the procurement of goods and services for CHOGM. 

The committee observed that she found a problem in performing her duty as assigned and found herself only coordinating reports other than management of the preparation process for CHOGM.  She was not effective, unable to advise the Cabinet sub-committee, even when they appeared to have abdicated their role of policy guidelines and got involved in procurements.

Furthermore, the committee was in one instance informed by the Minister for Security, hon. Amama Mbabazi, that during CHOGM, he held the responsibility of “Inspector General of CHOGM”. However, when the committee later sought confirmation of this role from the chairman of the CHOGM sub-committee, also the Vice President, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya, he denied existence of any such role or title and said, “Whoever told you was either fooling you or he was out of his mind.” 

The committee concluded that because of this ambiguity in the structure, some officials could have imposed some roles and titles on themselves, which were not in the established structure, for reasons unknown. Such inherent and created ambiguities in the structure led to various communication and co-ordination lapses in the secretariat.

Benefits from hosting CHOGM

Uganda definitely benefited from hosting CHOGM 2007, especially in its positive impact on the economy and international standing. The conference helped the country to lay an infrastructural foundation which is influential to the development of this country. The committee commends the effort of the Government in hosting this conference. However, as already noted above, the country would have benefited even more if only the resources were carefully utilised.

General Observations and Findings

During the course of audit, some observations were made and the Committee outlines its general findings on the concerns of the Auditor-General as follows:

Preparations

It was noted that although Uganda learnt of hosting CHOGM way back in 2003, and got the hosting rights in November 2005, serious preparations and release of funds did not start until late July 2006 when the first release of funds was made to Speke Resort Munyonyo, the venue for the meeting. However, before this, the NTF and organisation framework existed. Disbursements to implementing ministries like Ministry of Works were made in late December 2006, almost ten months to the date of the meeting, and yet the ministry had made a request to start in January 2005 due to minimum gestation period required for works. 

The delays in preparation and disbursement of funds greatly affected timely implementation of the planned activities, particularly those relating to procurement. There were lapses in compliance with recommended established procedures. In most instances, this was in respect of procurement for civil works and transport, involving substantial sums of money. 

Most ministries were, therefore, found to have resorted to procurement of goods and services using sole sourcing or restricted method of procurement, citing emergencies and time constraints.  PPDA cleared this contract without due regard to public interest.

Furthermore, for contracts such as civil works (50 percent of the budget) which had to be executed in such a short time, delay to release funds created a risk of poor workmanship, shoddy works and not allowing standard time for the civil works done before they could be used, leading to quick wear and tear. Due to the limited time available to the implementing agencies, procurements in most cases were rushed and in the process Government was ripped off through high prices, which would in most instances be three times the market prices. The mostly affected were road works, building constructions and repairs.

Funding for CHOGM 2007

Overall, the Government of Uganda through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provided Shs 270,474,309,660 for CHOGM 2007 preparations, spread over a period of three financial years 2005/2006, 2006/2007 and 2007/2008. This budget was approved by Parliament. 

Investigations by the committee, however, revealed that some individual ministries kept on spending outside the funds approved by Parliament. It was, for example, noted that a total of Shs 11.9 billion was sourced from Uganda Revenue Authority, to procure various security equipments for CHOGM. Another Shs 3.4 billion was got from the Ministry of Defence to pay for additional expenditures on fuel and allowances. Another Shs 80 billion was borrowed by CAA as a bank loan to carry out works on the airport.  A bank guarantee for this loan was issued by the Minister, Dr Ezra Suruma, without the required approval of Parliament. 

Some money was given to hotels as investment and this included J&M Hotel - Shs 2.6 billion, Imperial Royale - Shs 3 billion, and Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort - Shs 13 billion.   A lot of variations in the procurement of roads, street lighting, cars, and security, led to increased expenditures which were never approved by Parliament. 

The committee found that the US$ 5 million was got from the National Back Borne Project under Ministry of ICT for procurement of security equipment, without authority of Parliament, and was not declared to the Auditor-General – this is what you just passed a few minutes and this is what you are going through. These expenditures were not brought to the attention of Parliament and was, therefore, unauthorised. The committee reports that it could not get satisfactory justification for this extra budgetary expenditure. The committee estimates that the CHOGM expenditures almost doubled from the authorised and appropriated budget of Shs 270 billion to over Shs 500 billion.

We have given you the table, but the last figure of Ministry of Defence - fuel and allowances - should be Shs 3.4 billion and the total comes to Shs 247 billion. On this one, I am sure it could be more.

Works under CHOGM

Although most of the expenditures were approved in preparation for CHOGM and the works were expected to be completed by the time of CHOGM, some of the activities were carried out well after CHOGM. This included activities to do with the beautification of the city and road works. The committee was concerned on how relevant these activities were for the purpose of CHOGM since they did not achieve the primary intention for which they were intended and yet we paid three times more.
 
Procurement lapses

The committee reports that nearly all the procurements done under CHOGM, had lapses in respect to compliance with established procurement procedures. This was mainly noticed in respect of procurement for civil works and transport involving substantial sums of money.  For example, procurement of roads alone cost Government – which were direct - Shs 21 billion – which never followed international competitive bidding or even restrictive bidding. 

In the procurement of motor vehicles, Uganda lost over Shs 6 billion. As you are aware, this was single sourcing. The committee is concerned that the use of direct procurement methods denied Government competitive prices and quality. Procurements were rushed in all cases and in the process, Government was ripped off highly with prices which were even three times more. The committee was informed that despite the technical advice given by the technocrats of the ministries, the Cabinet sub-committee gave directives that interfered with the processes of procurement. 

The committee is concerned as to what the interest of the Cabinet sub-committee was by deciding to get involved in procurement outside their right roles of policy guidance. The committee finds this irregular and has made appropriate recommendations against members of the sub-committee of Cabinet, who were found to be interfering with the procurement process. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to highlight some of the major procurements under CHOGM where the taxpayer absorbed the biggest losses and these are:

Road works

The committee was informed that the infrastructure committee of the NTF was headed by the Permanent secretary, Ministry of Works. This committee was in charge of road improvements, maintenance and emergency repairs in Entebbe and Kampala, and it received a total of Shs 91.7 billion to cater for those things below. The following anomalies were noted:

Roads designed but not worked on

The ministry engaged consultants to carry out design of work on a number of roads that were identified. However, some of the roads which were designed by the consultants were never worked on, yet the designer had already been paid. These include: Makindye - Nsambya, Nakiwogo – Nsamizi, Ngamba and Bulago Islands. Of course, this led to a loss of funds which were used for consultancy. The expense, therefore, is nugatory.

Apparent poor quality works     

The committee noted poor quality of road works. Roads which had just been repaired or reconstructed had developed defects including potholes, bleeding and stripping.  This was basically due to poor workmanship and the directives for variations of scope of work by political leaders. 

Inconsistent charges for materials in direct procurement

The committee found that contractors were charging different prices for the similar items/work, yet contracts were awarded in the same period where one would not expect price fluctuations for materials. There were wide disparities between the prices charged and the published price list of materials on the PPDA official website. 

Since most of the contracts were procured through the direct method, it was certain that value for money could not be attained. PPDA should be held responsible for allowing direct procurement.

Value of work done 

The committee noted that out of Shs 9.9 billion – this was for maintenance of selected roads in KCC - that was required for road works, a total of Shs 6 billion had been paid as at 16 December 2007. The works should have been, therefore, completed before CHOGM. However, an inspection carried out and the progress report revealed that whereas some roads had been completed, others were partially done or not done at all by the CHOGM time. This implies that the projects never fully achieved the objective of CHOGM for which they were paid for. This would have been avoided if Government had properly planned for these works. 

Variations by the Minister outside the CHOGM budget

The committee observed that during the inspection of roads in Entebbe by the state minister for works, hon. Byabagambi, he directed the consultant engineers (M/S Multiplan) to carry out additional works. The minister did this outside the law and in total disregard of the Accounting Officer. 

The committee noted that this variation led to an extra cost of over Shs 1.7 billion outside the CHOGM budget. When the minister appeared before the committee, he said, “I stand by the directive I made and have no regrets whatsoever. My work is to direct and it was imperative upon the Accounting Officer to identify where funds are”. 

The committee, however, was concerned that these variations did not follow procurement regulations, but were directed by the minister on the basis of arbitrary rates. This denied opportunity for competition, which could have saved public funds.

Inclusion of non-critical roads

The committee was concerned that some of the variations included non-critical works. The authorities in place decided to abuse the trust and included in the list, roads that led to private property. The Minister of State for Foreign Affairs (Regional Co-operation), for example, on 11 June 2007 is reported to have written to the Minister of Works and Transport requesting the inclusion of the road to Enkombe Apartments in Mbuya. 

Critical roads which had earlier been designed were not worked on, and were sacrificed in favour of non-critical roads that led to private properties, yet funds were spent on the designs. 

Examples of non-critical roads that were not designed but were worked on include: Serunkuma Road leading to the Enkombe Apartments, at a cost Shs 302 million; Golf Course Road; parking and access road to Entebbe Municipality at Shs 170 million; and the variations on roads leading to hon. Suruma’s and hon. Rukutana’s – that is Salaama; we crossed it out –(Interjections)- yes, you cancel out that Salaama – leading to hon. Suruma’s and hon. Rukutana’s, were made at a cost of Shs 360 million. All these roads were not in the CHOGM budget and, therefore, not crucial, but were costs that the taxpayer was made to bear. Of course, these roads were not also ever approved by the Cabinet sub-committee of CHOGM and Parliament.   

Reduction in scope of four roads to cater for roads leading to hotels around Kampala City Centre, were also requested for by hon. John Nasasira. Although this was good, this request should have been planned and needed not to have waited for CHOGM. 
 
Several contracts underwent variations, which amounted to 30 percent across all the contracts. This led to an increase from the overall cost of Shs 74.7 billion to Shs 96.5 billion, an increase of 30 percent above the original budget -(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, we do not know more, if anybody knows about this, this is what came to our attention, and in that regard I want to lay a police report on the Table, which shows how the ministers did this road. This is the report, and the one of the officers of the Ministry of Works is in prison because of these directives of the minister.

Recommendations

•	The Minister of State for Works, Hon. Byabagambi – (Interjections)- that is the recommendation. Thank you very much. The Minister of State for Works, that is hon. Byabagambi, be held responsible for flouting PPDA laws and causing a loss of Shs 1.7 billion. He unilaterally directed the contractor to do additional works.  
	 
•	The Minister of Works, hon. John Nasasira, be reprimanded for allowing astronomical variations without due justification and process -(Interjections)- the report is yours.

•	Hon. Isaac Musumba, Madam Speaker, I want to report that hon. Isaac Musumba wrote a letter stating that he doesn’t own Enkombe apartments and it was confirmed Enkombe apartments was not his, but we do not know the motivation, which made him do the road to that place. So that is the road we are referring to. Hon. Isaac Musumba, the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, be held responsible for abuse of office and influence peddling leading to a loss of Shs 302 million. Of course we have said the IGG should take interest in this matter.
	 
•	Hon. Rukutana, the Minister of State for Education and Hon. Ezra Suruma, the former Minister of Finance, be held for abuse of office and influence peddling causing financial loss to the government of over Shs 362 million; also the committee recommends that the matter be taken over by the IGG.

•	The engineer-in-chief, Eng. S. Bagonza who was responsible for executing CHOGM works and went ahead to allow these unplanned and unfunded variations, be held liable for the loss and be charged for causing financial loss.

•	The committee also recommends that all those who delayed the process of road construction to create emergencies so that they go for direct sourcing, should be held for the loss. 

•	The Executive Director of PPDA should be held responsible for allowing direct procurement and single sourcing.

•	The appointing authorities should take appropriate action against them.

Madam Speaker, according to the procurement regulations – now this is transport.

b) Transport

The transport committee under the Ministry of Works and Transport was mandated to procure vehicles for CHOGM. The vehicles were to include executive vehicles for Her Majesty, the Queen, and other heads of Government, police motorcycles, lead cars, ambulances, and command and patrol vehicles. Total payments made in respect of vehicle purchased cost Ugandans, Shs 20,219,798,136. 

The solicitation of bids was advertised in May – hon. Nasasira, I wish you could listen to this. The solicitation of bids was advertised in May 2006, for the procurement of vehicles for heads of governments. Forty firms had picked bids and of these, 23 had returned the forms by 11 July 2006; the date of the Cabinet meeting, which halted the exercise - I know the reason why I asked you to listen. However, only three days before the closing date of the bid submission, the hon. Minister, John Nasasira, halted the procurement indefinitely citing a Cabinet sub-committee directive. 

On 04 December 2006, a decision was made by the Cabinet sub-committee for direct procurement to be used. PPDA upon being requested for a waiver rejected and instead granted restrictive bidding with at least three providers invited to bid. New bidding documents were prepared and issued to MotorCare Uganda Limited, Toyota Uganda Ltd, Spear Motors Ltd, Victoria Motors and Cooper Motors. Subsequently two firms, Spear Motors, MotorCare Ltd and EuropCar/InterCar Uganda Ltd submitted bids on 30 March 2007; Spear Motors emerged as the best and the award was given. We have attached it for you. 

Flaws in the Evaluation Process

•	Although bids were issued to MotorCare, the bid returned had a joint venture. According to procurement regulations, MotorCare, as a lead company, should have submitted the bids and then disclosed the names of the companies it intended to associate with. 

•	The committee also found that in February 2006, EuropCar Ltd had changed its name to InterCar and it was not clear why the name EuropCar was being used. The evaluation committee did not consider disqualifying MotorCare at this stage.

•	MotorCare submitted a trading licence No. 0066761, which had expired by 31 December 2006. The evaluation committee did not consider disqualifying MotorCare at this stage. Instead, the evaluation committee decided to forward the matter to the Solicitor-General who advised MotorCare to submit a valid trading licence against the PPDA regulations. You can see the hands behind.

•	However, it was not clear why it took the Cabinet sub-committee a whole year to make a decision. It was claimed that a cheaper leasing option from BMW, of Euros 4.17 million had been obtained. However, the Cabinet committee wrongly compared the cost of outright purchase of 204 cars at Euros 8.29 million with the option of leasing 144 BMW at Euros 4.17 million that had been obtained without transport cost of Euros 738,000. If you add that you get Euros 4.91 million.

•	Had the numbers of vehicles for outright purchase been put at 144, the cost for outright purchase from Spear Motors would have been Euros 6,190,500 as indicated here: 30 Type 1 - 1,404,000; 52 Type 1 - 2,433,600; 62 Type 2 -2,352,900; Total CIF Kampala, 6,190,500. Still the option for outright purchase would have been more favourable since the lease option would have exceeded the threshold of 40 percent. That is a lease/purchase ratio at 67 percent.

•	Surprisingly, a month later the process was again halted by His Excellency, the Vice-President, claiming that the Cabinet sub-committee had decided that there was no outright purchase and that the leasing option should be considered. Unfortunately, this decision took over one year to be made.
 
•	Later on, hon. Sam Kutesa informed the Cabinet sub-committee that he had written to some companies but only one company, MotorCare, had come up with a proposal to lease vehicles. And that is what we say on 4 December 2006, in a meeting chaired by His Excellency, the Vice-President, he informed the meeting that the decision they had taken in the previous meeting of 20 November 2006, was “final.” And that the committee had decided that since only one company had come up with a proposal to lease/sell vehicles to be used during CHOGM, the Minister of Works and Transport and that of Foreign Affairs, should work out modalities with that company. This decision was upheld on 16 January 2007. 

•	Later on when other companies complained to the President over the non-transparent manner in the procurement of these cars, the Vice-President, hon. Gilbert Bukenya, directed the Ministry of Works to proceed with MotorCare and warned against further procrastination -(Interjections)- that word, in the procurement of vehicles. (Laughter) 

On 12 February 2007, in a meeting chaired by the President, he advised that they should use Namibia and Zimbabwe examples where over 100 heads of state were driven in private cars. At this point, His Excellency Prof. Gilbert Bukenya never informed the President that he had already taken a decision to go for BMWs from MotorCare.

On 28 May 2007, the Vice-President, His Excellency, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya, called not the whole CHOGM Cabinet sub-committee but only the committee dealing with transport and under Minute 2, he was informed that Spear Motors was the best bidder for outright purchase as it had offered the best value for money. 

In the same meeting, we were informed that that number of vehicles had been reduced to 144. It is, therefore, not true for him to claim that he did not know that the number of vehicles had been reduced. In disregard to the evaluation committee recommendation, a directive was made to the transport committee to go ahead and negotiate with the representatives of BMW in Uganda by the Chairperson Cabinet sub-committee. Subsequently, on 1 June 2007 new bidding documents were made and issued to one firm, M/S MotorCare/InterCar Ltd contrary to the regulations. A waiver from PPDA to use direct sourcing was never obtained. 

It was, however, observed that although the solicitation bid document specified that the bidder presents a performance security of 10 percent equivalent to Euros 409,936, this was not submitted. In clause 41.2, it was stated that, “Failure to submit the performance security shall constitute sufficient grounds for the annulment of the contract award and forfeiture of any bid security”. This again was not done.

Observations by the Committee

•	From the very beginning a decision to use single sourcing had apparently been made and hence procurement was biased to favour only one company.

•	Spear Motors was never given a chance to bid for 144 vehicles and yet MotorCare returned a bid for 204 vehicles and an unsolicited bid for 144 cars. Surprisingly, His Excellence, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya went with the unsolicited bid of 144 cars. One wonders how you would compare outright purchase of 204 cars with leasing of 144 cars plus purchase of 30 cars.  

•	The vehicles were different from the ones that were ordered for and had wrong specifications both in models and year of manufacture. 

•	Although the Ministry of Works and Transport wrote to the suppliers on the 17 December 2007 asking for remedies, no response was received. Since the supplier never executed a performance bond, which would normally have been used for such breach of contract, Government was exposed to loss from the very beginning. 

•	Although the technical staff of the Ministry of Works and Transport tried to follow the procurement regulations in the procurement of cars, their effort was always being over ruled by the decisions of the Cabinet sub-committee chaired by the Vice-President. The Vice-President halted the process of competitive bidding in the procurement of executive vehicles. 

•	Again surprisingly, the Vice-President in his letter of 25 May 2007 Ref.OVP/IMC/08/6/12 (Annex 2) halted the procurement process claiming that there would be no outright purchase of vehicles, and that all vehicles would be leased. 

•	Even then, when there were complaints of lack of transparency in the manner in which these cars were being procured with some other suppliers claiming to have been denied the opportunity. The Vice-President took a decision in the meeting of 20 November 2006 for the Ministry of Works and Transport to proceed with MotorCare and warned against further procrastination –(Interjections)– that word again. Madam Speaker and hon. Members, forgive me, I went to Busoga College Mwiri, where we were taught in Lusoga. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are you suggesting about Busoga College?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It was a good school.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then you should speaker better English. (Laughter) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The committee was concerned that such decisions, including the halting of the bid opening, were done in a non-transparent manner well aware that if the bids were opened there was a possibility of getting cheaper offers that could have not favoured BMW.
 
•	The President in his letter to the Executive Director CHOGM, Madam Hilda Musubira, who was then the Executive Director CHOGM, had raised concern and warned against varying the procurement procedures. He had directed that those who do not ensure transparency were the ones who were responsible for the delays. 

•	The chairperson, however, instituted a special procurement committee in total disregard of His Excellency’s guidance and directive. In appointing a special procurement committee, the Vice President illegally usurped the role of procurement structures provided by PPDA. He directed for the special procurement committee to receive a new quotation from MotorCare against the provisions of PPDA. The committee found this quotation even higher in rates than the previous ones which had earlier been got from the same Company. 

•	The committee found the Minister of Works and Transport to have relegated his role to the Minister of Foreign Affairs. The Minister of Foreign Affairs, for example, wrote to companies inviting them to bid - something the committee found to be outside his role, and strange. More surprisingly, the Minister of Works, the in-charge of the sector, seemed not to be concerned. 

•	Furthermore, in the letter of the Minister of Foreign Affairs, dated 24 November 2006, to the Minister of Works, (Annex 3), the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Sam Kutesa, submitted the offer of the BMW to the Ministry of Works and Transport. The Minister for Works still did not find this irregular enough.  

•	All the ambulances delivered were not as per specifications. For example, the medical components were non-responsive to the specifications; they lacked oxygen cylinders, hooks, drug cabinets, emergency lights et cetera. Although the manufacturer acknowledged these defects, they were never rectified. The committee also found that only 21 out of 23 ambulances were delivered. The committee was told that the two were damaged on the way. 

Conclusions and Recommendations

    • Government of Uganda did not get value for money in the supply of these vehicles, as such Government made a loss.

    • When in the process of procurement, a decision was taken to cancel international bidding for restrictive bidding, national interest was lost.  

    • The Chairperson CHOGM Cabinet Sub-committee His Excellency Prof. Gilbert Bukenya, by ordering for direct procurement from BMW, and warning anybody against further procrastination –(Interjections)– that one -(Laughter)- on the matter, infringed on PPDA regulation 265 (1), which prohibits mention of brand names and trade marks, and therefore defeating competition which would otherwise ensure value for money. This breach was echoed in the PPDA audit findings.

    • The procurement process was fraudulent and marred with many irregularities.

    • The Minister of Foreign Affairs, hon. Sam Kutesa and the Minister of Works and Transport, hon. John Nasasira bent procurement procedures to favour BMW. The committee holds them liable for their actions. 

    • The actions of the Chairperson, CHOGM sub-committee had some hidden agenda. He decided to appoint a select procurement committee and instructed it to cancel the procurement process, declaring an emergency procurement and requesting for a new quotation from only one company, for example, BMW. This he did in spite of the guidelines he had issued instructing all chairpersons of Sub-committees of CHOGM to ensure that procurement procedures are followed. 

    • The committee recommends that His Excellency Prof. Gilbert Bukenya be personally held liable for the loss of over Shs 6 billion and flouting PPDA laws; and abuse of office.  The committee recommends that appropriate action be taken by the appointing authority. 

c)	Procurement of Media and Publicity

The contract to manage the Media Centre was awarded by the CHOGM sub-committee on media and publicity to Globecast. The company was supposed to erect, equip and manage the CHOGM media centre for broadcasting the CHOGM events at a total of US $4,500,000. 

The committee was informed that Globecast was procured basing on its previous performance in Nigeria and Malta. The procurement was, therefore, made on the basis of sole procurement on the advice of the Commonwealth Secretariat. The Executive Director of CHOGM never objected to it but allowed the Committee to proceed to PPDA to request for single sourcing. 

(i) 	Flaws in the procurement of M/S Globecast

The committee was concerned as to why regulations were flouted and single sourcing was used causing concern as to whether value for money was achieved:

•	That the award of the contract should have been based on the submitted bid or offer that should have gone through the procurement process and technical evaluation. This was found not to have been done as there was no offer to consider.

•	That there were no genuine justifications for single sourcing of Globecast when there were several other companies that had experience in the same work. US $4.5 million was put at stake in favour of Globecast without reference to any other competitive alternatives.

•	CHOGM was insured by Government but the contract form claimed US $795,000 was for purposes of insurance for this Globecast, which was for purposes of taking public resources.

•	The committee questioned why the Office of the Prime Minister/President’s Office - I am mentioning President’s Office because it started from there - went for direct procurement of Globecast when it was aware of hosting CHOGM by 2003 and had all the time to follow procurement procedures in acquiring a competent firm.

•	The committee wondered why PPDA allowed such procurement when this is not the only company in the world for broadcasting.

•	That the cost of the contract of US $4.5 million seemed to have been decided before Globecast visited Uganda and we have annexed for you a letter.

The committee noted that although US $4.5 million was paid, what was found on the ground by the Auditor-General was to the contrary. All of you remember some materials and equipment were not delivered, for example, OB vans and the satellite link, which had been quoted; instead they used the one of UBC.

According to special considerations of the contract, the Permanent Secretary, Office of the Prime Minister, was supposed to specifically appoint one officer to supervise Globecast. This was not done.

The committee found that the monitoring of the progress on how the project was performing was not clear. We have attached for you a letter. And therefore, this left a gap that allowed Globecast to perform according to their wish. The committee noted that the implementation of the project was being done and making payments without supervision. 

Some of the equipment brought into the country by the firm, in accordance with the contract, was for hire by other broadcasters. The firm also had to manage the hiring of office space, furniture, phone and foreign exchange stands with all revenue realised being remitted to Government.  However, revenue that accrued from hire of office space, equipment and phone and foreign exchange stands had never been disclosed. Reports available at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs indicated that the company collected US $20,560 from hire of office space and this was also not given to us.

The committee believes that the whole cost would have not exceeded US $2 million and therefore the taxpayer lost over US $2.5 million. Tax obligations that should have been made good to Government were also not done.

Recommendations

•	Noting that it was irregular for the accounting officer to have signed a contract that was silent of tax matters, the committee recommends that the accounting officer, the Executive Director of PPDA and the Attorney-General should be held responsible for the loss.
•	The evaluation committee and the contracts committee should be held liable for the loss.
•	Madam Hilda Musubira should be reprimanded for her action.
•	The committee directed that the accounting officer ensures that Globecast pays its tax obligations, if any.
•	The committee recommends that all the excesses of Globecast as per their contract be refunded.
•	The Executive Director PPDA should be held responsible for clearing a direct procurement, which led to such a loss.
•	The committee recommends that Globecast refunds collections of US $20,560 within 30 days. 
•	·	The appointing authority should take appropriate action.

(ii) 		Procurement of QG Saatchi & Saatchi

The committee found that two companies, QG Saatchi & Saatchi in association with Terp Consult Ltd were awarded a tender for the provision of media and publicity related services for CHOGM 2007 at a contract price not exceeding Shs 2,433,570,088, VAT inclusive. QG Saatchi & Saatchi was the lead consultant.  

The contract required the company to design a refined media strategy, and an effective communication strategy, produce and distribute publicity material and carry out production, placement and monitoring of radio and television adverts and commercials.

The committee learnt that although 17 firms submitted their bids for the same works, 16 were rejected for non-compliance immediately.  The committee wondered under what criteria the contracts committee went ahead to evaluate only one company, the QG Saatchi & Saatchi Consortium. Under such circumstances, the committee was concerned about the unfairness and non-competitiveness of the bid process.

Close scrutiny of the CVs attached to the bid further indicated inconsistencies. For example, all the CVs were signed by one Zikusooka and witnessed by the same person on behalf of Mr Rwabogo and Mr Patrick Quarcoo without valid powers of attorney. The evaluation committee, however, went further and evaluated QG Saatchi & Saatchi even with these preliminary inconsistencies implying that they had interest in the prequalified company. 

The committee observed that at this point, QG Saatchi & Saatchi should have also been disqualified due to irregularities in the CVs but this was not done. The argument by the accounting officer that he based his decision on the powers of attorney that he had been presented with was wrong since there is no way one could have used powers of attorney to sign on another person’s CV. It is like someone else signing your marriage certificate.

The committee further observed that whereas the CVs were signed on 27 January 2007, the powers of attorney were signed on 30 January 2007, implying that the powers of attorney were not the basis for the CVs. 
 
The committee was concerned that even when the bid was defective from day one, the contracts committee surprisingly upheld it raising queries on the interests surrounding the whole transaction. The committee noted that the works arranged into lots and only QG Saatchi & Saatchi were availed the chance to bid and not others.  
   
The committee also noted that in a meeting of CHOGM media and publicity committee at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the security had associated M/S QG Saatchi & Saatchi and M/S Terp Group Ltd with State House and raised concern that their involvement in CHOGM contracts would embarrass the Presidency in the aftermath of CHOGM in case of any query. This concern by security was ignored.

When the accounting officer requested for the security vetting as was a necessary requirement, he did not get security clearance arising from security concerns that had earlier been raised by the security meeting of 31 October 2007 but still proceeded with the contracting process. 

In a security sub-committee meeting of 30 October 2007, members noted that the performance of the contract was unsatisfactory. In another meeting of 13 November 2007, the meeting concluded that there was no point and value in paying Shs 1.5 billion to this firm when there was no visible work being done. The 291 sites that had been agreed upon for billboard placements in the contract were non-existent. The space was instead being occupied by other advertisers. 

•	The committee observed that although the Contracts Committee, in accordance with the evaluation report, had recommended for payment of only Shs 1.8 billion, Shs 2.4 billion was paid to QG Saatchi & Saatchi.

•	The committee questioned how the sum rose from Shs 1.8 billion to Shs 2.4 billion. The committee noted that this was irregular. Although the committee was told that after the evaluation was done the contract was amended to bring in extra claims, it observed that there seemed to have been collusion on the part of procurement officers and QG Saatchi & Saatchi. The amended information was hidden in the advertised bid in order to close others out, only to be introduced at a later stage. On the other hand, the contracts manager denied ever requisitioning for extra works. 

•	When tasked to produce the final deliverables undertaken by Saatchi & Saatchi which made the basis for clearance of final payments, the accounting officer could not. 

•	Furthermore, when Saatchi & Saatchi appeared before the committee, they confirmed that they did not deliver 100 percent of the contracted output. This raised a question as to how the accounting officer paid a blind eye to the deliverables and went ahead to clear final payments.

Conclusion and Recommendations

•	The committee observed that M/S QG Saatchi & Saatchi should have been disqualified from the first day and since it was not done, the head of the procurement unit should be held responsible. 

•	The procurement officers and all other persons who were responsible for procuring Saatchi & Saatchi should be investigated and held liable and charged under the Anti-Corruption Act. 

•	The contract was irregularly varied from Shs 1.8 billion to 2.4 billion. The committee recommends that the contracts and evaluation committee be held liable for this variation. 
	 
•	The contract manager should be held accountable for clearing final payments without ascertaining outputs and causing loss.

•	The committee observed that the performance of this company was only 60 percent and therefore it should be made to refund 40 percent, that is to say, 960 million for the contract performance lost.

Sponsorship of the Media and Publicity Related Services

Findings 

The  committee  was  informed  that  Government  also  entered  into  a  contract for corporate sponsorship with M/S QG Saatchi & Saatchi. The contract required the firm  to  acquire corporate  sponsorship  for  the  media  and  publicity  related  events, which were to be organised by the Media and Publicity Sub-Committee. Expected collections  were  Shs  1.2  billion and  the  funds  were  to  be handled  in  accordance with the guidelines issued by the Sponsorship Committee.  

The  committee  noted  that  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  the  Vice-Chairman Corporate  Sponsorship,  had  appointed  QG  Saatchi  & Saatchi  to  mobilise  the participation of  the  corporate  bodies.  The appointment should have been made by the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Foreign affairs, as per the law. 

In  his  letter  to  UTL,  Dr  James  Mulwana,  writing  as  the  then Chairman, Commonwealth Business Forum Steering Committee, said that the funds they would be receiving under this arrangement were to be paid under a 50:50 split as follows: 

To be paid to the Commonwealth Business Forum organizers; they were meant to be received by Saatchi & Saatchi on behalf of Government. 

After  CHOGM,  the  firm  informed  the  ministry  that  it  was  able  to  collect  only  Shs 360 million.  Out of  that  amount,  Shs  148 million  was  allegedly  given  to  the Commonwealth  Business  Forum;  Shs  18  million  was  retained  by  the  firm  as  its  10 percent collection fee; Shs 159 million was used by the firm at source; and Shs 35 million was to be paid to the ministry. However, the utilisation of the funds collected lacked the approval of the National Task Force and remained unaccounted for. The contract said, “Collect and bring,” but they collected and used.

The contract value of Shs 2,059,454,518, (excluding VAT) attracted a withholding tax of Shs 123,572,731. However, the money paid then to the firm had no withholding tax deducted at source in violation of the tax law. The accounting officer had explained that the firm had a withholding tax exemption, but could not produce evidence to the committee. The committee found out that QG Saatchi & Saatchi did not have tax exemptions and did not pay the withholding tax.

Recommendations
 
•	QG Saatchi & Saatchi should pay all the withholding tax due to it if any.

•	QG Saatchi & Saatchi should refund all the money it collected less their 10 percent, that means the balance should be paid to Government.

•	The Sponsorship Committee should be held liable for the flaws in this procurement, which is headed by the Minister of Foreign Affairs, hon. Sam Kutesa.

Collection of Funds under Corporate Sponsorship

The committee was told that the participation of the business forum arose from the letter written by the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, asking the members of the private sector to consider forming a business forum as part of CHOGM preparations.  

As Chairman Private Sector Foundation, Dr James Mulwana became the chairman of the Business Forum and some of its members went to Malta to attend the Commonwealth meeting.  Dr James Mulwana also travelled to the UK to receive the leadership of the Commonwealth Business Council.

In Uganda, the Business Forum meeting coincided with the CHOGM meeting. Because of these pressures, the Commonwealth Business Council sought support of Government to have a tent in place to service the conference. This is after it failed to get a convenient facility to accommodate participants in the conference. He said the Commonwealth Business Council had to hire a marquee at US $367,518 from Dubai -(Interjections)- a marquee is a tent. Let me do it very well. They had to hire a tent from Dubai at $367,518, that is, over 700 million of Ugandan currency.

The committee, however, found the accountability for these funds wanting, noting that Dr James Mulwana did not show all the total collections made, less total expenditures, so that the committee could be able to ascertain the whole picture.  

Consequently, Government paid US $100,000 to the Commonwealth Business Council. In a cabinet sub-committee meeting of 06 November 2007 (annex 6) he said that the funds got from over 35 sponsors were later enough and the money that had been got as the contribution of Government of Uganda was returned. These funds could, however, not be traced as having been returned to the Consolidated Fund. The whereabouts of these funds need to further be investigated. Members, this money has never been seen to date despite the fact that it was collected.

The committee noted that the Commonwealth Business Council is under the Secretariat of the Commonwealth and that it has an SCAB Bank account in the United Kingdom where the collections raised from the sponsors were banked. The signatories to this account were Mohan Kaul and Mr Gregory Mackinnon - not the former Secretary-General.

The committee observed that the instrument for the Business Forum for raising this money from companies was given by Government and therefore the funds were raised on behalf of Government. The guidelines were issued by the Cabinet sub-committee meeting of 16 January 2007 and the one of 08 February 2007. We have attached them.

The committee noted that Sarah Walusimbi was the contact person and coordinator for the Business Forum. She had informed the committee that all the money paid was made directly to a Commonwealth Business Council Account in Standard Chartered bank, Kampala, or was to be remitted directly to the Commonwealth Business Council account in the UK.

The committee noted that Dr James Mulwana used his influence as a Director in Standard Chartered bank to open this account even without the requirement of opening of a bank account, such as Articles of Association, signatures of Shareholders et cetera. The committee had found that although the company claimed to have been incorporated in Uganda, there were no records in the Registrar of Companies to that effect.

The committee noted that the PPDA attended cabinet sub-committee meetings, which the committee sees as a conflict of interest. This implies that decisions taken were not free from bias. 

Recommendations

•	The committee recommends that Dr James Mulwana, Mr Mohan Kaul and Mr Gregory MacKinnon be held responsible for the loss of US $100,000. The committee also holds them responsible for the non-accountability of the funds raised from the corporate sponsorship.

•	The Sponsorship Committee, headed by hon. Sam Kutesa, should also account for all the collections that were made under corporate sponsorship within 30 days.
    • 
(b) 	Undisclosed Expenditure on Security Equipment

The committee found out that the Ministry of ICT had spent an extra US $5,000,000 outside the budget approved by Parliament for CHOGM. This amount was reportedly spent on the TETRA communications systems (walkie talkie system) procured by the Ministry of ICT, but for use by the security.

The committee found out that the money was diverted from an ICT loan for the National Data Transmission Backbone Infrastructure Project to the Security Ministry and yet, when the loan was being approved, the walkie talkie system was not included in the loan request. Further investigations on this expenditure revealed the following:

•	Whereas this money was spent on CHOGM activities, it was not declared to the Auditor-General during the Special Audit on CHOGM, contrary to the requirements of the National Audit Act. It was also noted that the procurement of the Tetra system for the Security did not comply with the PPDA regulations.

•	It was established that the original contract between Government and Huawei provided that Huawei was responsible for supply of all the equipment, and would only seek consent from Government whenever necessary.   Instead, MoICT and Security went ahead to identify and select a supplier named Balton (U) Ltd, and only submitted the supplier and their terms to Huawei for them to write an LPO to Balton. This was against the terms of the turn key agreement.  

•	Indeed, in their letter to the Permanent Secretary Ministry of ICT dated 3 May 2010, Huawei explains that the inclusion of a third person (Balton) into what became a tripartite agreement was because “Government identified the sub-contractor”, which was a deviation from the expectation of the agreement and practice. Consequently, two issues arise: (1) How the US $5 million arose, and (2) how the difference of US $500,000 came about.

•	The Minster of Security introduced the idea of US $5,000,000 to the President, for the first time ever the figure surfaced in the CHOGM sub-committee meeting of 12 September 2006, documented under Minute 05/06. Whereas the Minister explained to the committee that by this time he was only communicating a result of a procurement process, and that this was at the tail-end of it, it was not true.  

•	This was confirmed by Mr Ochieng, Director of Internal Security, who stated that by the time of the above meeting, there had been no formal procurement process at that time.  

•	The committee has seen a technical evaluation committee report dated, 28 August 2006, where the committee chaired by one Kaliisa Ibrahim, evaluated “expressions of interest” in which Balton was evaluated with a quote of US $3-4m, against Harris US $4 to 5 million; Huawei itself US $4-7million; ZTE US $4-7million.  

•	In this report, there was no mention of US $5 million by this team at all (Annex 8). Indeed, these were merely expressions of interest and no formal bids or proposals and could therefore not be the basis of an evaluation and award, and could also not have been part of a formal procurement process, as the Minister claims. 

•	The Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Information Communication and Technology has written to the committee stating that the procurement process commenced on 10 January 2007, when Ministry of Information Communication and Technology (ICT) communicated to Huawei to start the procurement process of TETRA. While this in itself is contradiction, in that it is Government who identified Balton, it nevertheless clarifies that no formal procurement process had commenced at the time.

•	All this happened amidst budgetary concerns by His Excellency the President in the meeting of 12 June 2006, where he questioned the expenditures on communication equipment and directed that the army communication equipments should be used by the Police, instead of purchasing new communication equipment (Annex 9).  

•	While the His Excellency the President was concerned about the budget and source of funding for this equipment, the Minister of Security wrote a loose minute to His Excellency dated, 29 August 2006 that the contract with Huawei should now include the provision of communication and CCTV services from which money would be got for CHOGM communication. He stated that under cost and financing, Balton was the vendor. This also confirms that the TETRA communication was an afterthought that was introduced into the backbone loan, where no such provision had been made. He clearly stated that this should be procured from Balton as it was offering favourable terms. 

•	The committee is concerned that the technical team had returned an evaluation of US $3.2 million from Balton and the Minister of Security who is not technical raised the value to US $5 million.

•	Consequently, the Minister, having brought US $5 million into the picture, Balton submitted a Profoma invoice for US $4,986,500 dated 14 November 2006 (Annex 10).  However, the security sub-committee raised concern over the escalated amount in their meeting of 20 December 2006, where they recommended that the amount should be negotiated downwards. In addition, they also raised concern, as testified by Mr Ochieng, that while the amount had escalated, the quantities had come down from their original specifications.  

•	Later on, Balton submitted a revised Proforma dated, 28 August 2007, containing US $4,986,500 but discounted three times with special discount of 1.73 percent, additional special discount of 4 percent and another special discount of 4.022 percent, leaving a net invoice amount of US $4,500,000. An advance payment of 30 percent was stated as required (Annex 11). The record of negotiations, if any, and the parties involved was not availed/disclosed to the committee as requested.

•	The Permanent Secretary (PS) Ministry of ICT Dr Kibuka signed a Tripartite Agreement (Annex 12) with Balton and Huawei, for the supply of the TETRA system at US $4,500,000. However, the same Permanent Secretary instead went ahead and authorized payment of US $5,000,000 to Huawei for the equipment, including an unexplained US $500,000. This, therefore, led to a loss of US $500,000, which cannot be accounted for.  

•	Huawei later wrote to the PS/ICT on 03 May 2010 (Annex 13) claiming that the balance was a margin accrued and spread as explained in our earlier communication of 21 January 2010. That communication of 21 January 2010 (Annex 14) from Huawei claimed that the balance was a fee for financing and project management integrated costs agreed in negotiation with M/S Balton Ltd on TETRA. This suggests that Huawei entered some negotiation with Balton, and yet Government was the party that identified Balton and submitted terms to Huawei for LPO purposes only. You will notice they wanted to take the US$ 5 million.

•	The Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Information Communication and Technology, clearly states that he paid US$ 4.5 million in his letter dated 5 May 2010, with the supporting transfers. We have got the Auditor-General’s report which says 500,000 is still missing up to date.

The committee was further concerned with the following:

•	When asked – that is the minister - whether he had any connections with M/S Balton, its executive and staff, the Minister for Security denied any such connections.
	  
•	Investigations on the countries that had been supplied with the TETRA system in the last 10 years do not show that Uganda was one of the beneficiaries of TETRA supplies. The committee could, therefore, not ascertain whether the TETRA equipment were at all or if so, genuine.

•	The manner in which Balton was sourced contravened PPDA regulations and the Turnkey Contract Agreement between Huawei and Government of Uganda – which you have again passed a few minutes.

•	A testimony by members of the security sub-committee indicated that they had made contacts with 15 potential suppliers of the required equipment, and they finally zeroed on five of them. One of them was Balton U Ltd, which had indicated that they would be willing to supply the equipment at US$ 3.2 million.

•	Mr Ochieng further informed the committee that he drafted a letter to the Minister of ICT, on instruction from the Minister of Security, hon. Amama Mbabazi, for the IGP to sign, but was copied to the Minister of Security on 13 October 2006 stating that the security cabinet sub-committee had convinced the President that they should procure the TETRA system from Balton at US$ 5 million. Madam Speaker, on 11 October is when we signed the loan agreement. Imagine on 13th, you are signing to get US$ 5 million! The committee found out that the IGP –(Interjections)- we have attached it there. Everything is there. The committee found out that the IGP was communicating the purported directive of the President to the Minister of ICT, who had all along been pursuing the matter with the President.  Whereas the President was mentioned in this letter, it was never copied to His Excellency. Hon. Amama Mbabazi never denied this letter.  The committee found that the IGP never attended the Cabinet meeting of 12 September 2006, where the Minister of Security had initiated the issue of the Tetra procurement from Balton.

•	It is clear that the deal of US$ 5 million was between the Minister of ICT, Dr Ham Mulira, and the Minister of Security, hon. Amama Mbabazi. During that meeting hon. Amama Mbabazi informed His Excellency as follows:

1.	The existing communication system was inadequate for CHOGM 2007 and the Army equipments proposed for use during CHOGM would not capably handle the nature of communication required - you can imagine.

2.	There was need to guard against terrorism – you know they use the word “terrorism” - and the task required reliable and efficient communication system.

3.	The UPDF communication system handsets were inadequate in number and had limited application.

4.	There was need for US$ 5 million to acquire a communication system that was compatible with other communication systems gadgets, and capable of being used with the digital transfer of voice, video, data which is secure, and independent at minimised costs. The equipment for Police and intelligence services were obsolete.

5.	The Chinese company known as Huawei would construct a national transmission backbone for the whole country by CHOGM time and priority should be for Kampala and the Entebbe area. This transmission would be used for communication during CHOGM.

6.	It had been proposed that Huawei and Motorola would work out arrangements for the supply of equipment to be financed under the Chinese concessional loan – again the Chinese - and Motorola are supplied by Balton. 

•	The ICT Ministry took the lead as the lead procuring entity and sought clearance from the PPDA for direct procurement, which they failed to obtain.

•	The evaluation committee had evaluated five firms on 28 August 2006 and came up with the cost of the TETRA system at US$ 3.2 million. We have annexed it.

•	On 29 August 2006, hon. Amama Mbabazi instead wrote to the President giving the cost of the equipment as ranging from US$ 5 million to US$ 7 million. He also recommended Balton because of his favourable terms. 

•	The security sub-committee members also informed the committee that the responsible executive salesperson at Balton at the time of this procurement was one Ms Susan Katono, who was responsible for processing and issuing of price quotations etc.

•	The committee also separately established that the said Ms Susan Katono is related by blood to Minister Amama Mbabazi, and that whenever Susan Katono wrote on this procurement, she copied to hon. Amama Mbabazi, and yet Zeeudi, the Managing Director of Balton never did so.

•	 The committee discovered that the cost of this equipment should not have exceeded US$ 2 million.

•	The committee further established that Government ministries and CAA were supplied Tetra equipment for Shs 1.6 billion and this was paid for by the ministries like Foreign Affairs and CAA – not among the US$ 5 million.

Conclusions and Recommendations

•	The Minister for Information Communication and Technology, hon. Ham Mulira and the Ministry of Security, hon. Amama Mbabazi were involved in procuring Balton. Both should be held liable for these flaws. The committee found hidden interest on their part on this matter and recommends that IGG should take up the matter.

•	The committee found that the tripartite agreement was for US$ 4.5 million and Hauwei later claimed US$ 500,000 as management fees. This is theft on part of Hauwei.

•	Hon. Amama Mbabazi, the chairman of the cabinet sub-committee on security, should have requested for US$ 3.2 million which he had been advised. The committee questioned his motive of inflating the figure from US$ 5 million and later the firm that had accepted US$ 3.2 million also increased the quotation to US$ 5 million.

•	 The chairman of the security sub-committee, hon. Amama Mbabazi, should be held liable for involving himself in the identification of Balton as a supplier without following PPDA laws. He pushed for Balton to be contracted at US$ 5 million when Balton’s initial quotation was US$ 3.2 million. The committee finds him to have had a conflict of interest on this matter. He should further be held liable for the loss of US$ 1.8 million as inflated costs from the initial quotation of US$ 3.2 million to US$ 5 million, in addition by the way, to reduced quantities which were quoted in the sum of US$ 3.2 million, and he must refund this money.

•	Hon. Mulira should also be held liable for the loss of US$ 1.8m as his was the lead person.

•	Balton and Susan Katono should be held responsible for the short delivery of the equipments and penalties. Legal proceedings are recommended against them. Despite the short delivery, they got the full pay because there was a hammer above. 

•	The committee finds the actions of Huawei tantamount to corruption and recommends legal proceedings against Huawei for the recovery of US$ 500,000 and be held liable for this criminal act. Any public officer who is found involved in this transaction be held for theft and corruption. 

•	The accounting officer for ICT should be reprimanded for non-disclosure of this expenditure to the Auditor-General under the National Audit Act –(Interjections)- you can add on; you will add on.

•	The appointing authority should take appropriate action.

Decorations

A consortium of decorators undertook decoration work without any contract or agreement with the ministry. This is contrary to our laws.

The committee found that although decoration of venues was under the venues sub-committee in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and chaired by Ms Rhoda Kaisho, the Minister, Hope Mwesigye, hijacked the powers of the venues committee and decided to award the contract of decoration of venues to a consortium of decorators. We have annexed 18. She did this contrary to the law and even the Executive Director of PPDA, Mr Edgar Agaba, in his letter dated 17 January 2008, rejected attempts to get retrospective approval stating the following in his objection:

•	Those services were not procured in accordance with the normal procurement procedures and Ugandan laws.

•	The procurement was irregular in law.

•	The contracts committee had rejected the procurement anyway.

The committee, nonetheless, learnt that a consortium of decorators undertook the work without any contract or agreement with the ministry. They have since presented a bill of Shs 617,652,120. Scrutiny of the presented bills revealed that the demand invoices lacked certification by the responsible managers in charge of those venues which made it difficult to confirm that the actual deliveries were made. 

According to a report made by the spouses sub-committee:  

“The decoration at the spouses luncheon at Golf Course Apartments fell short of what was agreed and presented at the planning stage.” 

The committee was also availed evidence that Civil Aviation Authority decorated the airport and paid for it, but this was also included in the bill of Shs 617,652,120 claimed by the Consortium (Annex 19).

Owing to the irregular procurement of the decoration services and the failure to ensure certification of work done, it was not possible to confirm that the bill of Shs 617,652,120 reasonably represented the value of the actual decoration work undertaken. There was no contract that had been cleared by the Attorney-General as per the Constitution, which would spell out the deliveries against which payments should be made.

The committee was concerned about the manner in which the consortium was procured. The committee got evidence of a meeting chaired by hon. Hope Mwesigye on the 26 October 2007, in which she presented to the meeting a consortium of decorators, negotiated with them later and awarded them the contract. (Appendix 20). The committee notes this procuring, negotiating and contracting is not the responsibility of the minister.

The procurement of the decorations was, therefore, a direct procurement made without the approval of both the contracts committee and the PPDA, but done only under the authority of hon. Hope Mwesigye. Attempts to obtain retrospective approvals for the procurement were rejected by the PPDA. In this case, the committee finds the minister to have imposed herself onto procurement functions.

Furthermore, hon. Amama Mbabazi, in his letter dated 22 November 2007, which he signed as chairman of the inspection team, is reported to have instructed the decoration committee to carry out the decoration activity immediately and later seek for retrospective authority (Annex 21).  The minister told the committee that he wrote the letter in his capacity as “Inspector General of CHOGM.” (Laughter) The committee finds the minister to have over-stepped his role of policy guidelines to direct for flouting of the PPDA regulations.

In several venues, for example, the one stated by the spouses sub-committee, the decorations did not meet the anticipated standard.

The committee also learnt that the People’s Forum meeting was not decorated at all, yet funds had been provided.

The committee noted that:

•	Decoration should have been procured on time because it was a planned activity, but it was delayed to cause an emergency. Even between the meetings of 26 October 2007 to 22 November 2007, there was enough time to follow PPDA laws.

The committee recommends as follows:
•	That Minister Hope Mwesigye should be held responsible for flouting PPDA regulations and the Constitution of Uganda.

•	Hon. Hope Mwesigye should further be held liable for abuse of office and causing financial loss to Government of Shs 617, 652,120.

•	Minister Amama Mbabazi, the “Inspector General of CHOGM,” should be held liable for instructing the flouting of procurement rules.

•	The committee recommends that the appointing authority takes appropriate measures. 

Madam Speaker, we turn to incomplete beautification work. 

Incomplete beautification work

The committee noted that the contractor, M/s Omega Construction Company, was engaged to carry out beautification work on Clock Tower–Nsambya–Gaba–Munyonyo-Salaama–Kibuye corridor. This firm, however, had not completed the works even months after the end of CHOGM despite advance payment. 

The committee also found that the contract addendum had not yet been signed between the Government of Uganda (Ministry of Local Government) and M/S Omega almost two months after the end of CHOGM.
 
The committee observed the following: 

•	Failure to sign the contract addendum almost two months after the end of CHOGM, defeated the purpose of the contract.

•	No substantial amount of work had been done on the contract although the contractor had started doing some work. Given the fact that the primary purpose of the beautification was for the heads of government meeting, it is evident that the proposed intervention into this road did not achieve its purpose.

•	Zzimwe had earlier won this contract but was disqualified. The ministry did not seek further clarification on Zzimwe’s tender but just went ahead to invalidate it, without justification. Misgivings about Zzimwe’s financial status and performance were based on rumours rather than facts. They also had baseless misgivings regarding the capacity of Zzimwe to take on additional works in the middle of their commitment at the time. 

•	The competence of M/s Omega, which was finally awarded the contract, was questionable from the beginning. There seemed to have been some conspiracy to deny M/S Zzimwe the work since they had not been consulted to confirm whether they could not absorb additional assignments.

•	The whole tendering process was poorly done. There was no documentary evidence of communication between the evaluation committee and contracts committee.  

•	There was no evidence of authority from PPDA that allowed the ministry to carry out restricted bidding.

•	M/S Omega Construction Limited did not complete its work by CHOGM time, but were added money for extra works costing Shs 280,082,330.  This was 65 percent extra.  

The committee further noted the following anomalies: 

In the handover report of the accounting officer of the ministry by then, who was Mr Ssekoono, he writes, “We have so far spent Shs 5,065,773,122 leaving a balance of Shs 1,261,795,021.  However, Omega Construction Co., which was contracted to beautify Clock Tower, Gaba, Munyonyo and Makindye–Kibuye corridors, grossly underperformed and we have refused to pay this Contractor any more money beyond the down payment of Shs 85,600,000 which he received at the beginning”.  He recommended that no more money should be paid to this particular contractor until they make substantial progress on the corridor. (Appendix 12).

The committee, however, learnt that Omega Construction Company was paid immediately; and the former Accounting Officer, Mr. Ssekkono left that office.  The committee is concerned about why payment was made against underperformance and even prior warning by Mr. Ssekkono

It was also revealed that certificate No.2 was immediately issued on 1st October 2008 just after Mr. Ssekkono had left office, and again, despite the advice on underperformance by the contractor.

It was noted that the first certificate was presented in April 2008, but was rejected by Mr. Ssekkono up to the time he left office.  However, just after leaving office, the second certificate was also issued on 1st October 2008; he left at the end of September, 2008. The committee was concerned of how, within just one week, the contractor could have managed to perform all the work he had failed to do in the past six months.  The completion date given in the certificate was 28th August 2008.  One wonders how Mr Ssekkono could have advised against payment if he was satisfied by 28th August that the work had been completed.

The committee was told that the payment was made on the advice of Minister Hope Mwesigye. However, the committee never had the opportunity to question her motive and recommends further investigations on this matter. 

It was also revealed that the contractor claimed interest for delayed payment of Shs 56,513,646 yet the delay was a result of the underperformance on their part.

Given the underperformance, the minister failed in her duties by not delivering on the job and not holding the contractor responsible.

Hon. Hope Mwesigye as the chairperson never took action on this main activity for CHOGM.  This implies she failed in her duties.

Exhibitions at Shimon Grounds 

The committee was told that CHOGM exhibitions took place at Shimon grounds. These exhibitions were under the Chairpersonship of Hon. Hope Mwesigye.  The committee was informed that fees were collected from the exhibitors, however, these were not declared to the Auditor General. The committee noted that this was irregular.  

Conclusion and Recommendations 

•	The objective of beautification of Kampala was not achieved and there was no value for money.

•	The committee recommends that the members of the beautification committee, headed by Hon. Hope Mwesigye, take full responsibility for the lapses in the works. The committee should be held liable for the loss of Shs 280 million to Government arising from this contract.

•	Hon. Hope Mwesigye be held liable for no action on the delivery of this activity.

•	The supervisor of the project, Primo Consultants, failed to supervise the works and the tax payer never got value for money. The supervisor should also be held for any loss arising from the underperformance.

•	The committee recommended prosecution of the Directors of M/S Omega and Primo Consultants.

•	M/S Omega and M/S Primo Consultants be blacklisted for Government contracts.

•	Hon. Hope Mwesigye be held accountable for the fees collected at the exhibition at Shimon grounds. 

•	The Accounting Officer, Mr. Matte, should be held responsible for paying Shs 56,513,646 as interest for no good reason.

•	Appointing Authority should take appropriate measures.

Disposal of Assets

The committee was informed that Government bought various assets for use during CHOGM.  And, a total of US$ 4,256,784,010 for example, was paid out to various hotels in respect of refurbishments and furniture. The committee was, however, concerned that no guidelines had been put in place to dispose off these assets after CHOGM. These assets, therefore, continue to be kept in the stores of most of these private hotels like Serena, Speke and Resort Munyonyo. Unfortunately, these assets have not been taken on charge as required by Government regulations. This exposed Government assets to abuse. There is need, therefore, for Government to take these assets on inventory and initiate a process to utilise or dispose them off, to prevent misuse, damage, theft, wear and tear. 

The committee is also concerned that some Government officials had taken advantage of lack of care by anybody on the use of these assets such as laptops and Blackberry phones, to posses them for their personal use.  This could result in the loss of these valuable Government assets. 

Furthermore, it was found that Government had spent a total of Shs 6.1 billion on furnishing and Shs 15 billion on construction works of private hotels like Hotel Royale, Serena Hotel and Speke Resort Munyonyo. The committee further found that in the case of Commonwealth Resort Munyonyo, whereas shares for Shs 15 billion had been issued, another Shs 13.9 billion under the agreement for the marina and pathways was spent as a donation to Mr Sudhir R. The committee questioned the terms under which Government was made to finance a private venture, without due regard to public interest. The committee notes that the Attorney-General, Dr Khiddu Makubuya, without due regard to public interest, drafted the agreement and advised Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to sign and finance it. 

Recommendations

•	The committee recommends that all assets be taken on charge immediately, and that all ministries should retrieve all assets to their stores.  Use and/or disposal of these assets should be carried out in accordance with the PPDA regulations. 

•	The committee further recommends that the Attorney-General be held responsible for drafting and clearing the contract without due consideration of Government interest, which led to a loss of 13.9 billion.  

•	The committee recommends that Government takes due consideration of this donation when divesting itself from Speke Resort Munyonyo investment. 

•	The committee recommends that the Appointing Authority takes appropriate action.  

Bank Balances

The Auditor-General reported that as at the 31st January, 2008, a substantial amount of money was lying on various Ministry CHOGM accounts. Although the committee found that some of these accounts had by then been closed, some of the funds were found to have been spent on activities which were not related to CHOGM. The committee has requested the Auditor General to further audit these accounts. The committee was concerned that the idle cash in bank accounts could be exposed to abuse, and that such a situation is clearly contrary to the Public Finance and Accountability Act (PFAA), section 19, that requires that unspent balances at the end of the financial year be transferred to the Consolidated Fund

The committee recommends that these funds be immediately balanced and transferred to the Consolidated Fund. Any diversions should be made good and those responsible should be held liable in accordance with the Public Finance and Accountability Act.

The Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, should take appropriate action on any accounting officer who fails to respond appropriately. 

Outstanding Bills

The Ministry of Works, for example, had outstanding bills of Shs 30 billion and they had cash of Shs 1.5 billion. This arose as a result of variations by the minister and the other ministers who requested for more works to their private homes and residences.

The committee noted that ministries are reporting huge outstanding bills/debts arising out of the CHOGM since some major activities/contracts were still ongoing. It is not clear how ministries intend to finance these bills. The Ministry of Works, for example, has currently outstanding bills estimated at Shs 31 billion yet they have cash of only Shs 1.5 billion. This impinged on the budgetary ceilings of those ministries for the financial years 2007/08 and 2008/09 and consequently their service delivery in those years. There is need for Government to ascertain the total arrears position relating to CHOGM and plan for its settlement. 

The committee found that the unplanned arrears arose due to contract variations by the ministries, and non-adherence to the commitment control system during CHOGM, contrary to the existing financial regulations.

The committee recommends that for all the arrears which have been incurred without approval of Parliament, the concerned officials be held responsible for abuse of office and should pay.

The Secretary to the Treasury should take appropriate action on all accounting officers who fail to respond appropriately.

Maintenance of infrastructure

The committee found that the bulk of CHOGM funds were utilized on development, renovation and refurbishment of infrastructure. The committee was, however, concerned that there was no strategy in place for the maintenance of this infrastructure. For example, although the government spent over Shs 19 billon for installation of street lights, no safeguards were put in place for their security. Most of these lights have either been stolen, vandalised or were non-functional.  This concern was also echoed by the contractor who had advised that necessary security be put in place to safeguard such infrastructure. The committee was concerned that there was no effort by the accounting officer of KCC or the Ministry of Local Government to have safeguards in place.  

The committee recommends that a strategy be put in place immediately for the maintenance of this infrastructure to prevent deterioration if at all it is there. Government should further provide sufficient resources on a yearly basis for the maintenance of the infrastructure that has been put in place.

Furthermore, the committee recommends that Kampala City Council provides security for their security lights.

Concerns on the opinion of the Attorney-General

The Office of the Attorney-General was involved throughout in the preparations for CHOGM. The Attorney-General by law is required to clear all contracts entered into by Government except in cases that are covered under the exemption statutory instrument issued by his office. Any contract entered into without the approval of the Attorney-General is null and void.  The Attorney-General is also supposed to give opinion and advise Government on the legality of any action it intends to take. The committee, however, found the Attorney-General wanting in his opinions during CHOGM preparations. For example, the Attorney-General gave opinion allowing Government to invest in private hotels against the advice that such actions would need parliamentary approval. In this particular case, the committee found that Government’s investment in J&M Airport Road Hotel and Commonwealth Resort Munyonyo did not follow any established Government policy. 

The Attorney-General was found to have authorised Government to invest in these hotels using Article 8(a)(i) of the Constitution without due regard to Article 8(a)(ii). Furthermore, due regard was not taken to the provision of the Constitution to the effect that all public charges on the Consolidated Fund have to be approved by Parliament as the Attorney-General wrongly opinioned that it was not necessary.

The Attorney-General also wrongly relied on the PERD Act to provide justifications for investing in private entities and yet he forgot that J&M Hotel and such other entities were not listed in the PERD schedule and hon. Okecho knows about this.

The committee also found that the Attorney-General cleared contracts that Government entered into with hotel owners without any guaranteed safeguards. Government stands to lose over Shs 8 billion on the advances it made to the hotels without safeguards. The concern of the committee is that although these contracts were cleared by the Attorney-General, his failure to provide for guarantees in the contracts was exploited by the service providers and now the same Attorney-General is in dispute with the service provider and is now in court. 

While meeting His Excellency, the President, the committee drew the attention of the President to this concern and invited him to take closer interest in the trend of legal opinions coming from the Attorney-General. (Laughter)

The committee recommends that the appointing authority should review and take necessary action on the conduct of the Attorney-General.
 
The Attorney-General should be held responsible for the loss and investigated for abuse of office.

Amounts recoverable from private firms

The committee was informed that an independent audit firm, Johnson and Nyende Certified Public Accountants, was engaged by Government to assist in establishing the recoverable funds paid to the designated hotels in respect of self-financing delegates and guests. The firm ascertained that a total of US$ 2.3 million was recoverable from the hotels out of US$ 4.52 million leaving US$ 2.2 million irrecoverable. The summary of advance payments to these hotels and recoverable from hotels was given as below. The table is there.

The committee also noted that in some instances, self-paying guests left without settling their bills and the responsibility was transferred to Government of Uganda. The reason is, hotel owners had been advanced so they never bothered and the Attorney-General had not put safeguards. When Government gave advances, the arrangement was for hotels to collect the monies and later to refund the money advanced. This is article 4.7 of the agreement. The total claim is, therefore, US$ 4,432,919 not US$ 2,359,433 because of the agreement under 4.7.

For some reason, there were instances where the guests stayed for longer periods than stipulated, while in other instances there were cases of overbooking and Government lost US$ 51,518. I want you to multiply this by Shs 2,180 per dollar and you know how much we lost.

The committee, however, observes that these outstanding funds have never been recovered due to the weaknesses of contracts that were signed between Government and the hotel owners. The Attorney-General should have put in safeguards to protect Government interests in these advances. The hotel owners have now attempted to account for all the funds advanced to them utilising all the money involved even in cases of non-performance.

The committee notes that public funds have been lost and recommends that the Attorney-General recovers these funds from the private hotels immediately or else be held responsible for these losses. The recoverable funds from private firms be refunded immediately with interest thereon and we are recommending further that hotel owners should refund US$  4,432,919 for self-paying guests which should have been collected within 60 days. 

Hiking prices by hotels

Madam Speaker, the cost of hiring a conference hall for the Youth Forum was found to be Shs 800 million per day in Hotel Royale, and Government was also charged Shs 1 billion for purported loss of business by the same hotel. This pattern of hiking of hotel rates was also reflected in the rates charged by other hotels. (Laughter)

The committee was informed that prior to the commencement of CHOGM, Government, through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, made advance payments for accommodation of fully blocked venues at selected hotels. Except for a few Government of Uganda–sponsored guests, the majority of delegates and guests were expected to meet their own accommodation costs by making direct payments to those hotels. This arrangement covered Imperial Royale Hotel, Serena Hotel, Sheraton Hotel, Golf Course Hotel, and Speke Resort Munyonyo - all in Kampala, and Imperial Botanical Beach Hotel in Entebbe.

It was noted that the rates charged by the hotels for both the conference facilities and the rooms were hiked and varied significantly among comparable hotels. Nobody took interest to negotiate and obtain a better deal for Ugandans.
 
The committee was concerned that a hotel like Imperial Royale Kampala had been booked from 29 October 2007 to 13 November 2007. However, the hotel was not even ready at that time for occupancy. There were incidences when guests checked in and found that the rooms had one defect or another and, therefore, decided to go elsewhere. In this case, monies that should have been paid by the guests and recovered by Government were lost. The committee was concerned about how the room rates were determined for rooms that were not even ready. And Kamuntu knows about this. 

In all the above cases, Government officials who were responsible for negotiating people’s interests were found to have let down the trust put in them. The committee could not rule out possibilities of collusion to defraud the people of Uganda on the part of these teams, and hence the exaggeration of rates. Let me take some water. (Laughter)

The committee found that there was no loss of any business to the Imperial Royale Hotel as claimed because the hotel was not ready for occupation then. The negotiating team did not bother to protect the interest of Ugandans when they decided to block-book Imperial Royale Hotel knowing very well that it was not even ready for occupation.

The committee, therefore, recommends that all officials who negotiated for rates more than the 25 percent of the normal rates be held liable for causing financial loss to Ugandans and be held liable for abuse of office. Government should also demand for recoveries of charges that have been found to be in excess. 

The committee also recommends that the Government of Uganda should launch and pursue a claim in respect of accommodation not taken up but for which full payments had been made to the various hotels. 

Sponsorships

Madam Speaker, we have talked about sponsorships. What I can say here is that money was collected from sponsors and it is in the main body -(Interjections)- okay let me read them. 

Government decided to encourage the private corporate firms/organisations to sponsor the Commonwealth Youth Forum, Business Forum and People’s Forum, which preceded the main CHOGM. The responsibility to solicit for these sponsorships was entrusted to the Commonwealth Business Forum, Commonwealth Business Council and QG Saatchi & Saatchi. The committee, however, found out that:

•	The sponsorship was made by the corporate organisations and the funds were collected by the Commonwealth Business Forum, Commonwealth Business Council and QG Saatchi & Saatchi. M/s QG Saatchi & Saatchi was appointed by the Corporate Sponsorship Committee, headed by hon. Sam Kutesa, to collect sponsorship fees at a commission of 10 percent.  The balance of funds collected was to be remitted to Government. The criteria for arriving at 10 percent commission awarded in his letter of 30 May 2007 could not be established.

•	 There were over 35 sponsors and over US$ 3 million was collected, but the whereabouts of these funds could not be established - if you check in the main report, you will see the how the sponsors contributed. The committee was told that the funds were banked in the Commonwealth Business Council account in the United Kingdom. 

•	The contribution of US$ 100,000 made by Government to the Business Forum which was supposed to be refunded, has never been accounted for. Although Dr James Mulwana, Chairperson Business Forum, had claimed that these funds had been refunded to Government, there is no evidence of acknowledgment of these funds by Government.

•	The committee also found that a limited liability company, Commonwealth Business Company Ltd - we have attached for you to see - had been purportedly incorporated in Uganda, with bank accounts in Standard Chartered Bank in Kampala and in United Kingdom (UK), in which the money collected was deposited. The committee learnt that in order to open a corporate bank account, a Memorandum and Articles of Association is required. The committee further learnt that these details do not exist with the Registrar of Companies. The committee wondered how Standard Chartered Bank, where Dr James Mulwana is a Director, facilitated the opening of such a corporate bank account for a corporate entity that does not exist. These funds have never been accounted for at all. (Annex 22).

•	The committee also learnt that QG Saatchi & Saatchi collected some Shs 360 million and spent it at source without authority contrary to the regulations governing public funds in Uganda. This was in addition to the 10 percent commission which was irregularly determined.

•	 According to the appointment letter of QG Saatchi & Saatchi, the contract was supposed to be reviewed in two weeks (Annex 23). However, this was never done. They continued without having a reviewed contract.

•	The Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, is responsible for contracting not the honourable minister, Sam Kutesa.

Noting the above irregularities, the committee recommends as follows:

•	The Commonwealth Business Council and the Commonwealth Business Forum, which was chaired by Prof. Dr James Mulwana, should account for all the excess of funds they received on behalf of the Government of Uganda because there were guidelines given to them.

•	Prof. Dr James Mulwana should provide information on where he deposited US$ 100,000 paid to the Business Forum by Government since these funds have never reached the Consolidated Fund. He should also be held responsible for any loss arising from the sponsorship funds collected by the Business Forum.

•	QG Saatchi & Saatchi should refund all the collections they made less 10 percent commission only.

•	All the funds collected and banked in the Commonwealth Business Council in the UK be returned to the Uganda Government.

•	The Sponsorship Committee headed by hon. Sam Kutesa should produce accountability of all the funds collected as per sponsorship guidelines.

•	The Sponsorship Committee should be held responsible for flouting the PPDA Act.

Diversion of funds

The committee found that a total of Shs 8.6 billion was diverted from CHOGM funds and utilized on non-CHOGM budgeted expenditure.  The committee further noted deficiencies in planning that led to numerous budget revisions and reallocations throughout the preparation for CHOGM. Diversions affected the implementation of other planned activities. For example, Shs 8.6 billion was diverted from Ministry of Works for the construction of the Northern By-pass, and yet the Ministry of Works later reported outstanding debts of over 31 billion. 

On this Shs 8.6 million diverted, the committee found that:

•	The Deputy Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury authorised the diversion of the 8.6 billion for the construction of the Northern By-pass and yet this project had its own funding elsewhere - we have annexed it.

•	These funds (8.6 billion) were never replaced for purposes of CHOGM activities and, therefore, led to underfunding of CHOGM activities under Ministry of Works and Transport.

The committee in this case recommends that:

•	The project consultant should refund Shs 8.6 billion as it is clear it was his responsibility.

•	The Ministry of Finance releases Shs 8.6 billion to Ministry of Works and Transport to enable it fund the CHOGM arrears in the ministry.

•	The Auditor-General should urgently carry out value for money audit on the Northern By-pass as it appears that a lot of taxpayers’ money could have disappeared in the construction of this road which even still has a lot of defects.

•	The Attorney-General and the IGG should urgently take interest in this project with the aim of recovery from the contractor and prosecution of culprits who could have caused loss to Government from these projects.

Withholding Tax (WHT) due from various suppliers under CHOGM

The committee noted that the majority of firms which were contracted by Government for CHOGM did not meet their tax obligations. 

The committee recommends that:

•	Uganda Revenue Authority conducts a comprehensive tax audit on all companies that supplied goods and services to Government during CHOGM and take appropriate recovery action for the relevant taxes. The audit and recovery measures should be done on all companies, which supplied goods and services for CHOGM.   
	                      
•	A copy of such audit report should be presented to Parliament within 30 days of this report, without waiting for the Treasury Memorandum.

PPDA Rules and Regulations

The committee was concerned that in all the contracts of procurement, the cabinet-sub-committee was bent on flouting PPDA regulations. Incidences were noted when the Office of the Attorney-General was involved in identifying loopholes in the PDDA that could be exploited to bend procurement rules. (Laughter)  The Attorney-General is quoted to have advised that IGG should be made part of the procurement process if future problems have to be avoided. The committee takes this as a dangerous and unfortunate opinion that should not be accepted.

In another incidence, hon. Syda Bbumba, the then the Minister of Gender and now the Minister of Finance, is quoted to have recommended to the cabinet sub-committee for the PPDA Act to be amended by Parliament to suit the procurements. She suggested this against the President’s directive that all the sub-committees of CHOGM must ensure that the PPDA is followed without exception. 

Although the chairperson of the cabinet sub-committee had written to all chairpersons of the CHOGM sub-committee to stick to PPDA in any procurement made, the committee found him to have flouted the PPDA when he cancelled international bidding. The committee is concerned that the conduct of the ministers and the Vice-President were irregular and should have not come from persons holding such high offices.

The committee recommends that public officials be cautioned to be careful and avoid being overzealous and attempting to defeat the spirit of the laws that they have sworn to uphold. 

Insurance of CHOGM

The committee learnt that Government paid US$ 1.3 million to insure the hotels, vehicles, the Queen’s mace, goblets and other important facilities for CHOGM. The committee was concerned as to why Government insured hotels which was the responsibility of hotel owners and was part of the contract that had been signed between Government and the hotel owners. The contract said that hotels must be insured by hotel owners. Furthermore, the hotels were found to have had their own separate insurance policies. The committee also found that the mace and goblets had already been insured by British Government. (Laughter)

The Contracts and Evaluation Committees should have followed PPDA rules to get value for money. Clearing a process of single sourcing when there are many insurance companies is not acceptable.  The committee is concerned that Government insured for policies that were already covered. The committee, therefore, finds this expenditure dubious, and recommends as follows:

•	The Contracts Committee and Evaluation Committee should be held for this loss.

•	The Evaluation and Contracts Committee be held liable for the loss. Madam Hilda Musubira should also be cautioned for neglecting her role and failing to advise appropriately. 

•	CID conducts further investigations to trace the movement of the funds from Government to National Insurance Corporation and beyond. And National Insurance should refund the US$ 1.3 million.
    1.0 
    2.0 Civil Aviation Authority

The committee noted that a financial and technical audit is being carried out by the Auditor-General to conclude the issues raised in respect to this and will report within one month. Meanwhile, CID is also investigating the role of management and the board. The committee, however, found that the implementation of the CAA contracts was taken over by the sub-committee of the board, which it noted was contrary to the established laws. It is like the sub-committee of cabinet took over the other one.
    3.0 
    4.0 Funds expended on security and mobilization
    5.0  
The committee found that the Office of the President was allocated Shs 29 billion for CHOGM preparations. The committee was, however, informed that among this allocation were provisions for classified expenditure and it could not delve into the details, but asked the Auditor-General to breakdown the 29 billion separating classified from non-classified expenditure and to resubmit to the Public Accounts Committee for scrutiny. You will find buying stationery, transport in that 29 – we are saying separate it.
  
Meanwhile, the committee learnt that Minister Beatrice Wabudeya in charge of the Presidency had directed the Media Publicity Committee to include a list of RDCS into mobilization and be paid 14 million for the work. We have attached the Appendix. (Laughter)

    6.0 However, the minister knew very well that there was a separate firm appointed and paid for mobilisation for CHOGM. The committee was concerned about this duplication in roles and waste of resources. 

    7.0 The committee reports that a separate report for the Shs 29 billion which had been covered under classified expenditure will separately be presented to the House.

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, the CHOGM event presented Ugandans with many opportunities and experiences to benefit from, both to the private and public sectors, ranging from improved and faster communications to expanded hospitality/tourism facilities. There were clear instances of non-compliance with laws and regulations resulting in unaccounted for funds, losses and abuse of public resources. 

The committee strongly recommends that resources made by individuals should be refunded within three months from to date. Ugandans are looking forward to holding the responsible people accountable and we pray that the recommendations we are making shall be implemented accordingly. 

We also wish to inform the House that when we met the President, he pledged his support to the work of the committee and gave assurance that he will ensure the implementation of the recommendations in this report. The committee welcomes this assurance.

We also request the Speaker and the entire Committee of the Whole House that you also adopt this report –(Applause)- I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the process is not completed -  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to present a report which is already on mail because you said you have up to page ending at 196. Madam Speaker, I have 11 signatures plus; you said a third; but I have over 11 –(Applause)- I have the annexes to the report and I have all the minutes. When we met the President he said, “Butiku Report”; Butiku Report talks about minutes, meetings, reports and writings – not on phone - and the evidence is here –(Applause)– that is sub-committees.

I have the minutes of the National Task Force – they are here. (Applause) I want to lay some good document here which I will read first, one by one. 

Number one - the letter written on 16 October 2007. I have pulled out that one specifically where hon. Isaac Musumba was warning accounting officers that they should consult the cabinet before they can go to the committee to answer – it is here –(Laughter) 

I have a letter here dated 15 January 2007 by hon. Nasasira to the Prime Minister asking for the work to be started early enough. Madam Speaker, I will give you the reason as to why I am presenting this. I have a schedule attached with all variations which were done on road works and the reasons are also given. I have a letter where the minister, hon. Nasasira, was making a road going to Kitare Gerenge Road which is Garuga Road. This road leads to His Excellency, the Vice-President’s residence.

I have a Police report which has made Engineer Bagonza to be in court for variations and these variations were necessitated by these people of the frontbench and the man is dying alone in –(Laughter- this is it.

I have the attendance register to show you the members who were attending. They are here –(Laughter and Applause)

I have the Auditor-General’s report again here! (Laughter and Applause)

Madam Speaker, I pray – this is a re-prayer. I am kneeling –(Applause)- that the entire CHOGM report be uploaded on the Hansard for completeness. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, I want to make a slight variation to your completeness. You know you presented it as an Executive Summary and you cannot say “complete” when we have not entered the full text of the report in the Hansard. So, I will direct the Clerk that the full text be reproduced in the Hansard. (Applause) The other materials become now the property of Parliament. Hon. Musumba had something to say. 

(Full text of the report to be found in Appendix I of Issue 38.)

8.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Isaac Musumba): I thank you, Madam Speaker. It is with a heavy heart that I seek the Floor of this Parliament. I raise on a point that touches the Constitution, Article 28 and Article 44, both of which relay to the fundamental right of fair hearing and that it is prohibited to derogate from this right of fair hearing. The right to be heard is a basic element of natural justice. 

The PAC report which has just been summarised, on its page 15, bullet 3, makes recommendations and I quote: “Hon. Isaac Musumba, the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, be held responsible for abuse of office and influence peddling leading to a loss of Shs 302 million.” 

This recommendation is derived from their finding on page 14, paragraph six, which says that the authorities in place decided to abuse the trust and included in the list, roads that led to the private properties and that the Minister of Foreign Affairs, for example, is reported to have included the road to Enkombe Apartments in Mbuya. Madam Speaker, what I am being charged with is peddling influence and abuse of office –(Interjections)     

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Hon. Members, please allow the Member to record his objection.

MR MUSUMBA: I thank you. These two offences or charges are very serious offences under the Leadership Code. How could the committee make a finding of such magnitude without inviting me to appear before the committee to testify? The least that the committee should have done is to invite me and lay their evidence - lay their charges against me and put me to my defence.

When I heard on radio and TV that I owned apartments and I have used my position to make a road there, I called the chairman, Nandala-Mafabi, on phone and I said, “Mr Chairman, I have heard these things on TV and radio. Can I come to the committee to explain?” He said, “No, hon. Musumba; it is not necessary. You write stating whether those flats are yours or not.” And I wrote on 15 March 2010 stating clearly that I do not even own one share and that I do not even know the owners of those things. 

The chairman today has admitted that I actually do not own those flats – that was the last I heard. The chairman said he received this letter and that was the last I heard. The next I heard was this morning when I was told that I had been put in the report for abuse of office and influence peddling. 

All I am asking for is that for this kind of finding to be made, I should have been invited. I asked for permission to appear, the chairman said, “It is not necessary.” He said, “Write.” And I wrote. I, therefore, pray that part which is in the report and refers to me in a manner that is inconsistent with the Constitution and my right, be omitted from the report. I thank you. 

8.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, these are not joking matters. I am not here to put up a defence; I am here on a procedural question. Only yesterday, did I see an article in The New Vision saying that I am supposed to be held liable for influence peddling and abuse of office in connection with the variation of a road.

First and foremost, the offences of abuse of office and influence peddling are very grave under the Leadership Code Act and the Penal Code Act of Uganda. For anybody to make a finding of that nature; the accused, the person who is alleged to have committed those offences, must be accorded the opportunity to be heard. I have always been in this country. At no single time did any Member of the committee or any authority, intimate to me that there was an issue where I was personally involved, to which I ought to have responded.

My colleague, hon. Musumba, has already submitted on Article 28 of the Constitution of Uganda, which guarantees an inalienable right to be heard if your civil rights are in question. The same is provided under Article 44 of the Constitution of Uganda. Here I am, being surprised, being told that I committed very grave offences of abuse of office and influence peddling.

Madam Speaker, to demonstrate, just simply, had I been offered an opportunity to defend myself against those allegations, I would have demonstrated that my home does not lie along Salaama Road. It does not. I would have demonstrated that except for only one day when my minister was absent, I was not a member of the CHOGM sub-committee and I did not participate. How could I have committed these heinous offences? 

With all the humility, you cannot condemn a person without affording him the opportunity to be heard because entering these findings and recommendations in the Hansard is actually tantamount to condemnation -(Interjections)- Yes, the world over is waiting for this report. I have not defended myself; I have not demonstrated my innocence; how can these findings and recommendations be allowed to stand in the report? I pray that if the committee is to uphold these recommendations, I be offered an opportunity to appear before the committee and present my defence and demonstrate that what is being said is not true at all. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as we indicated, the report is not for debate today but I would want to invite you to take note of the objections raised by the two hon. Members and if it is true that really they were not given an opportunity to be heard, I think it is only fair that they should be given an opportunity to be heard. Hon. chairperson of the committee and your Members, can you convene for the purpose of receiving their evidence –(Applause)- before we commence debate on this matter? I think it is only fair, if it is true that you did not invite them. Yes, this is the property of the House; we must be fair to all Members concerned. In any case, we are not going to debate it tomorrow. No, we are not going to debate it tomorrow. 

8.33
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Madam Speaker, when I saw the two colleagues stand up to plead to us and if it is true that they were not invited or given an opportunity to be heard; it was indeed unfortunate. It is only fair as you have advised that we give them that benefit of doubt to appear and explain themselves. After all, as you rightly said, we are not going to debate this report. By the time we come to debate this report, they would have interfaced with the committee and then we will be able to freely debate it.

I am saying this because this is a report, which has been long-awaited; it has received a lot of publicity in the media over the last seven months; a lot has been rightly or wrongly reported about some Members of this House; I think it is only fair that these people be given that opportunity so that this report, which we are going to debate, goes with all the credibility that it deserves. As of now, I am already beginning to feel that if we allow it go the way it is; other Members will have a justification to dissociate themselves from it. So, it is only fair. I concur with you that these two honourable colleagues be given an opportunity to interface with the committee. I beg to move Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members that is my directive. Give the honourable members an opportunity to be heard and present an addendum report before we begin debating this report.  

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As you and the Leader of Opposition rightly put it, the right to be heard is really cardinal and what we want is a credible report. We also want this report not to be challenged outside Parliament because if we do something that infringes on the fundamental rights of people; then this report will leave the precincts of Parliament and will be challenged outside this institution. 

I am of the view that actually, the chairperson and the entire committee given the ruling you have just made. I think this is a guidance to the committee that if there are people whom the committee has made findings against, not even necessarily these two –(Interjections)- just a minute, who were not given that opportunity and I emphasise those who were not given that opportunity; but findings were made against them, the committee should be able to find a way of interfacing with them. But that does not apply to those who the committee gave opportunity and they abused the –(Interjection)– no, we do not have to personalise anything here. When you read the report, the committee has gone ahead to explain as to why some people’s views were not incorporated in the report; that is a different matter. 

In fact I would like to distinguish that case from that of the two ministers because the two have said they were not given opportunity at all. But then, there were others who were given opportunity and they refused.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Member, I have already given my directive; I have given my guidance that the committee reconvenes in respect of the Members who were not given an opportunity to be heard. 

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I naturally accept your ruling. I just beg that you add that, in the mean time, because of the absence of constitutional backing of what has been put, it does not stand as part of the committee report. To me this is very important –(Interjections)– let me explain. I am entitled to a hearing, and I am explaining from the position of a lawyer. The recommendation of the committee now is that I am guilty; anybody reading that report now would see that as the recommendation. And I am saying I have not been heard. So, until I am heard, I invite you to make a ruling on the validity and legality of what is in the report about me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to comfort all the Members in this House that the report has not yet been debated or adopted. So, until it has been adopted, it will not become a final report; this is now a draft until every Member has been given the opportunity to be heard. 

MR RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: Madam Speaker, I entirely agree with you that the report has not been debated. However, the existence of these findings is a prima-facie case on my part and on the part of my colleagues. You do not come up with a prima-facie case until somebody has been accorded an opportunity to be heard, because debating this report is not putting defence. If that was the case, then I would not even come here to defend myself because we are not supposed to defend ourselves during the debate. The proper procedure is, since it has been admitted that we were not afforded opportunity, expunge those parts from the records until such a time that we have been afforded time to be heard.

These findings shift the evidential burden on us without us being afforded opportunity to present our cases. Suppose we had been heard, who knows what the findings would have been? Who knows what the recommendations would have been?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not what us to go into this debate. I think there is no doubt that the Members were not invited. So, let us expunge just that part related to them until they have been heard. If those statements are confirmed, they will be reinstated. House adjourned –(Interjections)– what is it hon. Kamuntu?

PROF. KAMUNTU: I am praying, Madam Speaker –(Interjections)– all I want  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon. Members; please give him only one minute to speak. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: I simply –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I instruct the committee to meet expeditiously with those honourable members so that we can get this matter out of the way. Meet them expeditiously then bring an addendum report to the House. 

So, hon. Members, I want to thank you very much for the work done. We now have four reports we have presented and debated, in addition to some other outstanding work. So, I adjourn the House to Tuesday, 10 O’clock in the morning. 

(The House rose at 8.45 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 18 May 2010 at 10.00 a.m.) 


