


Tuesday, 19 May 2020

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. There are a number of items on the Order Paper. I wish the Government could handle them expeditiously.

In the meantime, I would like to inform the Government that I have received information that the situation of truck drivers, especially at the Elegu Border, is serious and that many are in hiding. It is important that Government reaches out to find out where they are so that they can be managed. Otherwise, we are in danger of getting a big pandemic.

As we wait for the members of the Cabinet, we will quickly get a few matters of national concern. Two minutes each.

2.47
Mr gaffa mbwatekamwa (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter of national importance is in regard to payment of allowances for COVID-19 to police officers.
 
We very well know that police have been on the frontline in trying to fight COVID-19. They provide necessary security and are spending sleepless nights. 

However, to our surprise, on 13th May the Inspector General of Police (IGP) wrote a letter indicating how police officers are supposed to be paid. 

They have worked for more than two months but according to the letter, they are only supposed to be paid for 10 days. A police constable is supposed to receive Shs 11,000 and an officer Shs 12,000 per day. You can imagine someone who has worked for more than even 60 days only to receive something like Shs 100,000.

Above all, the District Police Commander (DPC) for Kira told his subordinates that they are supposed to receive Shs 50,000 –(Interjections)– they are not even able to get the meagre allowances they are supposed to take home. 

Madam Speaker, even right now, our police officers who are working here have not received a penny in regard to that money yet they are working.

My prayer is; can the Minister of Internal Affairs –(Mr Odonga Otto rose_)– granted.

The Speaker: Are you now the Speaker? Okay, a piece of information.

Mr odonga Otto: Thank you, hon. Mbwatekamwa for giving way. Madam Speaker, the same situation applies to the military and Local Defence Units (LDUs). They have not been paid and they have been told this is a normal deployment. They are only being given posho and beans. 

The information I am giving is that these people on the streets - the military police, counter terrorism police and LDUs - are not being paid any allowances out of the Shs 500 billion we passed for the security budget. Thank you.
 
Mr Mbwatekamwa: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, this is my prayer. The Minister of Internal Affairs can come here to explain which criteria they are using to make sure that these people are cheated – (Interjection) - protect me, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker, we need your intervention to make sure that we help these officers since they do not have any person who represents them here.

The Speaker: Honourable members, I would like to confirm that this House passed funds for both the police and other security agencies. In the supplementary budget relating to COVID, the funding was supposed to come from Contingency Fund. There was even a clear source.

Therefore, there is no excuse not to pay the security personnel who are working. We need an explanation from the Ministry of Internal Affairs on Thursday to tell us why the police and other security organs have not been paid.

2.52
Mr vicent woboya (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity to raise this matter.

The issue I would like to raise is about a particular category of workers; the private teachers in this country. As we all know, this category of staff is not paid by Government but by the owners of the schools. 
Given that now the schools are under lockdown, these teachers are stranded. I was in the constituency recently and I was approached by a number of representatives of the teachers. They are begging for some support during this period.

Therefore, I would like to ask Government to find some support targeted specifically to this category of people. They are Ugandans who depend on their service to the private institutions. Now that the institutions cannot pay them the way Government is paying others, I would be happy if Government responded with some food and other targeted support. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Are these people in Budadiri?

Mr Woboya: They are all over the country. Of course, I speak for my constituency in Budadiri, but I know the situation is the same in the entire country.

The Speaker: Do we have anyone from the taskforce? Can we ask the Prime Minister to tell us what the – I see two ministers of Education and Sports.
2.54
The Minister of State for Education and Sports (Primary) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We do appreciate the concern of all our teachers. It is not only the teachers but also every Ugandan now is in need of support. 

You are aware that these are private schools. We would have loved to support them but I think it is important to also appreciate what kind of budget we are supposed to use to give that support. The kind of support we are talking about here is in terms of food - which probably the Government is already giving to the people of Kampala and Wakiso. Probably, we can discuss that with the Prime Minister and see what can be done. 

However, for now, Madam Speaker, it is very difficult for us, as the Ministry of Education and Sports, to make such a commitment. I think we can speak to the Prime Minister in this regard because they are also Ugandans that also need support. 
Madam Speaker, I beg you to give us a chance to discuss with the Prime Minister and probably his office can come and give some more guidance on that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, as you go to discuss, isn’t it time that the Government actually realised that other Ugandans need food, other than Kampala and Wakiso? Can we not continue talking about Kampala and Wakiso for two months into the lockdown, when other Ugandans are not getting support?  

2.56
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and my dear colleagues. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning a floating island surge and vegetation that has grounded the ferry service connecting Moyo District to the rest of the country on Albert Nile at Laropi Town Council Moyo District, West Moyo County from Thursday 14 May 2020. 

The floating vegetation stretches for over a distance of four kilometres, which has crippled public transport for cargo, fuel, emergency food supplies and medicine to the refugee-hosting sub-county of Palorinya in Obongi District as well as Yumbe, Koboko and Kajo Keji in South Sudan. 

The alternative route through Sinyanya Ferry to Obongi via Adjumani District is very far and rough as a result of rain. Ambulances cannot take the emergency cases; the sick as well as the COVID-19 suspect cases cannot be monitored and taken for referral. Individuals, businesses at Laropi Town Council and sub-county are suffering. 

My prayers are: 
    1. Multi-sectoral efforts involving the ministries of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; Works and Transport; Water and Environment; Energy and Mineral Development; Defence and Veteran Affairs as well as International Agricultural Research Organisation, should help in destroying the floating vegetation. 
    2. A bridge across the Nile, like the Entebbe Expressway from Busega called Nambigirwa be constructed across the Nile. 
    3. Work on the rough road between Atiak to Afoji in Moyo District, Koboko to Moyo, Adjumani to Sinyanya, Moyo Obongi via Palorinya for easy movement of vehicles. 
    4. Deployment of heavy equipment such as long-arm excavators, two-turn dam tractors, two safe loading trucks and one barge, a fisheries research vessel supplemented with a ferry from the Ministry of Works and Transport. This can help in clearing the floating vegetation. 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Works and Transport here? The Ministry of Works and Transport is directed to address this situation of the floating island, the inability of the ferry to travel, to examine the proposals made by hon. Aza and to report to us as soon as the floating island has been cleared and people are able to travel.   

3.00
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance. Over the weekend, I saw very many notices and I even watched on television a group of people on the national taskforce doing fundraising and asking selected companies and workers to contribute Shs 10,000 to the taskforce. 
Madam Speaker, we are talking about a population that is already stressed, people who have no food, and workers that are already disturbed by very many dependents who are not working and are now depending on them. We are talking about a situation, where given this, a fundraising committee has not yet told the country how they are going to use the money that has been fundraised and now they are riding to the population asking for more money. It is now becoming a tax because they are now coming up with how much to pay and who to pay. Therefore, that is a form of tax. 

Madam Speaker, we need answers. We would like to know why this is happening and why our people are being stressed, yet they already have very many other problems. I would like to implore the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the other related ministers such as those in charge of Public Service and Gender and Labour and Social Development, to tell us why our people are being disturbed with these contributions, yet we actually do not even have accountability of what is already contributed. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to explain how you are taxing people without the authority of this proposal? 

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Mwijukye for asking that important question. And indeed to say that we are very grateful for everybody who has contributed to this cause of fighting COVID-19, which has been on a voluntary basis. It has also galvanised the spirit of Ugandans to support each other when in a crisis. 

Regarding the contribution of Shs 10,000 which was an idea mooted and proposed by the national taskforce fundraising committee, it is not compulsory. Whoever wants to contribute can do so - but it is not compulsory and it is not a tax. It was just an idea that if somebody contributed Shs 10,000, we could raise this. Therefore, that is just an idea. If it has caused any confusion, we do apologise for that confusion but it is voluntary and not mandatory. I thank you. 

Madam Speaker, Government is not going to deduct anything from anybody’s payroll unless they so wish. 

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the honourable minister who said it is not compulsory to contribute to the national taskforce. However, we heard and saw somebody that wrote the letter to respective heads of companies and ministries asking them to see how best they can have the workers contribute. 

Therefore, the clarification I am seeking, Madam Speaker, is whether before the other person wrote the letter, the organisers and members of the taskforce had sat and agreed to write it. If it was voluntary and so, they would have just used the media to ask people to contribute the way they had been contributing. Otherwise, writing a letter to executive directors or managing directors of various companies or in charge of workers - can that one be termed as voluntary contribution?  

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Speaker, the issue is not only the so-called voluntary contribution to the COVID-19 fund; there is additional pressure on workers being sacked during this difficult moment. This is the time for everybody to be protected and not to be harassed; not to be humiliated; and not to be sent away.

Other than asking for the Shs 10,000, which is causing problems, what is Government doing about workers who are being laid off? What is Government doing about workers who are being suspended and those being paid half pay when they should be protected during this most difficult time? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, would the taskforce want to withdraw that letter because it is causing problems? If it is voluntary, why did you write?     

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I have not looked at the letter. I will take it up with the Prime Minister and the taskforce. 

However, I guess that was just an appeal; unless hon. Kibalya can lay that letter - it was just an appeal and it is voluntary. Anyhow, we shall follow it up and I am off the Floor, Madam Speaker. 

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, with due respect to my brother, the hon. Bahati, whom I have known as a good Christian. One of the principles in the Bible is that one must speak the truth. I do not know whether he is in order to say that the letter is not there when it was written. I came from Busia this morning but yesterday, while in a meeting between the district taskforce and cross border traders, some people complained about that letter. The taskforce cannot just wake up and writes such a letter without consultation.

Therefore, is the minister in order to tell the whole country that there is no such letter yet the letter is there? 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think you will have to come back and clarify. Otherwise, we would like to restate that we gave you a supplementary. You have collected funds and we don’t know what you are doing with them and now, you are going to the public. 
  
MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, can I clear it now, since it has come on the Floor, that I did not say that the letter does not exist. I said I have not seen the letter and that is the truth. However, I will follow up this matter, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. 

3.09
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance particularly in regards to the media coverage. Madam Speaker, you are aware that Uganda is being praised because we have been very obedient in implementing and obeying the presidential directive relating to the COVID-19 pandemic. 

However, I am amazed and disappointment that while Parliament appropriated Shs 9 billion to facilitate the media and the ICT ministry, the New Vision has closed its regional offices. As a result very many people have lost their means of livelihood because they have been attached to New Vision either as reporters or distributors, especially women and youth who normally sell newspapers on the streets. 

Therefore, I would like to know why, for example, the Orumuri office in the West has been closed. I would like to know why the Rupiny offices in Lango sub region as well as Etop offices in the East have been closed too, yet these are Government offices that we have given money for facilitation? 

Madam Speaker, I beg to seek that clarification?

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance?

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank Mama Cecilia, for giving us very important information. For example, in Soroti, where Etop is based, all the staff have been laid off.

Secondly, all the staff working with Etop Radio have had their salaries reduced. I have a copy of the memo signed by CEO of Vision Group - Madam Speaker, allow me to read only a part of it. The letter was written on 30 April 2020. The subject is “Salary reduction. The issue at hand is that following the consultation with the board, it was decided that we undertake the following measures:
    1. Pay full salary for the month of April;
    2. Gross salary reduction effective May 2020 of 60 per cent for those who earn above Shs 19 million, 45 per cent for those who earn between Shs 8 million and Shs 19 million; and
    3.  Deduction of 40 per cent for those who earn salary below Shs 8 million.”

Madam Speaker, this is the information I would like to give my very good Mama Cecilia Ogwal that what she is giving is a reality.    

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, as you are aware Government has given us guidance that the children can continue learning from home through radio and television programmes. However, now that all the radio stations that we would rely on – all the Government channels in the North, in the East and some parts of the West, have been closed, how are our children going to learn? These are the questions, which concern Parliament though we are here being told that everything is fine. 

In fact, while I recall the Minister of Information Communication Technology and National Guidance one time told this House that 90 per cent of this country is covered by radios and televisions, offices for all those stations have been closed.

My prayer is: can we be given clarification on how our children are going to learn during this pandemic, and how we are going to deal with the level of unemployment caused by our own Government agencies? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we shall ask the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance – 

MR KEEFA KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, hon. Ogwal has raised the issue of information and how our children will be getting information now that New Vision has closed its offices. However, there is a more procedural issue here and as Parliament we should interest ourselves into it. 

The New Vision is actually a subsidised company and I think some money was passed to help them. Now, what is going on? I do not think what is going on is voluntary. It is something very painful to them and this is a normal reaction, under similar circumstances, in management. If this is what is happening to Vision Group then think about what is happening to an ordinary company out there. 

The procedural matter is, for how long shall we continue waiting before we hear from Government on how it will respond to the issues that companies are facing right now? As a matter of fact, it is just days before we will be seeing many of them closing. We thought, at a point in time, that Government would come with a response on how these companies will be helped. They have made their appeal and certain things are very clear. Even on those, which are very basic, like Pay-As-You Earn and other things, there has been no response. Isn’t this a very serious procedural matter, Madam Speaker, that Government needs to respond to?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – By the way, this is an old request. Before we moved from the Conference Hall, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had said he was coming back to address the House on that issue but he has not.

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, there are two parts to this question. The first part regards Vision Group and that question was also raised by hon. Lilly one week ago. We promised that because the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – not ICT – is a shareholder, we were going to interface with the Board of Vision Group. We promised that we would come back and make further clarification on that particular matter this week. We request that you give us time on Thursday to make a clarification on what they are facing and what we, as the shareholders, want to do.

On the issue of the economic response, Madam Speaker, you will give us a week because we are discussing this matter at Cabinet level and Cabinet will consider this matter next week on Monday. On Wednesday or Thursday next week, we could come here to give specific economic responses to the different economic challenges facing different companies and the country next week.

THE SPEAKER: Those are two Government assurances. Let them be recorded by the Clerk. Let us have hon. Turyamuhweza for two minutes.

3.17
MR FRED TUMUHEIRWE (FDC, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This matter is about face masks that are supposed to be provided to Ugandans following the presidential announcement last night that Nytil will be providing these masks in the next two weeks. These masks are urgently required if we are to prevent coronavirus infections. Now that we are going to use public funds, how did Government contract Nytil and what kind of procedure did they use to come up with the suggestion that they are the ones to provide the face masks?

Madam Speaker, where we are committing public funds, why doesn’t Government provide a standard, say by Uganda National Bureau of Standards, so that interested parties – all those who can manufacture face masks – apply so that the masks are available and we also create jobs through those stakeholders that will be able to provide these masks? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can the Minister of Health explain how they got Nytil?

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Joyce Moriku): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for raising the issue of face masks for the people of Uganda. I, first of all, would like to appreciate you, Madam Speaker and all Members of Parliament, for your contribution towards the fight against COVID-19. I would also like to appreciate all our people for their vigilance, for being alert and for following the guidelines very closely. We are very happy. This achievement has been because of the support we got from the community. 

The issue of face masks has come on board and the President has directed that everybody in the country should be using face masks and that is based on scientific evidence.

Madam Speaker, indeed it is true the face masks will be made and distributed to the people of Uganda. People are not going to purchase them. The normal procedure of procurement is going to be followed because this is the money for the Government of Uganda that is going to be used to procure these masks. 

This morning, we have been in a series of meetings concerning the same issue. This afternoon, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the Minister of Health are also having the same meetings. Apart from Nytil, there are other companies that may be eligible for Government to purchase face masks from them. The discussion is still ongoing. I would like to say that at an appropriate time, we can bring this – (Ms Nabbanja rose_) – She is from the meeting that they had with the Prime Minister. Can I allow that information?

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, we are just from a meeting with a number of companies and the due process will take place. There were over 28 companies: Nytil, Fine Spinners and many others.

THE SPEAKER: How did you get those? How did they know about the masks?

MS NABBANJA: After the presidential announcement, they came to find out about the quality – (Interjection)– They came to find out how they will make these masks using scientific means. That is what they came to inquire about and we have been in a meeting. There are many companies, including women –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would like to know how the ordinary women of Uganda, who are making these masks, will be able to compete with those companies of yours. How will the young people of Uganda, who are already making masks, be able to get engaged in that business?

MS NABBANJA: We were of the view that we categorise companies, including local companies and local women here in Kiyembe – including in your area in Kamuli. However, we have also given a leeway such that other people who want to buy masks can buy and use them.

MR NSAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of masks is showing us how this country needs the local content Bill. There is a tendency by this Government to always ignore the wanainchi, especially when they are doing procurement. I would like to thank colleagues and everyone who dons a mask made by local companies here. There are very many of us who don those made by Americans and Chinese and they look very fashionable. However, every time you put on that mask, you are creating a job in America or China. 

Madam Speaker, it is high time this House took a decision that this Government buys from here and it shouldn’t be selective to say that it is “Company A” that must sell to Government. That is very unfair. Let Government put up an open system, where every Ugandan who can make a face mask - Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) can then come up and give us a standard and say, “This is the standard. Whoever can make a mask, please present this quality, and we shall buy it as Government”.

Madam Speaker, when Government comes up to say that the face mask must come from Nytil only, until the face mask from Nytil comes, that is when the lockdown will be lifted – that is very unfair, Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MR KYAGULANYI: Thank you very much, comrade for giving way. Madam Speaker, from the President’s communication last night, the major reason he gave for continuing the lockdown was that the Government had to give masks to every Ugandan.
Like my colleague, hon. Nsamba has said, Ugandans are already making masks for themselves. If the President said anybody who goes out of the lockdown must have mask, probably, all Ugandans would be out of lockdown by the end of today. It is, therefore, important for the Government to be clear on the reason of the continued lockdown. If it is face masks, I believe that Ugandans can come out of lockdown because they can improvise means of having their masks made by the local people. I submit.

3.24
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Oshabe Nsamba, who is encouraging us to Buy Uganda, Build Uganda (BUBU) and to say that all of us strive for that.

Madam Speaker, hon. Nsamba is wearing a suit, tie and shoes not made in Uganda –(Interjections)– you can lay the label at the Table. I am on a point of procedure – [Mr Nsamba rose­_]

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: He is free to lay on the Table whatever he is wearing so that we can see the label. However, the procedural point I would like to raise is, this evening the President will address us again –(Interjections)– do not get tired of knowledge. All of us would like Ugandans to wear quality masks, which have been confirmed by the Ministry of Health, working with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and UNBS. 

Madam Speaker, it is not only Nytil. Right now, a meeting has taken place where different groups have been called to make sure that – 

THE SPEAKER: Oh! Groups are being called selectively. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, we are operating in a state, where some bureaucracies –(Interjections)– we want Ugandans to wear masks and go out but most importantly, we want them alive.  This is the concern of everyone. When I hear hon. Patrick Oshabe Nsamba talking about BUBU yet what he is wearing might not be a BUBU, I think he was not proceeding very well.

THE SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, do not drive us away from the issue of lack of equity; the procurement, which is not clear and transparent is what we are addressing, not our dressings. 

MS MORIKU: Madam Speaker, I was concluding on this matter and my colleague added something. I would like to make it clear that the statement of the President is a directive, as we all know. However, the implementation and how we can procure these face masks will follow the normal procurement procedure of Government of Uganda. That is the discussion that has been taking place and it is based on scientific evidence.

I would like to make the second statement clear. It is not all about face masks. We are basing this on scientific evidence - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we listened last night and the President said they are being manufactured by Nytil. That is what he said. We have ears.

MR GAFABUSA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable Minister of Health. Yesterday, the President tagged lockdown lifting to face masks. For instance, public transport – Madam Speaker, I bought the mask I am wearing from Friecca Pharmacy Wandegeya. My assumption is that the Ministry of Health approved these face masks we are buying from pharmacies. The clarification I am therefore seeking is: If seven passengers from Fort Portal are wearing these masks from Friecca Pharmacy today, are they allowed to board a taxi and travel to Kampala – (Interjections)

MS MORIKU: Madam Speaker, with your permission, tomorrow I will come up with a brief statement concerning the issue of face masks. Otherwise, the President is going to address the nation tonight and already the discussions and the plans are still ongoing. Let us have a comprehensive package and bring it to this Floor tomorrow. I beg you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sebaggala, two minutes.

3.31
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. That is one of the points I wanted to raise.

THE SPEAKER: It has been raised.

MR SEBAGGALA: Yes, but I would like to make it clearer. When you look at that presidential order - many of us have supported Ugandans by buying masks that are locally produced.

Madam Speaker, when Ugandans realised that we were going to have a situation, where all of us are going to put on masks, they invested heavily in producing these masks. Our ladies everywhere are making masks. Since there are no employment opportunities due to COVID-19, they are making these masks everywhere so that they can support themselves. Now that Government has come up with conditions, I believe we will be doing a great disservice to all Ugandans. As Parliament, we should not accept this.

Secondly, as far as presidential directives are concerned, I do not know why there are many ambiguities yet those ambiguities at times, make these law enforcers to misinterpret, which is why the President is coming back today, yet he already addressed us yesterday.

The President said that private cars can move – if you allow private cars to move and say “you are waiting for masks” - and yet we know that there are many Ugandans who can afford masks in pharmacies. There are many Ugandans who can go and buy these masks from pharmacies and move on. Now that you said private cars should not move without masks, are we saying those who can go and buy masks can drive their cars?

Thirdly, there is no way you can allow private cars – you have said you are going to distribute masks across the country, yet it has taken you two months to distribute food for just Kampala and Wakiso alone. So, how will masks be distributed across the country within the two weeks, when it has taken two months to distribute the food?

Madam Speaker, I believe that ambiguities in presidential speeches must be really dealt with. 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, it has taken our Government two months to distribute food in Wakiso and Kampala. Nytil produces 10,000 masks per hour. The best they can do is 240,000 in about eight hours.

The President made a statement that not until the masks are ready in two weeks – which is very clear – so, Ugandans will wait for 14 days. He said the masks must be distributed through the LCs. The kind of distribution of food means another two months for them to relay the masks from Nytil to the LCI chairpersons.

Madam Speaker, Government must come out and say, “The requirement is a mask and the standard is this”. Ugandans will find a way to get their masks. As far as the taxpayers’ money is concerned, we want every other Ugandans to partake of that money because it is the only income that is coming in for now. Thank you.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, finally, since the President is going to address the nation today again, I beg that if private cars have been allowed and the owners can buy their own masks from anywhere, let them continue driving their cars, as long as they have masks, not waiting for the Nytil masks that can really take months before they are – (Interruption)

MR SILWANY: Thank you. Madam Speaker, the minister has come here and told this House that in processing and procuring the masks, the ministry and Government will ensure that they follow the standard procedures of procurement, governed by the laws of this country.

Would it be procedurally right for us to continue debating this issue, without finding out whether they have followed the right procedure or not? Aren’t we debating in anticipation, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have not seen any advert in the press from the Government, asking for people to make masks. Any procurement you are talking about must be underhand. So, Minister of Health, come and tell us tomorrow what is happening. If Nytil is good, let them compete with other Ugandans to make these masks.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE MANAGEMENT OF FLOODS IN KASESE AND BUNDIBUGYO DISTRICTS

THE SPEAKER: Minister in charge of disaster preparedness? Absent.



MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE GOVERNMENT’S PLAN TO REHABILITATE THE NAMUTUMBA-BUDUMBA-BUSOLWE-BUTALEJA ROAD

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Works?

MR MUHUMUZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of procedure regarding the item we have just skipped because of the absence –

THE SPEAKER: No, we did not skip it; we called it.

MR MUHUMUZA: Yes - because of the absence of the minister - that is the issue on the management of floods in Kasese and Bundibugyo. Madam Speaker, it is actually 10 days today since the people of Kasese and Bundibugyo were hit and big areas devastated by these floods.

The Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees was here last week and made a commitment, after presenting what was not satisfactory to us. He made a commitment to come here today and give us a detailed statement that we can take as this House and the entire country.

Madam Speaker, you can imagine in this condition we are in - of COVID-19 lockdown - people are displaced. They have nowhere to sleep; they have no food to eat and we have a fully-fledged Government. We, as representatives of the people here, have nothing to tell the people now. 

I drove from Bundibugyo last evening, purposely to come and hear what the minister is going to tell us. Madam Speaker, you saw on TV the conditions the people that are affected by these floods are living in, especially in Kasese and Bundibugyo. 

Are we moving well, Madam Speaker, that – and I know there is more than one minister in that ministry and the Government Chief Whip is here, if the minister is not there –  we just leave that matter to go and then as a representative of the people of Bundibugyo, what do I tell them from here? Are we moving well?

THE SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, can you whip the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees or his deputy to come because they made an undertaking last week to talk about Kasese and Bundibugyo? They made an undertaking before we closed.

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we talk about Kasese, the whole of Bukakata Sub-county has been submerged in water; people have been displaced. Are we proceeding well to look at only Kasese and Bundibugyo, leaving out the rest of the Ugandans suffering? I pray that the entire country is looked at, including Bukakata Sub-county and Masaka sub-region.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is not that we are ignoring the other parts. The members from Kasese and Bundibugyo came here and reported. That is why we are asking the Government to respond - because they reported.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, I remember last week you directed the minister to bring a statement covering all areas of the country that have been affected because even Kabale District itself was actually the first one to be affected. You mentioned all areas in the country. 

What we request from Government is a statement in respect of all areas in the country - all districts that have been affected and what Government plans are there, especially in respect of the infrastructure. Schools were demolished. My own primary school, where I studied from, was completely washed away. So, we want to know what Government is planning to do to reinstate the physical infrastructure that has been affected countrywide.

3.43
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, what the Members of Parliament are raising is indeed a concern. The issue of the rising levels of water in Lake Victoria has affected Lake Kyoga and, therefore, the entire country is suffering.

It is very prudent that the minister brings a plan of Government, which I am sure can be done - I am going to make sure that I reach him – which gives Ugandans hope. Those who are in the islands are equally suffering. Those who are around Lake Kyoga are equally suffering.

So, it is a big issue which we need to handle urgently. Let me step out, Madam Speaker, and make sure that I reach the minister.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Akamba.

MR AKAMBA: Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising regards item 3 (II), where the Minister of Works and Transport was meant to give a statement on the status of Namutumba-Budumba-Busolwe Road. I wonder whether we are proceeding well when the minister continues to absent himself whenever the matter about this road comes up.

Madam Speaker, Namutumba-Budumba-Busolwe Road has been impassable since December when we started receiving heavy rains. Officials from the Office of the Prime Minister went around the country promising that they would look for special funds to put right roads that had been damaged.

Madam Speaker, the nearest referral hospital to Namutumba is Busolwe Hospital. However, as we speak, my people are suffering; they do not have where to go for referral treatment because the road to Busolwe Hospital is impassable. The only health centre IV that we have in Namutumba is in a sorry state. The road is full of ponds. I do not know whether the Government is planning to turn it into a fish pond. 
My people are suffering, Madam Speaker, and I want this to be treated as a matter of urgency so that the road is worked on. In any case, it has been 15 years since the President pledged to tarmac it. Even the new bridge that vehicles share with the train is – (Interruption.)

MS MUGENI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I stand up with a lot of pain to give information to my colleague. Like I told you when I brought up this matter, it is very hard to get to Butaleja through Namutumba, yet that is our main road. Butaleja is the leading producer of rice in the eastern Uganda, but nobody is even aware of this because our rice cannot be easily transported to Kampala and other areas. Two days ago, a pregnant woman –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are arguing – I want the minister to come first. 

MS MUGENI: Madam Speaker, that is how serious the matter is –

THE SPEAKER: You raised it last week. 

MS MUGENI: Yes. The women who are being referred to Busolwe Hospital cannot get there because there is no transport. It is very far for somebody to walk all the way from Namutumba to Mbale Regional Referral Hospital. 

I am concerned, like my colleague said, that whenever we bring this matter to the House, the ministers concerned disappear and so, we do not get an appropriate answer. This is a presidential pledge, which we have waited for, for 20 years. This is really very unfortunate. 

THE SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, where is the Minister of Works and Transport and all his state ministers? There are three ministers for that docket but they are never here. 

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I would like to provide more information about what hon. Akamba has said. The road the honourable member talked about is the same road that connects to Bugiri, and it is indeed in a sorry state. People have stopped moving especially with the continuous rains. So, I also urgently urge the minister to ensure this road and roads in other areas of the country facing similar problems are worked on.

It is very urgent that it should have been done yesterday. People are stuck, especially now that they do not have transport as a result of the COVID-19 lockdown. People cannot totally move. This is something that should be handled immediately.

THE SPEAKER: I have directed the Government Chief Whip to find the Minister of Works and Transport or his assistants to come here before we close this sitting. Let us go to Item 3 (iii).

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON GOVERNMENT’S PLANS TO CONDUCT A COUNTRYWIDE DISTRIBUTION OF EDUCATION REVISION MATERIALS TO ALL STUDENTS

3.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE): Madam Speaker, following the closure of schools and institutions on 20 March 2020, the Ministry of Education and Sports developed a preparedness and response plan, which focuses on two main areas. The first was to ensure continuity of learning while learners are at home. Secondly, we wanted to prepare for the resumption and manage schooling once the COVID-19 lockdown is lifted. 

To facilitate continuity of learning for all our learners, especially those in primary and secondary schools, the ministry worked with the National Curriculum Development Centre to produce harmonised learning packages for use in the continuity of learning –

THE SPEAKER: I am sorry, honourable minister, but I do not know whether that is not what your colleague presented the other week. Our question was: “When will the whole country be covered?” Many districts do not have enough materials. 

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. In addition to what my colleague presented last time, I wish to add that truly, our purpose was to distribute materials, 100 per cent, to all our learners. As we speak, however, we have only distributed 25 per cent. Why? It is because of resources. 

We are, however, doing our best while working with development partners, to ensure that once resources are availed, we cover the rest of the country. I want to make it clear that we should all appreciate that the resources we are using at the Ministry of Education and Sports were, first of all, not budgeted for this particular purpose. We are working within what we can to be able to provide. We are doing our best to ensure that we avail more resources. 

I want to, however, make it clear that the materials we have so far distributed targeted the most vulnerable areas that do not have access to FM radio or TV stations. We agreed to use the first lot of materials to cover those most vulnerable areas. We sent a circular to the local governments to help us deliver these materials to those most vulnerable children who cannot access television and – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it seems nothing has changed. What the minister is saying now is what her colleague said the other week. There is no improvement. We want to know when each student will get the materials. 

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, it is very difficult – and allow me to be very sincere on this – to say that we are going to distribute the materials tomorrow when we are still trying to work around the clock to find resources. Like I said, just like my colleague said the other time, we are working with our friends and development partners to see how we can get resources to distribute more materials.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you. Madam Speaker, when the minister started making her submission, and noticing that she had lost track, you rightly asked her whether this is not the same statement that her senior minister presented the other time. She answered in affirmative. 

Our concern that time was whether it was necessary to continue with this programme countrywide and how effective it will be, even for the children deep in villages. We asked the minister to bring a report to the House. As soon as my good friend, the minister, answered that what she is presenting is what the other minister presented, she started haphazardly talking to this House without anything printed.

Is she proceeding well to give us information haphazardly, patching up and thinking about donors who will help us, without answering the fundamental question of how effective their approach of disseminating information through radios, televisions and internet will work for the children deep in the villages?

The Speaker: Honourable minister, if there is no plan, tell us so that we know and forget about it. We cannot continue like this. We have had a debate on this more than three times. Is there a plan or not? Are you in position to tell us or not?

Ms seninde: Madam Speaker, we started this programme because we all appreciated that we had to help our children during this time.

I appreciate that we would like to cover it very effectively. This Parliament can bear witness that when you are constrained with resources - Like my colleague made it clear the other time, I must repeat that we cannot lie to this august House that by tomorrow, we are going to be able to distribute all the materials we need. That is why I have made it clear that we are trying our best, like we have tried so far. We said that let the materials we have now go to the most vulnerable places as we also continue to avail information or learning on radio and television – (Interruption)

Mr olanya: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Right now, in my district, a copy of these materials was given for the whole parish. The ministry is asking LCs I in those parishes to photocopy the documents. These LCs I and local leaders are now calling Members of Parliament to help them photocopy those documents for the children.

The situation we are in is quite alarming. Is the honourable minister in order to inform the august House that they are trying to work on these materials effectively, yet there is nothing being seen on the ground and she is asking the local leaders to photocopy for the children?

The Speaker: Honourable minister, if you are not able, just tell us and we forget about it.

Ms mary babirye: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I took the responsibility to move all around Masaka District to see whether the approach the ministry has brought on board to help the children is effective or not. I found out that it is not effective at all.

The District Education Officers (DEOs) are requesting that the Government allows them to use the money which they have on their accounts because by the end of June, it will be taken back. They request Government to allow them to use that money to produce the materials instead of waiting for the minister and the ministry to provide materials, which they are not doing.

The Speaker: Honourable members, I think we are wasting time. Let us go to the next item.

3.59
Mr SAMUEL odonga otto (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, I rise to move a motion that the minister no longer be heard in this Parliament because in spite of three repetitive reminders by the Speaker that the country needs answers, the minister brings the same answer. She is being repugnant and uncooperative. She is not even asking this Parliament for the amount of money she needs. 

Therefore, unless the minister wants to withdraw, I would like to proceed and move a motion that she no longer be heard in this Parliament for the next six months. I beg to move.

The Speaker: No, it has not been seconded. Honourable members, let us go to something else and stop wasting time.

Mr Abacacon: Madam Speaker, we have been following this matter for a long time. I do not know if we are aware of this budget for revision. The subject is revision, not anything new, for our parents to exercise. You have asked the ministry to come and present to us a statement. They pledged that they were going to provide all these learning materials. By what time period would they do this? It seems they have no answer.

Since they have no answer, are we proceeding well - that we cannot stop this programme until further notice? This is wasting taxpayers’ money. In my village, only one sheet has been sent for primary 1. There are 40 of them in my village. Are we proceeding well to listen to lies today, tomorrow and the next day? 

The Speaker: Honourable members, you will bring a formal motion so that we can discuss what to do with that programme. Let us move on.

Ministerial statement ON GOVERNMENT’S PLANS TO EVACUATE UGANDAN CITIZENS STRANDED OVERSEAS AS A RESULT OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

4.02
The Minister of state for Foreign Affairs (International Affairs) (Mr Okello Oryem): Madam Speaker, I have the honour to update you on the Government’s plan and strategy to bring back our loved ones - Ugandans who are stranded abroad due to the COVID-19 Pandemic.

When His Excellency the President, on 18 March this year, declared a lockdown in Uganda, it resulted into, among others, the suspension of international travels and closing of Entebbe International Airport in Uganda, and the travelling of people up and down in the country by public means. This, unfortunately, resulted in many Ugandans being stranded abroad in many parts of the world. It also resulted in Ugandans being stranded internally in different parts of Uganda - in towns, districts and villages. 

My sincere sympathies go to every Ugandan who has been stranded in whichever part of Uganda due to this pandemic. Particularly, my heartfelt sympathies go to Ugandans who are stranded abroad and to their loved ones who are in Uganda, who think about them every day, due to the long-term separation.

Madam Speaker, the Government has, in principle, agreed that a plan and strategy be put in place for Government to bring back or return our loved ones from abroad. My senior minister, hon. Sam Kutesa, was yesterday, 18 May 2020, supposed to present a paper before Cabinet titled “The return of Ugandans stranded abroad in the diaspora due to border closure following the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic.” 

Unfortunately, the minister could not present yesterday’s paper due to other pressing provisions in Cabinet. It is hoped that the minister will be able to present the paper at the next special Cabinet meeting, which will be tomorrow, Wednesday 20 May 2020. 

The objective of this will be to apprise Cabinet or the Government on the principle for the return home of certain categories of Ugandan nationals currently stranded abroad under the different terms and conditions; to apprise Cabinet on the categories of the distressed Ugandans stranded abroad on account of the travel restrictions following the outbreak of the pandemic; and finally, apprise Cabinet on the various options and implications thereof available to the Government to address the challenges of Ugandans stranded abroad. 

Madam Speaker, it is my sincere and honest prayer that soon after Cabinet has owned the Cabinet paper, I will be able to come here and give, in full detail, the strategy and programme for Ugandans to be able to return to Uganda. 

It is my further prayer that colleagues will bear with the Government, myself and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and will be patient, as they have been up to this time, to allow us just these two days to be able to present the Cabinet paper and lay out before Cabinet the strategy and plans for Ugandans to return to Uganda. Thereafter, I will come to this House and present the same before them. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: On Thursday. 

MR OKELLO ORYEM: I will be here, Madam Speaker, on Thursday. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. That is a Government assurance.


MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE VALIDITY OF JOB INTERVIEWS CONDUCTED BY THE NGORA DISTRICT SERVICE COMMISSION ON FRIDAY, 8 MAY 2020 AMIDST THE COVID-19 LOCKDOWN AND THE ATTENDANT LIMITATIONS OF SOCIAL GATHERINGS

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister of Public Service. However, the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Public Service has written to say that she needs to collect information from the district. She wrote the letter on 19 May 2020. She is requesting for one week to collect information from Ngora before she comes back to us. 

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for that information. One week is not a problem but my biggest challenge is, as we talk now, the district was planning to issue the appointment letters to those who had done interviews under lockdown. I would like to get to know the validity of the entire process. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Can we ask the Minister of Public Service to intervene and stop the letters from being issued until we have had an explanation from the minister here, as they have requested? This is from their ministry, so the minister should stop the issuance of the letters until we have heard an explanation. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE OMISSION OF CLINICAL OFFICERS AND NUTRITIONISTS FROM THE CALL BY THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH FOR VOLUNTEERS IN THE FIGHT AGAINST THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

4.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Madam Speaker, indeed, it is true the Ministry of Health made a call for healthcare specialists during this critical time that we need more staff for management of COVID-19. 

On 24 March 2020, an advert was sent out specifically for the positions of medical officer special grade (internal medicine); medical officer (general practice); epidemiologist; nursing officer; assistant nursing officer; laboratory technologist; psychiatric clinical officer; anaesthetist; ambulance assistant; and driver. I would like to say that these were identified as critical staff after quantifying the need for staff during this period when we need more healthcare workers in the health sector. 

Clinical officers and nutritionists were not just left out. However, the issue at hand is that there are critical staff that were quantified to care for COVID-19 cases in the various regions and districts. Even for the medical officer special grade, you realise the focus is on internal medicine not surgery, gynaecologists and other areas.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to say that the ministry made this call based on the need that is at hand. The applicants put in their applications. They were sent to the Health Service Commission, which did the listing, and of course, the ministry did the posting. 

I would like to make this very clear: In the event that there will be a need for clinical officers, if the medical officers or the medical officers special grade are not enough, then, certainly, my ministry will extend that advert and recruit where necessary. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last week, we had partially handled the National Local Content Bill. I am proposing that we move the National Local Content Bill to item No. 4, finish it and then go back to the report by the health committee. Is that okay?  

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL LOCAL CONTENT BILL, 2019

Clause 27
THE CHAIRPERSON: Chair, are you ready? Honourable members, I put the question that clause 27 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 28, 
subclause (l)(d), by inserting the word “consolidated” immediately after the words “into the”.

Justification: To provide for clarity that the reference is to the Consolidated Fund. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 28 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 30 as follows:
(a) by renumbering the current clause as (1); and 
(b) by inserting the new subclause (2) to read as follows: “(2) The incentives under subsection (1) shall be spelt out in the regulations made by the minister.”

Justification: To provide for incentives to be spelt out in the regulations. I beg to move.

MS NAKATE: Madam Chairperson, we propose that clause 30 on incentives by the minister be replaced with this one: “The minister shall reserve certain components of the contracts for local companies and shall ensure that local companies access financing at affordable rates.”

The justification is that Ugandan companies should be able to secure bonds or performance guarantees and other securities for the contract.

Madam Chairperson, I must say, in regards to construction, there are about two or three companies that have demonstrated preparedness to do subcontracting works here and there. We have Armpass, Kasese Nail and Wood - Madam Chairperson, we propose that we condition the minister so that we can reserve certain components of the works to be done by the subcontractors. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank the honourable member for the proposal she is making. However, I think reserving some components of the contracts for our local companies can be better handled in the regulations. 

Furthermore, to condition the minister to ensure that these companies must have the funds to finance these contracts is a big toll on the side of Government. If you say “shall ensure” that these people have the money - We shall struggle as much as possible to ensure that these people get a source of funding, which is cheaper. However, to put it in the law that it is a must that the ministry will ensure that companies get money to finance these contracts, I think, is something that should not be put in the law. 

Therefore, I wanted to propose, through my colleague, that we handle this matter in the regulations. I support the position of the committee and request my colleagues to handle this matter in the regulations. It is something that we need to study, Madam Chairperson.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The proposed amendment is already covered in Guideline No. 2 of the PPDA, which mentions reservation of at least 30 per cent of the value of works through subcontracting to local providers. It spells out the means and ways of how this can be specifically spelt out for local Ugandans.

Therefore, I support the position of the committee because the intended amendment is already covered in the guidelines. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to implore the honourable Member for Luweero to withdraw her proposed amendment on two major grounds. One, the requirements proposed for the minister are too onerous and will make the minister a micromanager.

Two, we have made provisions in this Bill that favour largely the local component and the local contractor. Whatever intentions she is looking at will be properly covered by the regulations as proposed by the committee.

Therefore, I support the amendment by the committee as presented and implore the honourable Member for Luweero to withdraw her amendment so that we pass the clause as proposed by the committee.

MS NAKATE: Madam Chairperson, I concede. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much, honourable members. I put the question that clause 30 be amended as proposed by the chair.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 31
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 31(1)(i) by deleting the word “deviation” and substituting it with the word “diversion”.

Justification: To provide for the offence of “benefit diversion” and not “benefit deviation”. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 31(1)(i) says, “to engage in benefit deviation”. Is there no offence of benefit deviation? Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 31 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 35 in subclause (3) by deleting the word “designated”.

Justification: There is only one department being referred to under subclause (1) of clause 35. I beg to move.

MS JANEPHER MBABAZI: Madam Chairperson, I propose, in clause 35(1), that the supplier database be developed and maintained by PPDA and Uganda Registration Services Bureau (URSB) respectively, to avoid duplication of duties. The PPDA has been in charge of registering all procuring entities and URSB in charge of registering all the companies. Therefore, to avoid duplication of duties, we should leave their mandates like that. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What subclause? Do you mean the one on the department?

MR NIWAGABA: I would also like to implore my colleague, the Woman Member of Parliament for Kagadi, to abandon that proposed amendment because when you look at clause 1, which we have already passed, you realize that this particular Bill goes beyond matters of PPDA and it goes beyond what, ordinarily, is done by Uganda Registration Services Bureau. We are also talking about licensed activities under the Uganda Tourism Act, the Mining Act and the Electricity Act. 

Therefore, I beg that she withdraws that proposed amendment so that the department created in this particular law caters for everything under local content in the Bill we are considering.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to inform the honourable member from Kagadi that our interest in the department dealing with the national supplier database is so that we know who is doing what. We do not want excuses like “this is not available; this skill is not here; this product is not in Uganda.” We desire that the department gathers all the innovations that we have – all who can supply anything – such that at any particular point in time, there will be no excuse that “this product is not made in Uganda”, yet actually there are many companies that are making it. 

Once you leave the responsibility to PPDA, they use a competitive process. They look at who is ready; that is what they focus on. Therefore, we may not leave this affirmative action process to PPDA. They will not handle it better than the proposed department. We, therefore, should leave it to the department within the ministry. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is hon. Mbabazi still strong on that position?

MS JANEPHER MBABAZI: Madam Chairperson, I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 35 be amended as proposed by the committee chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 36 by substituting subclause (1) with the following: “A local content entity shall maintain records relating to the local content entity’s compliance with this Act.” This is to draft the subclause better.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 36 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45
MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 45 by deleting the words “and for its due administration.” The justification is that they are not necessary. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 45 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45, as amended, agreed to.

Schedule 1, agreed to.

Schedule 2
MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, my amendment, which I communicated to the chairperson of the committee and the mover of the Bill, is in respect to management services, particularly in the hotel industry. The hotel industry is very sensitive. For us to continue promoting tourism, we need more international companies managing our hotels here with corresponding portal addresses across the world. 

When you look at the current situation in Uganda, I believe we have only three international management companies: Hilton, Marriott – even Sheraton, which used to be independent, is now under Marriott. We need more Radissons and Hiltons; we need more of those international companies. What they normally do is to let a local person construct and own a hotel and they only come in to provide management services. At most, they will provide only two employees, largely the general manager and to some extent, if we do not have a local one, a chef. 

For us to continue tapping into that business, I beg to move that Schedule 2 be amended by excluding hotel management services under items 821, 822 as well as items 641-643 under this Bill, in order for us to protect the tourism industry. 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I would be worried if we got the said management services and they used public funds. However, if they are international management services that bring resources into the country, I would like to concede, Madam Speaker.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Niwagaba, can you show me exactly what you are dealing with? Which page are you on? The list starts with part a, section A.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, 821 and 822 are under real estate services; it has 821 and 822, which is a and b only. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which page is that?

MR NIWAGABA: I have a photocopy but it should be page 39 - the second page of Schedule 2. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Real estate services -

MR NIWAGABA: Exactly. Madam Chairperson, read that together with item No.9 under tourism and travel related services. The two are closely interlinked. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hotels and restaurants including -

MR NIWAGABA: My proposal is that we exclude “hotel management services”. It is important for our economy, especially the tourism sector.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The mover has no problem. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, it is true that hon. Niwagaba brought the proposal before us and in the opinion of the committee, this proposal is in the interest of helping our economy grow. It is very difficult for us to grow in isolation. There are some sectors, which have global linkages. In this regard, we agree that his proposal be adopted. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Schedule 2 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 2, as amended, agreed to.


Schedule 3
DR LYOMOKI: I beg to move that Schedule 3 be amended by replacing paragraph 3 with the following: “Workforce development strategies and decent work labour standards in relation to Ugandan citizens, including labour union rights, training plans and projections to address any skills gap that may have been identified in relation to the local labour force”.

Madam Chairperson, I am introducing an addition to the phrase “decent work labour standards”. We are talking about workforce development strategies but we are leaving out the decent labour standards. What usually happens here is that our local labour force is always undermined. There are no decent labour standards and so, we end up undermining the development of our labour force. Our people are being undermined and treated under all sorts of standards that do not fall under the international labour standards. 

Therefore, I think that that provision should be included in the National Local Content Bill so that whenever we deal with our labour force, the standards relate with international standards.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does the chair or the mover have a problem with that?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, the honourable member briefed us about his proposal and we have no problem with it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Schedule 3 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26
DR LYOMOKI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend subclause (3)(h). We are still trying to move in the same way that we moved in Schedule 3, since most of the issues in this clause are referred to in Schedule 3. We are, therefore, introducing the same wording that we had added in the matter that I raised, so that the paragraph would read as follows: “Implement workforce development strategies and decent work labour standards in relation to Ugandan citizens, including training plans, labour union rights and projections to address any skill gaps that may have been identified in relation to the local labour force.” 

It is the same phrasing since they fall in those two categories. I beg to move.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, the honourable member is introducing something we did not agree upon. We agreed that the element of labour union rights should be deleted.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I will go with what the chairman has suggested. Let us leave only have the addition of the decent work labour standards, as we agreed. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 26 -

MRS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move an amendment to clause 26 (3) to substitute paragraph (d) with the following:
“(d) Employ Ugandan citizens in the project and ensure that at least -
(i) 40 per cent of its entire management staff are citizens of Uganda;
(ii) 60 per cent of its skilled staff are citizens of Uganda; and
(iii) 100 per cent of its unskilled labour are citizens of Uganda”.

Justification: to require the employment of Ugandans at all levels of management and throughout the entire programme of the contract. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, is that the proposal you had circulated before or are you bringing it now?

MRS OGWAL: I circulated it.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I am constrained to disagree but I have to do it. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal did not circulate her proposal to the committee. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we agreed that if you have a proposal, circulate it in advance to Members. The proposals from hon. Nakate and hon. Lyomoki are here. It is because of this type of ambush –

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I received a copy of her proposal from the legal department but I was still processing the same. I have my own reservations about it.

Madam Chairperson, the amendment where we had challenges the other time was on whether we maintain 60 per cent or 80 per cent; that is where the debate was. The committee report had removed 80 per cent of the workers and had proposed 60 per cent. 

Where the debate came in, we thought that that was not fair. I think the mover is trying to break this down to suggest about three scenarios; we have management staff, we have skilled staff and we have unskilled staff. The mover is proposing 100 per cent unskilled staff, which I agree with. The amendment is proposing that 60 per cent of its skilled staff are citizens of Uganda and is proposing 40 per cent of that.

Madam Chairperson, this clause 26 is concerned with those contracts that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development always negotiates with funders, which do not go through our procurement processes here. If we take 40 per cent, in my opinion, you can easily find that it already exists. 

In my opinion, Madam Chairperson, we take the 100 per cent for unskilled staff, 80 per cent for the skilled staff and 60 per cent for the entire management staff. I beg to move. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You also amending what she has brought because she was talking about 40 per cent of management staff to be Ugandans. You are now saying 60 per cent; you are now amending.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, there are two points here. The first point is that it is not true that there is any Government project that does not go through a procurement process of the country. Every project goes through the procurement process of this country –(Interjection)– yes.

Every project, which goes through appropriation, meaning Parliament participates in it; we go through a procurement process. I do not know about the off-budget but this is what I am referring to.

The second point is that for some of these projects, the lenders have their own requirements. That is why when we were doing the Investment Code, we harmonised the different requirements of the different lenders and the people that we work with and came up with a proposal of 60 per cent. We thought that this 60 per cent should be agreeable at all levels. 

Remember, Madam Chairperson, we are borrowing this money but in other cases, it is not necessarily right to assume that we are coming from a point of strength, meaning that we dictate to the lenders whatever we want. So, to get a compromise position in the Investment Code; after analysing what was at stake in all these things, we agreed on 60 per cent. For the Local Content Bill, if it coincides very well with the Investment Code and we start from 60 per cent at all levels, I think that will be a good thing. 

Madam Chairperson, you might take this lightly but even if it is a situation of unskilled labour and you say 100 per cent; if a Managing Director wants to employ a tea person or something special and there is no room, it becomes very complicated. However, I can take information from the Attorney-General on the other side –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, honourable minister. Actually, since you are always referred to as the minister in charge of borrowing, I would like you to educate us more on how you obtain these loans.

This particular clause is in respect to projects funded through loans. So, if it is in respect to projects funded through loans, in your experience in respect of the borrowings we have made; what is the ordinary percentage of the local content in terms of employment of Ugandans?

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, honourable minister. I would like to get further clarification on these lending entities which you are talking about. When they are specifying, do they specify nationalities or competencies and qualifications? 

I have seen most of these companies which even bid. You find, for example, they say they need a civil engineer with experience of 10 years. Don’t we have them in Uganda? We do. So, when we are talking about these lenders and all that, their focus is not on saying they are giving you a loan; you must bring these expatriates. No! They say, you must bring people of these qualifications – whom we have in Uganda but we do not want to give them jobs. We end up giving jobs to foreigners.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The minister should clarify. He is the one who negotiates these loans.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, we are trying to run away from a situation, where a contractor brings these truck drivers who we see grading our roads, who are foreigners. So, we have to ensure that we put in this law that unskilled labour must be 100 per cent Ugandans. I think that will be an assurance to us that these people will not bring us foreigners to take up the jobs, which we, ourselves, can do.

The way you have categorised it makes it easy for us to come out of the entanglement we found ourselves in when we discussed this matter. We look at the management and say, if we talk of 60 per cent, what is the value in terms of money? You find that it is 60 per cent but in terms of value of money, these are simply lower cadre kind of personnel but that is not what we are looking for. We want it properly spread out and that is why we wanted to make it easy for the minister in charge of loans to be guided appropriately by the law.

MS MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. About the number; if we say Ugandans, it should be the percentage on the payroll, not simply the number of Ugandans to be employed. Look at the Chinese; they bring everybody, including the foremen, as if we do not have these people. We have competent people who are even more educated and qualified than those people.

So, I suggest that we do not look at the numbers being employed as Ugandans but we look at what type of positions we are holding. A Muzungu – sorry to say – will simply come and take the other top positions in the department. You then find our Ugandans are the casual labourers; that is if we are even given chance. Sometimes, they bring everybody.

So, we need to raise this number. This percentage should be high and should be clear on the staff payroll so that we are on the same page. Thank you. 

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, there were various arguments over this matter last Thursday. The reason for standing over this was because of the need to ensure that Ugandans are not deprived of even the simple jobs that they can do, where skills are really not required. 

Madam Chairperson, the position by hon. Cecilia Ogwal is one that I think we should take up because we were informed here last time that the Investment Code talks about 60 per cent of the total staff being Ugandan citizens. This Bill was proposing 80 per cent. 

For the unskilled staff, why should anybody even compromise it by saying it should be 60 per cent? We have a lot of Ugandans who can do these jobs. Therefore, for the unskilled jobs, let us adopt what hon. Cecilia Ogwal proposed, which is the 100 per cent. For the skilled staff, in line with the Investment Code, let us adopt the 60 per cent and move on. That is what she proposed and it is what is already in the Bill. 

For the management staff, maybe that is where we can argue whether we really need to take the 40 per cent or we have it at 60 per cent since it is already in the Investment Code. That is what I wanted to state. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In this House, you have taught us to respect each other and use good language as we debate national issues. I am always surprised at how our honourable member, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, continues to really undermine others when we give her the full respect. For her to say that the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) is in charge of the “ministry of loans”, I think it is not a good thing and we should close this matter. (Laughter)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I withdraw. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I think we can have a middle ground to say that for the skilled labour and management, we can have it at 60 per cent and for the unskilled labour, we can have it 100 per cent. We can, however, put a provision for skilled labour so that in case a skill is not available, the company is not constrained to hire others. I think that would be the middle ground. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, sometimes we have the skilled and the semi-skilled labour. There is another category of labour called the semi-skilled.

MR BAHATI: We have skilled and unskilled labour.

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Chairperson, I think it would also be very important to first define these people. When you say, skilled, non-skilled and semi-skilled, is it provided for in the Interpretation Clause of this Bill. The moment we sort out that, I think we will move much better. 

MR NIWAGABA: Hon. Tayebwa, we are looking at projects being funded by loans and they vary from ministry to ministry. So, you would not define the skilled and the unskilled labour in this particular Bill because if it is a project, for example, in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and you are looking for skilled people in agriculture, then that is a different matter. If it is road works, then you look for engineers. 

Therefore, let us not go into the intricacies of definition because the projects will vary from profession to profession. 

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Counsel Niwagaba talked about the engineers. In engineering, we have the engineers and the technologists. So, you can register as a technologist or a technician. That is why he said “unskilled”, “semi-skilled” and the “skilled” - because they are there. 

Most of the works – he mentioned roads - these investors bring these people “in documents” but it is Ugandans who suffer with this work. They say they will bring highly skilled people from abroad but you will never see them on the roads. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what do we do? 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to supplement what the minister said: I think we need to be consistent with other laws. You cannot make a law and then make another one which is very different. I would like to agree with the minister who said that when we debated the Investment Code at length, we agreed that those companies, especially those international projects, do attract foreign direct investment. People who come to invest here come with their money but they would think otherwise when investing. 

On the expatriates and the professionals within those projects - like what hon. Niwagaba said - if we agree on 60 per cent, it is okay then we leave out 40 per cent. There is no qualification of “semi-skilled” because if I am running a project, I have to look for a professional person. 

So, I agree with those people who are proposing 60 per cent. For the low skills which we can get from here, we can have it at 100 per cent and then leave that last part of management and skilled labour. For example, the foreign companies that wanted to invest in the oil refinery here looked for local expatriates and there was none. We could not tie their hands because the Government needs money or wanted a certain percentage. 

I think the middle ground should be that if we agree on direct investment to be 60 per cent, then the labour which we can get from here should be 100 per cent so that we do not allow other people – After all, the labour is cheaper here. Then, we can leave that content of 40 per cent for management and professionals. That is the middle ground.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, we are finding a challenge here. The Investment Code is focusing itself purely on foreign direct investment. Its interest is not targeting public funds. The companies that bring money to invest here are the ones that are targeted within the Investment Code. 

Section 26 that we are discussing talks about monies that come to handle projects here. For example, when the Standard Gauge Railway was being negotiated, the Republic of Kenya told China what they needed; they said they wanted steel to be made in Kenya. China and EXIM Bank agreed and gave them money. Let us not confuse these two. 

The simple thing we are talking about here is that when we are borrowing money to do a project, let us include our people as much as possible. Let us not confuse it with other projects. 

Mr james kakooza: Madam Chairperson, I think there is something that my honourable colleague, also mover of the Bill, has not understood properly. If you talk about money, it can be public and private. That is why there are public-private partnerships with Government.

Look at the Agha Khan - when he invested in the electricity dam,     what was the amount and the strings attached to that money? It was a foreign direct investment partnering with the Government of Uganda; it was about a private person investing here. There are so many projects - it does not matter so long as the person has brought their money here. What they look for is how to manage their project professionally.

Therefore, what we are saying in this Bill is – (Interjections) - do not try to put yourself - if you are saying you have available labour, make it 100 per cent. Otherwise, if you only have foreign direct investment, make it 60 per cent. 

If there are management skills you would like to look for - if I am investing in a country, I also have to control a certain percentage so that I can know how my money is being managed. I cannot bring investment into your country and you say, “Be out of it; you do not have a say.” That is what it means.

I agree with somebody who says, “Fine, you have come to invest here; we have unskilled labour, which we can avail to you 100 per cent.” If you say you have 60 per cent of a certain level of the skills in the country, that is okay but you have to allow me a percentage whereby I can handle that project professionally but when I am included. Thank you. 

The chairperson: Can we have some proposals?

Ms kamateeka: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. If we have the skilled labour, why would we allow an investor to take 40 per cent and bring in foreign expatriates?

I think when the skilled labour is available; the investor should be allowed maybe only 10 per cent of the key people in management positions. The rest should be Ugandans. It does not matter how much money the investor is bringing in. We are giving the investor a chance to do business and so, we are giving them all the semi-skilled labour that they require. All that they need is management.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, I wish you could read the head note. It states, “Local Content for public work funded through loans.” It is not about investment. Honourable Chairperson, let us find a solution.

Mr musasizi: Madam Chairperson, we have a proposal in the Bill, which talks about 80 per cent of Ugandans. However, the committee scrutinised the Bill and recommended 60 per cent. Throughout this debate, another proposal has emerged, which states that for unskilled labour, 100 per cent must be Ugandans. For skilled labour, at least 60 per cent must be Ugandans.

I would like to inform the House that for the purposes of moving forward, the committee is willing to concede to the new proposal of 100 per cent unskilled and a minimum of 60 per cent for skilled labour, which has just come up. I beg to submit.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, I put the question that the clause be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3
Mr musasizi: Madam Chairperson, I need your guidance here. Are we on clause 2 or 3?

The Chairperson: We are on clause 2. Did we defer clause 3?

Mr musasizi: Madam Chairperson, we stood over clause 3 because we needed to harmonise with the mover on sub clause (d). The committee contested (d), which was providing for “Order for the Termination.” 

We propose that sub clause (d) reads as follows; “Recommend for termination of a contract.”

The Chairperson: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 3 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2: Interpretation
Mr musasizi: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 2 as follows:
    a) By substituting for the definition of the word, “Foreign Investor” with the words, “Foreign Investor has the meaning assigned to it under the Investment Code Act, 2019.”
    b) By deleting the word, “and” in the definition of the words, “Ugandan Company.”

The justification is to correct the reference to the Investment Code Act, 2019 since Cap. 92 was repealed by the Investment Code Act, 2019. I beg to move.

Mr mawanda: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I intend to move an amendment on clause 2: Interpretation. I served a notice to the mover, the Chairperson of the committee and yourself. 

In clause 2, I propose to substitute for the definition of the words, “Minister” and “Ministry” as follows:

“Minister” to mean “The minister responsible for Trade” and “Ministry” means “The Ministry for Trade.”

The justification is that the Bill proposes the implementing ministry to be the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. However, the object of the Bill, being an affirmative action law, should not be implemented in the same ministry that implements the procurement laws since the procurement law and the Bill conflict because while one aims at value for money and competition, the other is about affirmative action.

The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives already has a department dealing with local content and they have been implementing the Buy Uganda Build Uganda (BUBU) policy. It has developed the necessary competencies and skills. This will be a natural housing for the Bill for its due implementation since transferring the Bill to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will create duplication of roles with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives implementing BUBU and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development implementing the local content yet both are aimed at the same thing; being affirmative action for Uganda enterprises and building their capacity.

The Bill deals with other facets of local content other than procurement such as technology transfer, employment of Ugandans, the use of manufactured goods and other resources; skills transfer and training, which all fall or have a direct link to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. 

The goods and services prescribed in clause 6 of the Bill and the Second Schedule to the Bill are goods and services, which are within the mandate of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to monitor. It will be easy for the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to include any other goods or services in the Schedule since it is in charge of the manufacturing sector in Uganda. 

Madam Chairperson, even the committee itself in its report, number six, says: 
“Whereas the Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003 contains provisions relating to local content, the provisions are limited only in the creation of preferences and reservation schemes. 

Furthermore, the local content in the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets is not only applicable to public procurement but is only considered at the tail end…” 

Madam Chairperson, I would like to mark this, “at the tail end of the procurement process, after all other evaluation criteria have been considered.” 

This means that the persons it is intended to target - at the time local content is considered - most of them have been eliminated or are no longer competitive by the application of the other evaluation criteria. 

I beg to submit, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Is there any other amendment on interpretation? Let us hear from the minister.

MR NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I beg that the House rejects that amendment on these grounds - initially, we had the same line of thinking when we targeted all sectors of the economy. We initially thought the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives was best suited to handle this law and we thought it is better housed there. 

However, after consultations, we discovered that we need to begin with public funds specifically and focus on public resources. The ministry that controls public resources in this country is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. They negotiate all the loans that we go into and oversee the procurement entity; PPDA. They are the ones that give out licenses for investors and make much of the negotiations, be it on licenses and everything. 

If we want local content to make meaning, every public procurement entity in the country should take local content seriously. What hon. Mawanda has quoted as (6) in the report – Actually, the committee supported our decision because in this Bill, we have proposed the deletion of Article 50 from the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act. Why are we proposing it? It is because they were considering local content at the tail end. 

In this law, we have provided that you begin with local content. Every procurement entity must begin with local content. Madam Chair – (Interruption)

MR MAWANDA: Madam Chairperson, I am seeking clarification on two things. We appropriate money and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development budgets it for ministries. We give a lot of money to the Ministry of Works and Transport but does the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development set up a department for the Ministry of Works and Transport to oversee the money that is appropriated to them? 

Secondly, we are at implementation. The core mandate of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is resource mobilisation. We are now setting up a law for implementation. For this law to be properly implemented, we are suggesting the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development cannot look for resources and it goes ahead to implement the policies and laws. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

MR NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, he rose on a point of clarification and I can clarify that – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let the minister first speak. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to request the mover of the Bill – I know that you consulted but hon. Mawanda has a strong point because in Government, most of these laws follow policy. The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives developed a policy of BUBU; so, local content is actually being managed through a policy framework, which is the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. 

In my opinion, if this law can fit within the policy framework of Government, which as we speak is under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, it will be more effective. You will have a ministry that follows all this. Given the nature of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we will be following up so many things. I think the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is better suited to follow this, since they have a policy in this area. I thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, can you address us on the structure of the loans? When the loans are being negotiated, how are they structured? If you can address us on that, I will be satisfied. 

MR BAHATI: When the loans are being – For example, if you get a loan from the EXIM Bank of China or India, most of these have commercial contracts that are signed with different implementing agencies. The Solicitor-General, who is the Attorney-General, must now ensure that this commercial contract conforms to the existing laws. Whether the Minister of Trade, Finance or any other – the question now is, who confirms that this commercial contract conforms with the existing law, in this case the Local Content law?

Therefore, the check point is now at the Attorney-General’s office that ensures that this commercial contract conforms to the Local Content law. It is not to do with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, I think, from experience, we have seen how the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been frustrating the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. If we were to talk about one of the weakest ministries in this Government, it is the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. If you really want to frustrate this law, put it under the Ministry of Trade; it will die there. (Applause) 

The minister is here and he can testify. How much money do you give to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives? They are so weak that they cannot implement a policy like this one with very stringent measures. Let us give this law to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which is a giant. If we put it under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, it will die.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the minister.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, this debate has been going on between the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and even before my colleague came to speak, we had had consultations. 

As you are all aware, colleagues, the mandate of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives as derived from the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda Article 189, Sixth Schedule Sections 11, 12, 13, 20, 23 up to 29 says, “This is to formulate, review and support policies, strategies, plans and programmes that promote and ensure expansion and diversification of trade, cooperatives, environmentally sustainable industrialisation, appropriate technology development and transfer to generate wealth for poverty eradication and benefit the country socially and economically.” 

We even had discussions with hon. Nsamba earlier on that the parent ministry should be the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, when we actually come to the issue of local content. As you are aware, we came up with a policy of BUBU and this is an amendment I am going to make under the interpretation clause. We came up with a policy and this policy, of course, had guidelines but there was no backing from the legal point of view. We even made a very substantive contribution to the amendment of the PPDA Act. That is why you find that the PPDA Act was recently amended to take care of local content. 

However, we are in agreement with this Bill to be a standalone Bill but where should it be housed? It should be in the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives.

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The ministers have been using local content and BUBU interchangeably. Honourable minister for trade, if you were talking about BUBU, your case would be right but when we talk about local content, it is wide; it is not only limited to trade and we are talking about a wider spectrum.

Therefore, before we proceed, maybe we need to help the ministers to appreciate what we are dealing with at this moment so that as they inform the House, we are very clear on what they are speaking about. If you are talking about local content in the wider context, the argument by my brother, hon. Lugoloobi that Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives does not have enough money also does not suffice because it is the role of Parliament to appropriate money depending on the responsibility you have given an entity and as the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget, would be scrutinising at that point.

I would like to summit colleagues, that given the wider spectrum of what this is intended to do – For instance, Madam Chairperson, I have looked at bid documents of big companies when they come to do contract work here. They normally list their skilled labour but immediately the foundation stone is laid, the skilled personnel leave the country. These Chinese look the same; you don’t know whether the one they showed you as an Engineer is the one who is actually on the site or not. That is why most of them even construct at night; they do not do work during the day. 

Both of them have a point. For instance, when we talk about this aspect being domiciled at trade because of the structure, whether it means – a structure in finance does not make hon. Bahati run away from responsibility, which you do properly because you have no structure. I beg to submit.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank you very much. I would like to make two comments about what the Chairperson of the Budget Committee has said. He has said that the weakest ministry in Uganda is the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. Who made that assessment? Before I make my point, that must be on record because it is a big problem and that is why I would like to know where he generated that capacity from. 

Madam Chairperson, I would like to say whether it is going to be in Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but at this stage, finance would be appropriate in managing this matter since we are talking about local content; meaning it deals with everything – (Interruption)

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to give this information; when we are dealing with such a matter, what has been the practice in Government? The chairperson asked a very pertinent question: what happens when the sector minister makes a demand? For example, in health, we had a problem of strengthening health systems; so the sector ministry demanded that reproductive health should be dealt with. It is the sector ministry, which makes the demands and the job of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is to mobilise money and negotiate that loan. 

You cannot say, the policy is given to BUBU - which is the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives – that you are now transferring it to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because you are dealing with local content. 

Lastly, the frustration that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been grappling with is conflict of interest - you are killing that law. They will never take off. You leave it to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and anybody who will be interested will come with the local content. The minister himself has told you that with the problems they have, they cannot handle, why do you push it to them?

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to say that the owner of the Bill was very clear and all of us have been there and he is a member of that committee. I am shocked today that we are differing on this line. 

This Bill must go to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because they have the capacity to manage all these matters. I thank you very much.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My understanding is that we are making a law for this country. All the sectors that will get involved in any financial transaction in relation to this will be able to play its part. Therefore, as we process this, we need to identify the key ministry. 

I totally agree with the proposal of hon. Mawanda because the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is a general overseer of all financial issues of this country.

However, if we left this Bill to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, it means that the directly involved ministries would leave off their hands. Therefore, I propose that we adopt that but we are not putting a waiver on the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to play its role. The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives will play its role but the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will also do the overall oversight of this implementation. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has mobilised the money. This is a law that we are making to ensure that local content is taken up by all the different Government agencies in this country. Once a department is created, irrespective of where it is, it is the responsibility of that department to liaise with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and check which loans have been passed and ensure that the various ministries, departments and agencies actually implement what is in this law. 

What do we mean by “local content”? If you look at the definition, it says,

“Local content” includes the quantum or percentage of – 
    (a) locally produced goods;
    (b) locally produced services; and 
    (c) utilisation of personnel – are we going to say we take this to the Ministry of Public Service or the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development – financing goods and services by a local content entity in any operation or activity carried out in Uganda.” 

“Local content entity” means – 
    (a) Government, including a Government ministry, department…” 

Madam Chairperson, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is overloaded – (Interjection) – Yes. Once we have created – (Interjection) – No, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has already spoken. 

Once we have created a department under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives – that is particularly responsible – they will ensure that what is in this law is implemented. Therefore, I support the idea that the ministry responsible for this law be the ministry for trade. Thank you.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, the investment authority in this country is under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The public procurement entity in this country, where the focus of this Bill is, is under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – (Interjection) – Honourable members, I beg that you listen to me before you kill this Bill by sending it to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives.

Madam Chairperson, when you look at this Bill, the point of Government expenditure is at procurement. We are requesting, in this Bill, that the procurement entities across all ministries –which are supervised by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development under the PPDA – implements this law. It is not going to be the ministry in charge of trade. The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives has already failed with BUBU – (Interruption)

DR LYOMOKI: Madam Chairperson, I rise on a point of procedure. We are here legislating, as Parliament. The mover of this Bill is trying to say that when we place this matter in the ministry in charge of trade we shall be killing it. Are we proceeding right when Parliament is trying to bring systems to this country and the mover of the law is claiming that by placing it somewhere else and not in the Ministry of Finance, we shall be killing it - meaning we are supporting the bully behaviour of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that tries to undermine other ministries?

Is it procedurally right – when there is consensus being built by this House so that we put this entity in an area – for the mover to say we shall be killing it?

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is his conviction. Let us have the chairperson of the committee.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, when you directed that when a Bill comes to the committee, whoever has concerns should come and appear before the committee, I now realise the challenge you foresaw. Here we are. It is true that last Thursday, we got a notice of the intent to move a motion by hon. Mawanda but the committee, first of all, did not find time to sit down and consult about the proposal. 

Secondly, what is in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in relation to the Bill we are considering? In 2014, we passed the law on PPPs and we created a PPP unit under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We recently amended a law on the Investment Code – we created an investment authority – and put it under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We recently enacted another Act on public procurement and this is also resident under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

This Bill also has a clause that is central in contracting public loans - and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is responsible for borrowing in this country. 

Madam Chairperson, with these considerations – if you get local content which is supposed to inter-relate with all these agencies I have mentioned and you send it to a different ministry – I am constrained to make an opinion that it will be effective under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. Also, putting into consideration that the mover of the Bill consulted widely on the Bill than anyone of us here, I beg to move that we go by the position of the mover.

MS JANEPHER MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives has a policy on BUBU. This law is here to operationalise BUBU – (Interjection)– Just a moment. 

Madam Chairperson, there is a section in the memorandum which was moved by the mover and this section reads, “The BUBU policy which seeks to increase consumption and utilisation of local products and increasing participation of the locally established firms in domestic trade has not been fully operationalised due to lack of an enabling law.” Therefore, in this case, to avoid duplication of duties – and where we say that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has a lot to do and it role is more of mobilisation of funds – I beg that we take this law to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it seems that opinion is divided on this issue and I heard from the chairperson of the committee that, actually, they had no time to look at the proposal. I propose that we adjourn. It is only one clause but it is important because we need to know where the home is. 

Therefore, I would like to give the committee up to tomorrow afternoon to sit and look at the proposal by hon. Mawanda and see how it fits with the mover’s position and then we can complete the Bill.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.42
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Madam Chairperson, can I be protected from hon. Mawanda?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order!

MR NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The House resumed, the Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, presiding_).

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.45
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Local Content Bill, 2019” and passed clauses 27, 28, 29, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43 and 44 without amendments, passed clauses 26, 3, 28, 30, 31, 35, 36, 45, with amendments and stood over clause 2.

THE SPEAKER: We finished clauses 3 and 26.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Yes, we stood over clause 2 on interpretation. The Committee of the whole House passed Schedule one without amendments but passed the second and third schedules with amendments. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
5.45
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you for the work. It is almost curfew time. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00.p.m. Thank you.

(The House rose at 5.45 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 20 May 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)







