Thursday, 18 May 2006

Parliament met at 10.22 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Chief Justice, Justice Benjamin Odoki, in theChair.)

The House was called to order

PROCLAMATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

WHEREAS under Article 95, where a new Parliament is elected, His Excellency the President has to appoint a place and a date not beyond seven days after the expiry of the term of Parliament for the first sitting of a new Parliament 

AND WHEREAS under Article 289 the term of the current Parliament expires on the same day as the five year term of the President in office at the time of coming into force of the said Article 

AND NOTING that the term of the current President expired on 12th day of May 2006

NOW THEREFORE in exercise of the powers conferred upon the President by Clause 1 of Article 95 of the Constitution, it is hereby proclaimed that the first sitting of the new Parliament shall be held at Parliament House, Kampala on the 18th day of May 2006 commencing at 10.00 a.m. 

Given under my hand this 12th day of May 2006 and signed and sealed, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President.” (Applause)

STATEMENT BY HIS LORDSHIP THE CHIEF JUSTICE

10.26
THE CHIEF JUSTICE (Justice Benjamin Odoki):  Honourable members of Parliament, I wish to take this opportunity to warmly congratulate you all for having been elected to this august House- (Applause)- I know that apart from those of you who were elected unopposed, the journey to this House and all the benches you all occupy has been arduous.

Having achieved your individual goal to become elected members of this Eighth Parliament, I implore you not to relax, as the role of the legislator requires a sober mind.  Your duty is to be part of the solution to social, political and economical problems that continue to derail this country.  It is a crucial role as the laws you will deliberate upon and pass will affect the entire nation. Whatever it takes, you must bear in mind that this position requires your total commitment, interest and effective leadership.  

Almost five years ago, to be precise on 5 July 2001, I came to this Parliament to preside over a similar function.  My role today is simply to preside over the election of the Speaker of Parliament in fulfillment of Article 82 (1) of our Constitution, which provides for a Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Parliament.  Clause 5 of the same Article provides thus, “The Chief Justice or a Judge designated by the Chief Justice shall preside at an election of a Speaker and the Speaker shall preside at an election of the Deputy Speaker.”  

Permit me to appeal to you honourable members of Parliament to seriously consider electing a person of respect and integrity, a person you will all respect, whose decisions and rulings will be taken as a collective decision of the House. Please, elect a person whose guidance shall enable this House to make laws for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda.  

As stated before, I am here to discharge this Constitutional obligation. I have been informed that you have all been availed with copies of the Rules of Procedure governing the election of these two important offices of the House. They are straightforward and they are the rules we are going to apply during this exercise.  I now propose that the rules circulated to you honourable members, be the rules to govern the election of Speaker and Deputy Speaker.  I hear no objection. I now put the question that the Rules circulated to you to govern the election of the Speaker and the Deputy be adopted.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

NOMINATIONS FOR THE OFFICE OF THE SPEAKER

10.28
MRS BEATRICE WABUDEYA MUKAYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Sironko): His Leadership the Chief Justice, I beg to move under Rule 4(8) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament that hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, Member of Parliament for Bukoto Central, Masaka takes the chair of this Parliament as the Speaker.  I beg to move.  

10.29
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam county North, Apac): My Lord, I second the nomination of hon. Edward Ssekandi. 

JUSTICE ODOKI: Honourable member, would you wish to give a brief description and justification for your nomination?

MRS WABUDEYA: Your Lordship, I proposed hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi for the following reasons.  Hon. Ssekandi Edward is a distinguished lawyer, a graduate of the East African University with LLB Honours and he has served this country in various capacities as a lawyer during which time he has come out as one of the most respectable lawyers we have in this country. (Applause)

Hon. Ssekandi was a member of the Constituent Assembly and therefore participated effectively in the making of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.  He was a member of the Sixth Parliament and during his term of office those of us who worked with him on the various committees remember him as an effective contributor and as an effective chairperson of some of the committees of Parliament on which he served.  It was because of his capabilities that midway through the term of office of the Sixth Parliament hon. Ssekandi became the Deputy Speaker of the Sixth Parliament -(Applause)- and as a Deputy Speaker he did a great job in supporting the Speaker of Parliament then and seeing the Sixth Parliament complete its tasks.  When the Seventh Parliament he was voted in –(Interruption)

10.32
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula county, Rakai): Your Lordship, I would like to be clarified on our Rules of Procedure, election of a Speaker Rule No. 4, Clause 5, “No person shall be proposed as a candidate to the office of the Speaker unless that person has given his or her consent to the nomination.”

JUSTICE ODOKI: Does the honourable member have contrary information that the honourable candidate does not wish to stand?

10.33
MR EDWARD SSEKANDI (NRM, Bukoto County Central, Masaka): Your Lordship, the Chief Justice of Uganda, I am Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi who has been nominated by hon. Beatrice Wabudeya. I accept the nomination. (Applause)

MRS WABUDEYA: I thank hon. Kakooza for that intervention.  Honourable members, I was just going on to say –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: Your Lordship, I have just heard one nomination tendered in. I do not know whether there is any other nomination and if there is no other nomination what is the purpose of the -

JUSTICE ODOKI: Honourable members, after her statement, I will invite members to propose any other nominations if any. If there is no other nomination, then we close. 

10.36
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative, Central): Your Lordship, I beg to move that the nomination be closed and hon. Edward Ssekandi be declared Speaker of the Eighth Parliament of Uganda.  I beg to move.

JUSTICE ODOKI: Is the motion seconded? Shall I put the question that the nominations be closed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

10.38
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): I think for purposes of the Hansard we needed two sides; Those in favour, who say “Aye” and those against, “Nay”. This will give it the two sides so that we get the majority to take the day. 

JUSTICE ODOKI:  Those in favour of closing the nomination say “Aye” and those against say “Nay”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DECLARATION OF THE SPEAKER

JUSTICE ODOKI: Honourable members, I now declare that hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi has been elected Speaker of the Eighth Parliament. (Applause)

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi.

STATEMENT OF ACCEPTANCE OF ELECTION TO THE POSITION OF 
THE SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT

10.43
MR EDWARD SSEKANDI:  Your Lordship the Chief Justice of Uganda, I take this opportunity on behalf of the Eighth Parliament of Uganda to thank you most sincerely for having effectively and efficiently performed your Constitutional duty today in this Parliament by presiding over the election of the Speaker of Eighth Parliament. (Applause)

The Eighth Parliament is entrusted with the duty of ensuring a new political system. The people of Uganda in a referendum adapted to succeed a multiparty system. 

On personal note, I thank you my Lord for presiding for the second time on my election. (Applause)  You have conducted the elections transparently; they were free and fair. I am sure they will not attract any petition. (Laughter) Thank you very much, my Lord.

Honourable members, as a Speaker now, I wish to warmly welcome you to the Eighth Parliament and congratulate you for having secured the confidence of your people by being elected. The overwhelming confidence you have expressed today in me is a big challenge. I must deliver.  I want to assure you that I will be a Speaker for three hundred and so Members of Parliament because the entire House has elected me. I assure you that this Parliament under my leadership will succeed in delivering services to the people.  I assure you the multiparty system under this Parliament will succeed this time. (Applause) 

Honourable members, my appeal to you is that we should be good listeners, sober and tolerant to each other.  If we are governed by these values, definitely we shall succeed.  My office is open for each of you to come so that we discuss how the Parliament is going to be run. I accept the election. I place myself in God’s hands so that my work succeeds.  I thank you my Lord. (Applause)

ASSUMPTION OF THE CHAIR BY 
THE RT HONOURABLE SPEAKER

(The Instruments of Power – the Constitution, the Rules of Procedure and the Mace - were thereupon handed over to the Speaker by the Chief Justice.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thank you for what you have done to me.  I am overwhelmed by the confidence you have exhibited today.  As I said earlier, I am going to serve you -(Applause)- I will be a Speaker for each one of you and I thank you.  Now, honourable members, since I have to see off the Chief Justice, I suspend the proceedings for ten minutes.  Proceedings suspended.

(The Proceedings were suspended at 10.47 a.m.)

(On resumption at 11.05 a.m., the Speaker presiding_)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have completed the first business, which was the election of Speaker, and the next business is to elect the Deputy Speaker.  As you remember, the presiding officer over the election of Speaker was the Chief Justice and he reminded you to look at the Rules under which the Speaker is supposed to be elected.  These same rules, apart from the presiding officer, will apply for the election of the deputy speaker.  This time the presiding officer is the Speaker.  That is my first assignment in the Eighth Parliament.  Now could we receive nominations for Deputy Speaker?

NOMINATIONS FOR THE OFFICE OF THE DEPUTY SPEAKER  

11.07
MR FREDDIE RUHINDI (NRM, Nakawa Division, Kampala): Mr Speaker, on a rather selfish note - since I am going to speak for my other colleagues, allow me to extend my sincere congratulations upon that very resounding victory- (Applause)- I nominate hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, Woman Member of Parliament for Kamuli District. (Applause)

11.08
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I second the nomination of hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  It seems there are no further nominations.

MR EKANYA GEOFFREY (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion that nominations for Deputy Speaker be closed.  (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

11.10
MS REBECCA KADAGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamuli): Mr Speaker and honourable Members, I accept the nomination. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  The nomination has been accepted. There are no further nominations and therefore it is my duty and honour to declare that hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, Member of Parliament for Kamuli District has been elected unopposed as Deputy Speaker of the Eighth Parliament- (Applause)- I congratulate her and thank you for electing her unopposed as Deputy Speaker.  

I have had the benefit of working with my sister, hon. Rebecca Kadaga.  She has been of great support to me and I am sure, with her, we shall lead this Parliament to greater heights. You will enjoy our friendly environment under which you will operate.  Thank you very much.  

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to Rebecca Kadaga.

11.10
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER (Ms Rebecca Kadaga): Mr Speaker and honourable members of the Eighth Parliament, first I will take this opportunity to congratulate you upon your election and subsequent arrival in the Eighth Parliament- (Applause)- I would also like to thank the 147,000 people who voted for me in Kamuli District. I pay tribute to them.

Honourable members, you will find my office open, you will find me accessible; you will find me very friendly. You should have no cause for worry about anything. I look forward to working closely with you. I hope that you will carry out your work diligently because the challenges of this tenure of five years to a population which is increasingly getting enlightened - they require better services; they require information. I would just like to appeal to you to keep in touch with them and help us work together for the fulfillment of their aspirations. While we are in the multiparty system, I still believe that the interests of the people must still be paramount. I look forward to us achieving that objective. Thank you very much.  (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have been greatly impressed by your diligence in the way you have attended the first sitting -(Laughter)- I apologise that you are not comfortable, especially this side [Pointing to the Movement side.] but Parliament is looking into finding means to ensure that in future, in fact very shortly, you will sit in comfort.  

From today, because this is a multiparty Parliament, the sitting arrangements will have to change. The new Parliament, which we expect to have if funds allow, will be accommodating 500 people.  But this Parliament was meant initially at Independence to accommodate 82 people. There was an expansion which was made but that was the maximum expansion that could be made. So we cannot expand anymore. 

But then the arrangement will be this; the government side will be sitting on my right and the opposition will be sitting on my left. The front bench will be reserved for the ministers and this front bench on my left will be for the shadow cabinet of the opposition. That will be the arrangement. But we shall give you more briefings as we go along.  

We shall be transacting business in the afternoon at 2.30 p.m. So, the proceedings are now suspended until 2.30 p.m. when we shall reconvene here.  

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I need your guidance. I remember when the Chief Justice was here, he mentioned that we have been given Rules and I think we adopted them for the elections of the Speaker and now the Deputy Speaker. According to our Rules again, which we have adopted, under (c) we were supposed to deal with the Assistant Speaker. So, I want your guidance, which rules are we using, the Seventh Parliament Rules or the Eighth Parliament Rules?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the Seventh Parliament, we realised that Parliament is going to be under a multiparty system and there was a need to adjust our rules to suit the new system. Our committee on rules drafted some rules, which we have not passed, and which we shall consider now as the Eighth Parliament. So the rules, which you are referring to, are draft rules amending the rules that have been operating under the Seventh Parliament. 

That particular suggestion of having an Assistant Speaker, I think is one of the suggestions being proposed in the rules.  But of course we will have to address it taking into account the constitutional provisions. It is a good one in the sense that we would be relieved also as Speaker and Deputy Speaker. But then you have to find out whether constitutionally it is possible to have the Assistant Speaker. That is something, which we shall discuss and if we pass it then we shall be able to deal with that issue.

MR KIYONGA: Mr Speaker, you have just guided us on the arrangement of the sitting of these honourable colleagues. You mentioned those in opposition to sit on your left and government side on your right.  I am seeking clarification on where Members of Parliament who are independent, who are neither in opposition nor government side, will sit? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the configuration of this Parliament is just two sides. When we get the other one, which I am telling you about, it will be in an oval shape. That will be easy to say independents – because independents are not in opposition and they are not for government. But independents will be free to choose the side where they want to sit. We have made consultations about this, it is your freedom to say, “I will be sitting with the opposition or I will be sitting with the government.” That will be perfectly in order. I hope I am clear on that. 

Honourable members, assist us by mentioning your name because I cannot say, “you”. That is not permissible. But after a time, I will be able to say you are so and so without pointing a finger. It is not good manners and we do not do it in Parliament. At least I will know your constituency, if I cannot get your name. I have to say member for such a constituency or so and so honourable member if I get to know. So, it will help us to know each other. Fortunately, I knew those who stood before and that is why I was able to mention them.

MS ERIYO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I congratulate you and the Deputy Speaker. I stand here to seek clarification from you on the sitting arrangement. I wonder if it would be prudent to at least put a bar on the other side so that the excess members on this side in the meantime can be sitting there as Parliament makes arrangements –(Laughter)- there are a number of members who are standing outside and the opposition is not even a third of the House -(Interruption).

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Is my honourable colleague in order – my name is Alaso Alice of Soroti District and the Secretary-General of the FDC. (Laughter) Is my honourable colleague of Adjumani in order to suggest that they want to cross over to this side without paying rent for space this side? (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: I think honourable member, you know this is a right attitude if the multiparty system is going to succeed. I think she had an idea of comradeship. Being a comrade –(Laughter) - being accommodative. I think you should stay as a family; whether the house is a small one, you do not send your children to another family to stay there. So, I think this will drive us to really finding a solution to the problem. If we are squeezed, then you will say, “For how long are we going to be squeezed?” I think the Executive will realise this and then provide us with funds. But for the time being, let that arrangement continue. I am sorry.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to congratulate you and your deputy. I just want to seek clarification since I am on the frontbench –(Laughter) I can see my friend; Minister of Defence is squatting over there. You know, family planning is very important. But on a serious note I want to seek your guidance as to where the members representing the Uganda People’s Defence Forces would sit. It may look a very simple matter, but to the onlookers on Television to see my army colleague Brigadier Okello standing and sitting on a side which is very partisan - may be we should get clarification since it is Uganda People’s Defence Forces not NRM-O Defence Forces. We should get a standard clarification so that I will feel a little more comfortable next time he comes in the military gears. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: I think this matter - well, you are a Member of the Seventh Parliament, but this matter came up in the Seventh Parliament about where members of UPDF will sit. What we must appreciate is that members of UPDF are here on deployment. UPDF is a government institution. You cannot say they are against the government –(Laughter)

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) JIM MUHWEZI: Thank you, honourable Speaker. I think we should borrow from the great book, the Bible where Jesus says that those who are not against us are for us- (Applause) -Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: So, whether you regard them as independent - I think that is what you are trying to suggest. But I have earlier indicated that independents will choose where they want to sit. It is up to them. If you regard them as independent, then they will be free to say we sit on this side. But one thing, which should be appreciated, is that UPDF is a government institution. You cannot say they should be on opposition; they cannot. But if they are independent, then they will sit where they want to sit.

MR OKUPA: I think to try to solve this problem; I agree with you that we need to be accommodative. My proposal would be our colleagues who are independent members, of course they may have some links, but basically they are supposed to be in the opposition. So, we are free to help them and create space for them. They can have space on the opposition side because you cannot say you are independent and Movement unless you are hermaphrodite type of person – (Laughter)- So, we would be able to sort out this matter by at least having that accommodative spirit that way and have the independents be on the rightful side. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Okupa, we have made consultations over this issue. Actually, during the elections, there were a team of international observers who met me and this issue was raised. From the consultations I had with them, what I have said is what happens in other jurisdictions in that independents are free to sit where they want to sit until we have a good arrangement where we can say independents sit in this and the other side. But it does not really matter. Does it matter where they sit since that will not affect their independence?

DR OKULO EPAK: Rt hon. Speaker, the truth is that independents are independent because they have disagreed with all these parties here. In essence, they are the grand opposition. Technically, because they neither agree with parties on this side nor with parties on the other side, that is the basis for their being independent. But I stood on a point of information. 

I recall in the last multiparty Parliament where the Army was first represented, the members of the Army enjoyed themselves sitting on any side whenever they wanted. That was what was going on at that time. Maybe we can borrow from that so that we can avoid the stigma of trying to evaluate or agree what these honourable members will be representing here or what they are deployed here for.

In fact, deployment even makes it more difficult because their terms of deployment must be very clear and we would like to know what their terms of deployment are if they are supposed to be deployed in the House. I thank you, Mr speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think the position of the last Parliament and this one is not comparable because the last Parliament was under a Movement political system and any member who was here came here under that arrangement. But this one in the sixties –(Interruption)

DR OKULO: Mr Speaker, I am sorry, I was speaking about the 1980s not the amorphous Parliament we have just succeeded.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

11.31
MAJ. (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (NRM, Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me also congratulate you with the Deputy Speaker upon being elected. I want to give my personal opinion on the army representation. The army is supposed to serve any government in power or any party that takes government; the army must salute and must serve the nation. So, I do not see the problem when the army sits on the side of government in power. I think we should not waste a lot of time on this as you have already ruled. I think we shall have to iron irregularities that we sight as we go along. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think this is clear.  

11.32
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo District): I congratulate you and the Deputy Speaker upon your victory. From the point raised by the former Minister of Health, a quotation or any kind borrowed from the Bible that those who are not against us are for us, I can also say that those who are not with us are against us. Those of you who are from the army or those of you who carry guns or those who are escorted with guns most of the time, since you do not seat with us, you are against us -(Laughter)- I am scared now that the persons who are heavily guarded and who will move with arms around them can easily be a threat –

11.33
MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Is the honourable member in order to impute that we carry guns in this Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I mean this is a matter; can you substantiate? We have rules and when we go through the rules then you will see that we have already addressed that issue. You should not be worried; the Chair properly protects you.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to propose that we debate the details of every other thing as we handle the Rules of Procedure. If we do now, it tantamount to unguided procedure and we will be scattering left and right. I propose that we come back at 2.30 p.m. when we are starting on the Rules of Procedure. That would be very good; it helps provide direction as we make our submissions. Thank you.

11.35
MR OMARA ATUBO (Independent, Otuke County, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of people sitting on the right hand side of the Speaker and the opposition sitting on the left hand has a historical background from the British Parliament and because of limited time possibly we may not have to go deep into it. How it came about - but for you to go - we have research colleagues in the department who will be able to help you to find out why the government side sits on the right and the opposition sits on the left. It has a long historical background from the British Parliament.

But I agree with you that what is important is to be in this House and the spirit of comradeship which you have rightly put has started. It started with your election, nominated by hon. Wabudeya from the NRM side and seconded by none other than hon. Ben Wacha from the Independent side and you went unopposed. The hon. Deputy Speaker was nominated by hon. Ruhindi and seconded by the FDC strong person.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Mr Speaker, is it in order for Members of Parliament who belong to the NRM and whose official designated position is on your right hand to come and discredit the opposition side? I refer specifically to the former minister, hon. Israel Ssebunya and next to me former minister, hon. Rukutana. Are they in order to be here and we assume that they have lost their seat?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think a point of order does not arise in the circumstance because earlier when they occupied the seat, which they are occupying, I had not proclaimed the sides. Now that I have proclaimed after maybe the suspension, they will reverse. But as of now, they are okay.

MR ATUBO: Mr Speaker, let me conclude my remarks. Possibly we do not have to take this too far and –so that spirit is already there, specifically on the Army. I think we have to be quite flexible. I have read something in the papers today about when Gen. Tinyefuza was speaking on behalf of the Army after their being sworn in. He used two fundamental words in his remarks. He said the Army would be neutral and fight for freedom. Now, if he was quoted rightly, it backs the provision of the Constitution, which says the Army will be non-partisan. 

To me, therefore, this question of whether the Army sits on the government side or on this side is something possibly which may not have to be taken too far. All that is important is that the Army knows their role; the Constitution is very clear on the role they should play and definitely they will sit where they can best function as a national army. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think we conclude.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of the presence of the Army in Parliament is historical. I am glad that honourable –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI:  Mr Speaker, you had made a ruling on this issue of the Army and the debate is being opened now. Could you guide us on a procedural matter on this debate, which is being opened on where the Army representatives should sit when you have already given your ruling?

THE SPEAKER: I have already given the ruling. I did not know that this matter was still continuing. Let us leave it as that. I have already said UPDF is a national army; it is a government organ and I have said where they will sit. We can review this eventually but for the time being that is the ruling. I think let us suspend the proceedings to 2.30 p.m.
 
(The House was suspended at 11.40 a.m.)

(On resumption at 2.32 p.m, the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you may appreciate, before the starting of this Eighth Parliament, a law was passed under the Administration of Parliaments Act, which requires us to have certain officers because the Office of the Speaker will be working with certain officers. Therefore, it is necessary that we get a Leader of Opposition; we get the Chief Whip of opposition and Chief Whip for government. 

As far as government is concerned, the Leader of Government Business is constitutional that will be the Prime Minister.  But I wish to tell you that I have been informed that hon. John Nasasira is going to be the government Chief Whip. That information has been received and therefore I have somebody to work with on the side of government. I now request the parties because we shall have the chief opposition whip who will come from FDC but even other parties like Uganda People’s Congress and Democratic Party will need to have whips with whom the office of the Speaker will be working.  So, I request the members and leaders of FDC, leaders of DP, leaders of UPC to submit to me the whips so that I can have meetings with them and see how business will be transacted in this House.

2.35
MR ADOLF MWESIGE (NRM, Bunyangabu County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As colleagues are aware, this is the beginning of the multiparty Parliament in this country and, therefore, the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament must be urgently amended to facilitate the transaction of multiparty politics in this Parliament. 

As you are aware, the current Rules of Procedure of this Parliament as proceeding from the Seventh Parliament were tailored to facilitate the Movement political system. To get Rules of Procedure of Parliament in a multiparty dispensation, we need a Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline which will study the draft Rules of Procedure which have been left to this Parliament by the committee on rules of the Seventh Parliament. Therefore, Mr Speaker, the formation of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline is a very urgent matter because it will review our rules of procedure, report to this House and without reviewed Rules of Procedure it might not be possible for this House to transact business in a multiparty setting.

Mr Speaker, as you can observe, the Executive is at the moment not represented in this House and in my view the House is not complete until the Executive is represented. Therefore, the formation of the appointments committee is an urgent matter. The committee on rules and the committee on appointments must also reflect the multiparty character of this House hence the need to amend the Rules of Procedure which determine the composition of these two important committees which we need to setup as urgently as possible.

Mr Speaker, amendment of Rules of Procedure is governed by Rule 50 of the current rules of procedure. I have circulated a document because I know members may not have copies of their Rules of Procedure as of now, which reproduces the provisions of Rule 50 which says that, “A member may move that any of these rules be amended giving not less than five days notice. The notice of any motion for the amendment of any of these rules shall be accompanied by a draft of the proposed amendment, when the motion has been proposed and seconded. It shall stand referred to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline and no further proceedings shall be taken on it until that committee has reported on it.”  

In view of the urgency which I have described, it might not be possible to follow this procedure as it is in Rule 50. I am, therefore, moving a motion, under Rule 9 of our Rules of Procedure and Rule 40(1) (d) for the suspension of the application of Rule 50 in order that we may proceed to amend the Rules of Procedure regarding the composition of the committee on rules and the committee on appointments. The rules which guide the composition of the committee on rules is Rule 135 and the rule which governs the composition of the committee on appointments is from Rule 126 to Rule 143.  

In view of the urgency, which I have described, it might not be possible to follow this procedure as it is in Rule 50. I am, therefore, moving a motion under Rule 9 of our Rules of Procedure and Rule 40(1) (d) for the suspension of the application of Rule 50, in order that we may proceed to amend the Rules of Procedure regarding the composition of the Committee on Rules and the Committee on Appointments. The rule, which guides the composition of the Committee on Rules, is Rule 135 and the rules which govern the composition of the Committee on Appointments, are from Rule 126 to Rule 143.  

Mr Speaker, in view of the urgency, I beg to move that the provisions of Rule 50 be suspended in order that I may move a motion for the amendment of the Rules of Procedure for the urgent composition of the two standing committees, which I have described. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

MR LIVINGSTON OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum):  Mr Speaker, allow me to add my voice to those of my colleagues who have already congratulated you and your Deputy. Most of us are new in this Parliament, and we do not have the rules the mover is talking about. 

As of now, I believe that this Parliament has no Rules of Procedure. Now, which rules are we proposing to amend? We have the draft, which we have not gone through and we have not approved. To make sense to some of us, it would have been useful to provide those other rules being referred to so that we are at par when we discuss this matter. 

I seek clarification on whether we should proceed the way we are doing, or something has to be done.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Constitution mandates Parliament to regulate its procedure by making rules that govern the way business is transacted in Parliament. These Rules of Procedure are not for the First Parliament or Second Parliament; they are Rules of Procedure for Parliament. They are the Rules of Procedure that we have been following and which will control us for the time being until it is found necessary to adjust them. 

The Parliament we have now is different from the Parliament we had under a Movement Political System. What is being proposed is to amend those rules we have, to be able to adjust to the multi-party system. I have no reason to disagree with you that you do not have a copy. I think we shall try to ensure that you get a copy, but the rules are there and we are only trying to modify them because of the multi-party system. 

As the mover has stated, the procedure of amending rules is that you give notice of five days, stating that you want to amend this or that rule. In view of the fact that we have a lot of work to do, as you have heard there is need to deal with, for instance, appointment of Cabinet, there is need to deal with this. It is necessary that we put in motion the organ that will be dealing with amendments and receiving proposals for amendment to guide us as to how we amend those procedures. That is the Committee on Rules. Previously, it was headed by hon. Ben Wacha but that was for the Seventh Parliament. What hon. Adolf Mwesige wants is for us to at least set up a Rules Committee that would spearhead the process of amending the rules. 

There is a constitutional mandate for us to deal with the amendments made by the President say, for ministers, judges and so forth. It is necessary, if we have to function as Parliament, to have ministers we can put questions to. If we do not have ministers here, our business may be bogged down. That is why he is moving a motion that we suspend the requirement of giving notice of five days so that we process these particular committees, so that we can function. The Rules of Procedure are there but they need adjustment.

I understand you were given copies -(Interjections) I think the printing missed out something. They should have indicated in very deep black ink the kind of amendment they were effecting. That is what is missing. We need to debate this motion of suspending the rules so that we set up a committee that would spearhead the process.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Whereas I share concerns raised by hon. Okello-Okello, if you have time to look at what is in your file, you will realise that this is the old rule in which the proposed amendment is marked. The proposed amendment is marked and, therefore, I wish to support the motion moved by my colleague.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Actually, a number of us are getting lost. If you look at the proposals that the former Minister for Constitutional Affairs is trying to move on Rule 127 - in the drafts that we have Rule 127 is talking about a committee of supply!

THE SPEAKER: Committee of what?

DR EPETAIT: Committee of supply. However, the content of the amendment that he is trying to put forward is talking about representation on standing committees. So, I think there is need for us to be in tandem. We are getting lost. Which Rule 127 is he referring to?

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, what hon. Epetait is referring to is a working document. The motion I seek to move is to amend the current Rules of Procedure. I cannot move to amend a draft. I know in the draft there has been a re-organization of the numbering of the Rules. Rule 127 in the parent rules relates to the mode of election of standing committees. I do not know whether Dr Epetait is following. 

There is a variance between what is in the document you have because it is a working document. It is a draft of the Rules Committee. In the actual rules of Parliament, Rule 127 talks about the mode of election of standing committees not the committee of supply. I think what is important are the amendments. The numbering can be done when we are finally printing the new Rules of Procedure.

MR WACHA: What the honourable former minister has just stated indicates the necessity for everybody to have a copy of the rules he is talking about. If we are going to amend the rules, which we have been using then the Members must know what they are amending otherwise, we will be at a loss. I do not think it is asking too much of the Clerk to provide these documents to the Members.

THE SPEAKER: Well, at least the rule, which he wants to suspend you have it here. He is trying to say, let us suspend the requirement of giving that notice of five days. If you agree with the motion, we can move immediately to deal with that one. 

Since there are not many rules, I think we can lift out those particular rules so that Members can get a copy. It is the idea of suspending. I put the question that we suspend this particular rule so that we can see what he wants to amend.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: But let us be facilitated by having those rules lifted out.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, I will try my best to read the rules in the parent document as much as possible. I will invite Members to look at Page 3 of my document, which I have circulated –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, while you are reading, the Clerk’s Office can assist us to photostat the relevant rules. Proceed.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Sir. I propose to amend Rule 126. Rule 126 in the current Rules of Procedure talks about membership of standing committees. In the current Rule 126 –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: I understand that the honourable former minister’s amendments were reproduced from his office and they are not enough. Some of us do not even have the document. We do not know what he is talking about.

MR MWESIGE: I have distributed 150 copies and I would like to implore Members to share the copies that they have. It is possible to share. More are on the way.

THE SPEAKER: Let him read for those who do not have as more copies are produced. Proceed with reading.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Sir. The current Rule 126 says: “Subject to these rules, each standing committee, apart from the Business Committee, Budget Committee, and the Appointments Committee, shall comprise fifteen Members elected in accordance with these Rules.”  

The amendment I propose, Sir, is to read as follows: “Subject to these rules, each standing committee, apart from the Business Committee and the Budget Committee, shall comprise twenty Members elected in accordance with these rules.”  

I propose only two changes to this rule. One of them is to increase the number of membership to standing committees from 15 to 20. This is of course dictated by –(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Mr Speaker, I thought the motion hon. Adolf moved was for us to suspend the rule, and that rule has been suspended. Following that, I expected the substantive motion that he is now explaining. There is no way that you could have moved because the first statement in your rule says, “Whereas Parliament has resolved that Rule 50 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament be suspended” and we had not resolved. How could you have moved? After we have resolved that the rules be suspended, then the statement we have would be valid.

THE SPEAKER: What has been suspended is a requirement for you to give notice for so many days. Now that you are permitted, move a motion to amend the amendments we want to effect now. Can you do it?

MR MWESIGE: I was trying to save the time of the House, but now that we have a lot of time I will proceed to read the motion.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to propose an amendment in the heading of the motion. I propose to move a motion for the amendment of the following Rules of Procedure: Rule 126, Rule 127, Rule 128, Rule 129, Rule 131, Rule 139, Rule 140, Rule 141, Rule 142, Rule 143 and Rule 135. My motion is moved under Rule 40(1)(k) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.  

“WHEREAS Parliament has resolved a few minutes ago that Rule 50 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament be suspended to enable the Rules of Procedure to be amended; 

AND WHEREAS it is necessary for the President to appoint the Vice-President, Prime Minister and ministers to be approved by the Appointments Committee of Parliament; 

AND WHEREAS it is considered expedient having regard, inter alia, to the fact that Uganda has adopted the multi-party political system, to amend the Rules of Procedure of Parliament relating to the composition and functions of standing committees of Parliament; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

That Rules 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 139, 140, 141, 142, 142, 143 and 135 of the Rules of Procedure be amended in the manner I have specified in the schedule, which is attached to this motion.”  

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by hon. Hope Mwesigye. Now proceed to justify.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I have stated in my motion for suspension of the rules, it is necessary to have a committee on Rules of Procedure created by this House before we proceed to transact further business. We are in a multiparty setting. The character of this Parliament has changed, and it is expedient and very important that the Rules of Procedure must also change to facilitate the multi-party setting that this Parliament is in now. 

I have also said that there is a vacuum in this House because the Executive arm of government is not represented. It is important and urgent that the Executive be created so that the Appointments Committee can have it approved. It is, therefore, urgent that we have the Standing Committees on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, and on Appointments in place as soon as possible.  

Having said that, Mr Speaker, may I now proceed to propose the following amendments to the Rules of Procedure:

My first amendment is on Rule 126, which I had already read from the parent Rules of Procedure. The amendment I am seeking to introduce reads as follows: “Subject to these rules, each standing committee, apart from the Business Committee and the Budget Committee, shall comprise twenty Members elected in accordance with these rules.”  

The amendments I am moving are two: one is to change the number of Members from 15 to 20 and the second one is to remove the mention of the “Appointments Committee” in this rule. 

I propose that like other standing committees, the Appointments Committee should also comprise 20 Members. 

The Budget Committee and the Business Committee are exempted from the requirement of having 20 Members because, by their nature, they have chairpersons of all committees of Parliament represented on them. Therefore, their number will definitely be more than 20. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I want to comment on the number. Fifteen is an odd number so the chairman never had a casting vote. Now when you move to have 20, I think we will complicate matters. I do not mind increasing the number but it should be odd. So, I suggest that this time the number should either be 17 or 19.

THE SPEAKER: Or 21? Honourable mover of the motion, anything to say about 21?

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the Constitution is very clear; that the presiding officer, whether the Speaker or chairperson of the committee, has neither an original vote nor a casting vote. On that basis, the issue that hon. Nandala Mafabi is raising does not apply. In effect, we will be having 19 Members taking a vote on the matter.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay.  

MR MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I think the former Minister of Parliamentary Affairs has not got me clearly. The chairman of the committee is a Member of the committee. Previously, when we have been having 15 Members, the chairman has been a Member of the committee and that is why it has been an odd number. I am asking him to consider adjusting this number to an odd number, 19 or 21.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, I think hon. Hope Mwesigye’s explanation was very clear. She said that a presiding officer in a committee does not have an original or a casting vote in the committee. This makes the number of voting Members in the committee 19, which is an odd number. So, I do not see the worries of hon. Nandala Mafabi.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I think what my colleague, hon. Nandala Mafabi, has just put forward has not been adequately understood. If a committee in the Seventh Parliament had a membership of 15, including the chairperson who had no voting capacity, this meant that there were 14 people to vote. And now we have raised it to 20, meaning that out of 20 one will not vote but 19 will vote. 

Hon. Mwesigye came up here and made a reference to the Rules of Procedure. Can I ask the former Deputy Attorney General to tell us which rule in our Seventh Parliament Rules of Procedure, which we are using right now, he is referring to?  

MR MWESIGE: It is Rule 71(2) and I would like to read it: 
“The Speaker or the chairperson of a committee shall have neither an original nor a casting vote and if upon any question before the House the votes are equally divided, the motion shall be lost.”  

THE SPEAKER: According to the records I have, I see Members of the government side sitting on the opposition side. Do I take it that they have crossed the Floor?

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, in your ruling this morning you stated that any Member who sits on a side that he/she is not supposed to will automatically, according to our Constitution, be declared to have crossed the Floor. Is it in order for hon. Jessica Eriyo to sit on this side? Is she still a Member of Parliament for the Movement or she is now part of the opposition.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, go and squeeze yourself on your side. 

Hon. Nandala Mafabi, the mover has read the relevant provision. You say an odd number but he says that it will be an odd number because the 20th person will be the chairman, and 19 is an odd number. Do we approve this increase? It is an increase from 15 to 20. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, I move that Rule 127 of the Rules of Procedure be amended as follows: The current Rule 127 of the Rules of Procedure talks about the mode of election of standing committees.  I propose to change the title on that rule –(Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, this matter of the sitting arrangement in Parliament I think is being abused unfairly. According to what has been established, your left side is anything on this side from the middle of the House. Now we have in this House the former Minister of State for Animal Resources seated here. We have a group of honourable members, none of whom I recognise as belonging to our party, seated here. I think it is not fair. We accept co-operation but we have a right to this side of the House. I kindly ask the honourable Speaker to protect our right on this side of the House. (Laughter)

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Speaker, I take it that from here, this side is for Members of the Opposition. If this corridor also goes to the opposition, logic should dictate that there will not be enough space on the government side. Mr Speaker, I think you need to make a ruling that is reasonable and practical. I thank you.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, you did make a ruling in the morning and it was very clear. Is the honourable member in order to fail to differentiate between left and right, and start creating diversions according to your definition of the left and right? Is she in order? 

THE SPEAKER: No, what the honourable member was trying to suggest is that the seats for Members of Parliament should end where these green seats end. 

You see, there is a bar there and those Members are behind the bar. Actually, they should be sitting here. It is only that the Chamber is small that it cannot accommodate us, but that should not be part of us. What I suggest is, let us squeeze where we should belong and then this will help us negotiate for funds to build a comfortable House.  

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Professor, I think this will be corrected. Why don’t we go on to the substance of the matter?

PROF. LATIGO: Okay.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, in the current Rules of Procedure, Rule 127 talks about mode of election of standing committees. We propose to change this title to, “Representation on the standing committees”. This was the amendment adopted by the Rules Committee of the Seventh Parliament in Rule 132 of their draft. 

In effect, the amendment is seeking to amend both 127 and also what is contained in the draft, which reads: 

(1)	“The Members of standing committees shall be selected from among Members of Parliament during the first session of Parliament.” I propose to add, “for a term of two and a half years.” I will give the reasons. 

We propose a term of two and a half years because we think standing committees, like sessional committees, should also be reviewed in their performance. A review at half the life of Parliament is necessary, in my view. That is why I am making this proposal, which says that standing committees be elected at the beginning of this session for a term of two and a half years. After two and a half years if they have performed well, they can be re-elected. If they have not, they can be replaced.

(2)	“In the selection of Members to standing committees, the political parties represented in Parliament shall designate, through the whips, to the Clerk, Members of their parties for membership to the standing committees. 
  
(3)	In designating Members to committees, parties shall take into account in their proposals special interest groups, gender representation, experience, interest and qualifications of the individual Members.

(4)	The membership of the committee shall be directly proportional to the strength of party membership in this House.

(5)	Independent Members of Parliament shall apply in writing to the Clerk indicating their interest to serve on a particular committee. 

(6)	Political parties organisations shall have power to withdraw and relocate Members from individual committees.

(7)	Apart from the Appointments Committee, each standing committee shall elect its chairperson and deputy chairperson.

(8)	The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, Local Government Accounts and Government Assurances shall be chaired by Members not aligned to the government party.” So, these can be Members from the Opposition parties or Independents.

(9)	“Any vacancy occurring in a standing committee shall be brought to the attention of the Clerk, who shall make consultations with the appropriate whip and fill the vacancy within one month from the occurrence of the vacancy.” 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was looking at (8) where hon. Adolf Mwesige was talking about the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, Local Government Accounts and Government Assurances being chaired by Members not aligned to the government party. 

I want to bring an amendment here. These committees that are named here are in place mainly to check on the accountability of these institutions. One other committee that was created out of the Public Accounts Committee, where I have been for the last five years, is the Committee of Commissions, State Enterprises and State Authorities. This is a committee, which scrutinizes the accounts of these state enterprises and authorities. So, basing on that background, I am proposing that this standing committee be included on the committees to be chaired by the opposition.   

THE SPEAKER: So you are proposing an amendment?

MR OKUPA: Yes, I am proposing an amendment.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Adolf, you have heard.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, I accept hon. Okupa Elijah’s amendment.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR KAWANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask hon. Adolf Mwesige about the Appointments Committee. With your amendment, you want to reduce the number of membership to 20; but currently it is a big committee. One of the considerations was the representation of districts on the committee. It is so important that people know which people are being appointed so that they scrutinize them. 

Twenty, to me, appears to be a considerable reduction in view of the importance of this committee. Why do you want to drop the rationale of representation of districts on this Appointments Committee with this regard? But otherwise, we are going to have 20 people considering appointments, which are so important in this country and with all the dangers that are involved in this.  

MR KIRUNDA KIVENJIJA: Thank you very much, I would like to contribute towards hon. Kawanga’s worry that as this appears to be a transition, my colleague is suffering from the hangover of the old non-party situation whereby there were no vigilantes to take care of political interests. We are all here trying to sort out our national interests and that is why that committee was big, but now that we have got vigilantes in form of parties that require national credibility and to ensure that all the national aspirations are championed, the representation of the party is enough to do that. If the majority party makes a mistake, and only floats people from Masaka to that committee, ending up with appointment of a sectarian management of society, then the consequences are known and it will be to the advantage of the opposition. Thank you very much.

MR JOHN ODIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Having listened to hon. Adolf Mwesige’s explanation particularly on this proposed amendment (8), I would still seek further clarification on his explanation on the leadership of these standing committees, with special reference to Members of the Independent group in this House. 

When he says the chairpersons of these standing committees should come from Members not aligned to the government party and he says Independents stand a chance, I imagine that is a very vague explanation. Because this morning we said Independents are neither on the government side nor on the opposition side. So, how can you justify the fact that they stand a chance to lead these standing committees? I want clear explanation over this matter. Thank you.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, it is true that Independents are not aligned to any party, therefore, they are not aligned to the government party. So, the rule I am introducing here if I could repeat for hon. Odit reads as follows:

“The Standing Committees on Public Accounts, Local Government Accounts, Government Assurances” and hon. Okupa’s amendment on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises, “shall be chaired by Members not aligned to the government party.” So, it is Members other than Members of the government party and Members other than Members of the government party include Independent Members, which is what it is.

MR ODIT: Would it, therefore, be right, Mr Speaker, to demand that those Independents, who have made their positions clear that they do not sit on the opposition side, can clearly stand a chance to compete for this office?

PROF. LATIGO: Mr speaker, I was trying to look through our Rules of Procedure to see the provisions that we have for elections of chairpersons of committees. I do not see what was provided in the original Rules of Procedure brought into this since we are discussing these committees for modification. It is very dangerous for this Parliament to provide for election of chairpersons of committees by committee even when they say that the chair of that committee will come from a party. 

I say that there is mischief behind this because it now means that we do not have authority over who should represent us and be designated to chair. It will be the majority Members who will elect and I think this is very dangerous, because when we assign Members to particular committees, we bear in mind competencies and also in parties there are issues of seniority that are very critical. I do not think that it would be right for another party to pick a Member we probably had agreed would serve on the committee but we would have our chair based on our seniority within the party. This could be really unfair and I do not think this is a practice all over.

MR ONEK: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What hon. Ogenga Latigo is expressing in this House is lack of organisation and capability within his own party. Because when you nominate Members to a particular committee from your party and you know the chairperson will come from your party, within your membership, you should instruct your Members that among you, so and so should be noted for that and none of you should participate. So, automatically, you will fill in the candidate you want. Why should it become an issue in the rules? You had better get organised within your party so that you get the right person in the right place. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I just wanted to give information in line with the arguments developing. We are avoiding a situation where supposing my party, FDC, nominates me to be the Chairperson, Local Government and then we have another Independent being backed by the NRM, you will still find that by proxy an NRM person will chair that committee because I believe Independents are not actually independent. In fact, there is nothing like being independent in this world, according to me. So, hon. Hilary Onek -(Interruption)

DR OKULO: The Constitution is very clear; it defines and gives right of a person to stand for elective position as independent. The same Constitution makes it very clear that even if an Independent Member decides to join another party, he losses that position of independence. Is the honourable member in order to bring his confused mind into a matter, which is already clearly defined in the Constitution?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is obvious that one can be an Independent Member of Parliament. This is provided for in the Constitution: that you can stand as an Independent and you will be considered to be independent until such a time you take up the card of another party then you lose your seat; you go back and stand on the card of the party to which you have joined.  As far as I am concerned, the Gazette - official way of informing us of what is happening - has gazetted a number of Members here as Independents. So that is the state of affair here.  

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, just to make my argument come straight and not in a purportedly confused manner, I was just giving information to Hilary Onek that the mischief we are trying to cure is to avoid a situation where an Independent NRM becomes the chair. I give an example like hon. Tanna Sanjay from Tororo; is Independent but he is NRM! So, our intention is to have a committee like the Public Accounts Committee to be chaired by the opposition to check government. Now, supposing we have Independent –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Odonga Otto, as far as I am concerned, we have Independent Members of Parliament in this Parliament and you cannot remove that tag from them unless you want to chase them out. So we shall continue to regard them as Independents. They may have friends here and there but that will not change their character.

PROF. KABWEGYERE:Thank you, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is it information you are giving? 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: To who?

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  To hon. Ogenga Latigo.

THE SPEAKER: He resumed his seat.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Okay to inform the House, Sir.  Mr Speaker, we are all here because we got majorities. The principle of democracy in elections is that, the person with the biggest number wins, the majority wins. Now, hon. Ogenga Latigo seems to overlook this fact in the composition of this House and, therefore, in the composition of the committees.  

If you are dealing with majorities, you have to accept the composition of the committees and team – I am trying to say, Mr Speaker, that the honourable member should know that the composition as being proposed is that they are going to take proportions. By implication it means voting can take the position of numbers, however, that does not mean that automatically a Member from a minority party cannot be elected. But if it should so happen that he/she is not elected, it should not surprise anybody. 

MR BEN WACHA: Mr Speaker, I want to raise the issue on paragraph (8) vis-à-vis paragraph (4) of this amendment to Rule 127. Let me paraphrase it like this: all the standing committees that we are talking about under paragraph (8) are oversight committees, they check on what government has done. Actually put it in another way, they do post-mortem work on the activities of government.  Sir, that is why I think the former ministers propose that persons who are not aligned to the government side chair them.  However, that does not go far enough.

We have already been told earlier this afternoon that the chairpersons of these committees have no casting nor original vote, therefore, in effect, decisions in the committees will be made by individual Members of those committees. Now, if you want to have an effective oversight of a committee you do not load that committee with Members who think along the people you are trying to check.  Chances are that, if it is left as is proposed under (4) then Members who are aligned to the government side will load these committees. 

That is why, Sir, in our proposed draft, if you look at page 100 of the blue book, that is proposed Rule 132(8) at the top, we had proposed that in instituting these oversight committees, it would be ensured that Members who are not aligned to government have the majority representation on these committees.  This is important because we are not trying to hide, we are not trying to have a committee or committees, which are there only in name but are not going to carryout oversight functions and this did not fall out of the blue.  

Mr Speaker, I have been a senior speaker in the Commonwealth, what is proposed in this blue book is what happens in all the other Commonwealth parliamentary jurisdictions because you cannot have a doctor who has treated a patient come and do post-mortem on the same patient who has died. What is he going to find out, is he going to say the same thing? Because the purpose of doing post-mortem is to tell the doctor who was carrying out treatment on the dead person that look –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I am seeking clarification from hon. Ben Wacha. Looking at the number of Members on each committee, supposing each committee is of 15 or 20 Members, don’t you think we are likely to have a shortage of Members because when we look at other parties, I do not think they are more than 100 and these are about five committee. So, we are likely to have a committee with only 10 or five people.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, we are dealing with the principle of formation of these committees and the underlying principle is that you cannot treat your patient and then do postmortem on the same patient after he or she has died. You would not be adding any value. The Government should actually be very keen on seeing that the oversight role of these committees is effectively carried out because it is carried out after a fault has already taken place and this committee is going to say, “Look, do not do this again because the other time you did it and this happened.” That is the role of PAC, the Local Government Accounts Committee, the Government Assurance Committee and these other committees on commissions. It is not going to affect the work of government like departmental related committees; it does not. It warns government not to do this again, and if I were in government I would be very happy to have somebody who can effectively check on my activities.

3.37
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, and I am your MP, Mr Speaker. I want to assure you that should you need the intervention of the Member of Parliament, the doors will be open.   

Mr Speaker, I think that what the Members of this side are saying is that we should think of the spirit in which paragraph 8 was written. The spirit of paragraph 8 is to support government where it goes wrong, it is also to support – to help government act better by looking into themselves. So, in order not to undermine that spirit we should face the facts that there are some Independents who only came into this House because they lost in the primaries of their parties. They have also said that, “We belong to this party”, but they came because they lost in the primaries. So - (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you honourable colleague for giving way. I am seeking clarification from you that also the Government side may have to feel a danger of sabotaging its work from the committee, how is that fear going to be arrested from your side?

MS KAMYA: Thank you, honourable member. The Eighth Parliament is facing a serious challenge, the Seventh Parliament was audited and out there people are watching the Eighth Parliament, and their expectations are low. We have to raise the expectations of the people, of the Eighth Parliament. It is up to us to raise the expectations to the people’s expectations. So we have got to debate with a view of not which side wins or loses, but what will help this government to take Uganda forward and what will help the common man, the man out there who elected us.

I would like to conclude by saying that we need to go further into looking at paragraph 8 and come out with a position that really commits these committees to the opposition. Not that the Independents are aligned with government to come and chair these committees. Thank you very much.

3.40
MR AMAMA MBABAZI (NRM, Kinkiizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The spirit of the actual proposition in the motion is that because of the urgency of handling two committees, the Appointments Committee and the Rules, Privileges and Discipline Committee, we have suspended rule 50 in order to enable this House and the country at large to transact business. As you commented in your statement from the Chair, the amendments being proposed to these rules are going to be submitted to the Rules Committee, hence the urgency of having the Rules Committee.

So most of these issues are going to be studied thoroughly and discussed in the Rules Committee and will be brought back by way of a report to the House and we will have full debate on them. So my proposal is that in order to achieve the purpose for which the motion was passed, we should not go into the debate for instance about the practice of the Commonwealth because I know for sure that in the Commonwealth, the only committee which by practice is reserved for the Leader of the Opposition is the Public Accounts Committee. 

In fact here the proposal from the motion is that the opposition chairs more committees than just one. But this is a matter, which I am proposing that we could debate in full when the report of the committee comes. But the purpose of the motion is to make sure that we have the Appointments Committee composed as it is being proposed and we set the Rules, Privileges and Discipline Committee so that we can indeed submit all these amendments and they are subjected to comprehensive scrutiny. I, therefore, propose that we limit ourselves to taking that position and then we prepare ourselves for greater debate when it comes. Thank you.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We recognise the spirit in which hon. Amama Mbabazi has brought his proposal and we think that it does not do any harm to what we need to do to strengthen this Parliament. We, therefore, accept that proposal so that we proceed with the matter of the day and then we end at the appropriate time. (Applause)

3.45
MR ONYANGO KAKOBA (NRM, Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am looking at paragraph 7 of the proposed amendment and this one is talking about the standing committees putting in place their own chairpersons and deputy chairpersons. I think there was an omission because to the best of my knowledge, the Chairperson of the Appointments Committee is the Speaker, as well as that one of the Business Committee. So I just wanted to include the Business Committee. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us look at these amendments to enable us constitute the two committees. Now the Rules Committee is going to study these rules, because we are going to have a debate on all of them, but this is a temporary measure that we set up the committee and I think the intention here was: “what do we follow in setting up that particular committee?” So, let us deal with that, they go and study them and come back with the report and then we shall have a fully-fledged debate on what to amend in the rules.  

3.46
MR DANIEL OMARA ATUBO (Independent, Otuke County, Lira): Mr Speaker, there is lack of clarity in rule 127, paragraph 5. It says, “The Independent Members of Parliament shall apply in writing to the Clerk, indicating their interest to serve on a particular committee.” 

Mr Speaker, we are 36 “Independent of Independent,” as hon. Amama Mbabazi said. Possibly we cannot form a caucus of our own because we are also independent of ourselves. Let us be realistic, we are a large number in this House but we are being treated as if we do not exist! This is true. Even in the Seventh Parliament, the way we debated the other Bill you remember the way we were treated in the other Bill, the Parliamentary Administration (Amendment) Bill, 2006? And now it is being brought here. 

Why am I saying there is lack of clarity? There is lack of clarify because all the other parties are going to be represented proportionally. If all the other parties are represented on the basis of their proportional strength, at the end of it all they are going to take all the seats and the Independent Members will apply. First of all we are not being allocated anything on our proportional strength.  

Secondly, Mr Speaker, the Clerk is going to have a very difficult job because we have not told him - when an Independent Member of Parliament applies to belong to a certain committee - how he treat his application. How many seats have been reserved for us? So I think while - of course hon. Amama Mbabazi has guided us here that we should concentrate on principles here. The issue, which has been raised, will be handled later when we are looking at the new rules altogether. 

I am not satisfied with rule No.5 and I want to propose - my amendment is that in line with the spirit which we have brought in the issue of proportion representation, my amendment would be like this and it is subject to further input from colleagues: “Independent Members of Parliament shall apply in writing to the Clerk, indicating their interest to serve on a particular committee and their representation shall be based on the proportional strength of the Members of the other ones.” I think this is good enough. But all I am saying is that, please, assist the Clerk to give us something because you are now not assisting him. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think the problem - actually you said Independents cannot have a caucus; they have no union. There is nothing to unite them. Independents do not have a whip who would present the arrangement they want. I think the intention here is that Independent Members would write to the Clerk and say, “We would like to serve on four or five standing committees,” so that when they are setting up these committees, they at least get somebody from the Independents to serve on the committees. Otherwise, it would mean ignoring the Independents because each one is independent of another.

DR OKULO: Rt Hon. Speaker, if I heard you correctly, you said the Independent Members will or shall not have a caucus? What rule stops them from having a caucus?

THE SPEAKER: This is what hon. Omara Atubo has said –(Interruption)

DR OKULO: No, what hon. Omara Atubo said was a slip of the tongue –(Laughter)- because I do not see any rule, which stops Independent Members of Parliament from forming a caucus. There is experience elsewhere where Independent Members formed very powerful caucuses and I would like to warn people that that is a real possibility. Thank you.

3.50
MR JOHN NASASIRA (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker, first of all whether the Independents have a caucus or not, they cannot present their membership to any committee as a membership of that caucus because caucuses are informal. We deal with formal structures when we are dealing with Parliamentary work.  

But I want to take this opportunity to request Members that we have got constituencies and names. We are all former something here and we should not be referred to as former minister of this, former minister of the other one; we are all former Members NRC, former Members of the Seventh Parliament, former Members of DP, and now FDC. There are many former titles. So, let us leave these “formers,” let us be referred to by our names and our constituencies until titles are sorted out.

I wanted to help hon. Omara Atubo that of course I realise that the Independents are also many although they are independent of each other and, therefore, they can never present their membership as a group because being independent, you are independent of the other independents. So what we can do in 4 - first of all I am proposing that we amend that and say: “The membership of the committees shall be directly proportional to the numerical strength of the party membership.” We add the word “numerical,” so that they can also be seen as proportionally represented as a party. 

But then for you to show the interest, you cannot show it as a group, you will have to go to the Clerk, you show your interest and then the Clerk will look at the interests of different Independents. But as we form committees we will know that proportionally Independents may be at 10 percent, therefore, in each committee there should be 10 percent of that reserved for Independents. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, don’t you really think that in order to achieve what we want, that is to set up a committee, that we would look through the rules and suggest amendments to paragraph 127? We need to agree on paragraphs 2, 3 and 4. Once we agree on this then we will be in position to set up that committee to embark on its work. Then later they will come to us to consider others issues. Am I clear? I think for our purposes what we need to do for this exercise is to consider paragraphs 2, 3, and 4 so that the independents can also – because they may be interested in this committee – and paragraph 7 - then we will be able to work. Later after a week or so depending on how they do things, we can come and consider all the rules, adopt them and then they will guide us for the future.

MR KAWANGA: I just wanted to add that we should specify the committees that we actually need to do this transition. If we could just specify those two: the Appointments Committee –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: We need the Committee on Rules and Appointments.

MR KAWANGA: Yes, so that the rest are done afterwards.

3.56
PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (NRM, Sheema County South, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, I support your guidance on 1, 2, and 3 but paragraph 127(4) requires more clarification - why? We can go through the arithmetic to demonstrate the difficulty I have on this paragraph. To make it easy to calculate, if you have a total membership of 300 in the House and the composition of the committee is 20 Members, and you want to compute the direct proportionality of the numerical strength of party membership on those committees, you get 20, which is the composition of the committee, divided by the total membership of the House, which is 300, times the numerical strength of each of the parties. 

Consequently, an independent member – unless all the independent members are regarded as an entity – if all the 36 or 38 are grouped together to be an entity, you have nothing to multiply through by 20; and by the end of your arithmetic there will be nothing remaining for the independent Members of Parliament.  

Similarly, the further clarification we require is that if you have 20 Members divided by 300, if the numerical strength of a party is two or three Members, you will end up with a proportion of 0.00013 as a result and of course you can round it off. The clarification I am seeking, therefore, is, it should be known from this House that unless the proportion is at least 0.5 and above, then you have no representation on this committee at all regardless of your numerical strength. You must have certain minimum strength for you to have just one member on that committee when we go by proportional representation.

THE SPEAKER: The idea of independents is that we should be seen as participating in all activities of Parliament. Since they will have indicated their interest giving alternatives, it will be the duty of whoever is administering this to ensure that independents are scattered on all the standing committees we have. We are not going to have only one committee; it is not only the Rules Committee or the Appointments Committee; we have many other standing committees. So it will be a question of checking whether there is an independent on a certain committee so that they too can participate, otherwise, if you do not do that they may be left out because they do not have a whip.

4.00
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Mr Speaker, hon. Nasasira brought a very good amendment to the Minister’s proposal. I want to stand and support it that in view of the debate on independents on 4, which you pointed out as one of the issues we deal with, which reads: “The membership of the committees shall be directly proportional to the strength of the party membership,” let us add “and numerical strength of independent members in the House.” Because if you do as he has proposed then it will remain as it used to be. 

If I want to serve on the Committee on Foreign Affairs and I know that the numerical strength of independents is maybe five, once I find that five independents have already applied, I will simply not apply there and apply for something else. That is what we used to do. So I think once we adopt the proposal of hon. Nasasira, it will be very easy for us to accommodate the independents.  

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you say, “with at least one independent - proportional to the strength but with at least one independent.”  

MS AMONGI: No problem. So we can modify it to read: “… proportional to the strength of the party membership,” – hon. Nasasira wants to improve on his amendment.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, first of all, if we say “at least” that means we are forcing an independent to be on each committee. We should leave the independents to choose their committees but guarantee their numerical strength as a wholesome of independents. I will give you an example. The independents, before we get the last two seats, which are not yet contested for, form 11.4 percent of this Parliament and, therefore, if the committees are going to have a membership of 20, we should in our 4 guarantee that independents should have at least 10 percent of the 20, which is two Members on each committee. We agree on the principle and work out the numbers – let us just agree on the formulation of 4.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chief Whip, I think previously there was a requirement that any member who is not a Minister must serve on a committee; it is the duty on any Member here to belong to a committee. So it is not a question of forcing but the practice is that you cannot choose not to be on committees; you must belong to a certain committee.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, I did not want to argue with you, with due respect, but I am looking at a situation - because the rules say in standing committees you cannot be on more than one committee. You can get a situation where the independents are less than the number of committees you have, so you will find yourself in that problem. I wanted us to work on a percentage of the wholesome and leave them room so that when they apply to the Clerk, they will work it out. If there are three independents that want this, only two positions are there, they put them there so that the independents are represented on each committee.

THE SPEAKER: How many independents do we have?

MR NASASIRA: 35.

THE SPEAKER: It is a big number. Let us do this; can we dispose of 2? I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Can we agree on 3, any contributions to 3?

4.03
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a problem with clause 3. It appears to be superfluous in nature because these special interest groups are catered for elsewhere in different parties, and there are parties like the Democratic Party where we do not even have a lady here. Anyway, that is beside the point, but the overriding factor –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, hon. Lukwago, clause 3 should not cause any worry to any party because this is an internal matter. It has to be handled internally by the party concerned. So if you do not have a particular group in your party, it is understandable; then submit a list. But it is only advisable that you take into account these principles of affirmative action, which we have taken into account.  

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, my reading of this particular clause seems to be mandatory that parties “shall take into consideration” - it is mandatory. But my point here, with due respect to your observation and guidance, is that these special interest groups are catered for in other aspects not specifically for this representation. That is my submission.  

THE SPEAKER: Should I call the vote on this?  

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I think the worry of our colleague, hon. Lukwago, should not arise because if the provision says “you shall take into consideration,” the mandate is to take into consideration. If you do not have the requisite person to field, you will have taken it into consideration. That is all.  

THE SPEAKER: I think let us vote on this. I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Then we come to clause 4.

4.08
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, I want to humbly suggest that we amend the membership and leadership and we add “leadership” after “membership” so that it will read: “The membership and leadership of committees shall be directly proportional to the strength of the party members in the House.”  

MRS MASIKO: Mr Speaker, I need some clarification from the honourable member who has just been on the Floor. If he suggests that the numerical strength of leadership should also be accorded directly, does he want to mean that all leadership should come from a party that has the strongest numerical strength? I would like him to clarify that.

MR OTTO: You know, when you read clause 4 as a paralegal –(Laughter)- you read it concurrently with clause 8 because we are talking about specific committees. So the contradiction now is that those parties that would check government are not those that would ordinarily work with it. That is my view.

4.10
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to propose an amendment to clause 4 to read: “Except for Standing Committees mentioned under sub-rule (8) of this rule, the membership of committees shall be directly proportional to the numerical strength of party membership in the House.” 

My justification is to marry it to sub-rule (8) to ensure that those standing committees, which deal with an oversight function on government have big representation from parties not aligned to the government party as had earlier on been articulated by hon. Ben Wacha. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: What we are trying to do – I think the agreement was not to deal with all the paragraphs in this particular amendment; that we deal with only three or four paragraphs and approve them for purposes of setting them. This other issue on (8) and so forth shall be addressed fully when we come to consider the amendments.  

DR EPETAIT: Okay, I concede, I will take my argument to the committee.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Since we are looking at only two committees, to avoid doubt, we should put here that “the membership of Committees of Appointment and Rules and Privileges,” so that we are sure that those are the committees we are looking at now, and nothing more.

THE SPEAKER: So do I put the question to clause 4?  

MR MBABAZI: For clarity, clause 4 as amended by hon. John Nasasira reads as follows: “The membership of committees shall be directly proportional to the numerical strength of party membership in the House” and then that other part about the independents –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Add it if you can.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, since hon. Amama Mbabazi does not seem to know what he is talking about, can hon. Nasasira take over since it was hon. Nasasira’s amendment anyway?  

THE SPEAKER: Have you finished? Okay you add the other part.

MR MBABAZI: So, can I read it again? All right - and hon. Ben Wacha is free to continue with this one: “The membership of committees shall be directly proportional to the numerical strength of party membership in the House taking into account the independents.” 

MR WACHA: It should go like this: “… and also taking into consideration the numerical strength of the Independent Members in the House.”

4.13
PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (FDC, Agago County, Pader): Mr Speaker and honourable members, as much as we appreciate the concern of independent members, you must first go back again and look at what they are as defined earlier on, that they are independent and therefore, if you are taking into account their numerical strength, then it will be one all the time -(Interruption)- I know that is the legal position but the proper position is that if we have to accommodate independents, then we cannot accommodate them institutionally; it is wrong and I say this with all honesty because many of my very close colleagues will be affected by that but then when you are making rules, you do not make rules to fit individuals, you makes rules to fit the law and the circumstances. 

I think what we are trying to do and I would like us as I had considered earlier on, for the purpose of these rules and constituting the two committees, let us say: “The membership of the committees shall be constituted by the parties in proportion to their numerical strength, but shall include two members or three members of the committee.” Otherwise, this debate can go on forever and I do not think we have studied and considered all things to come up here and debated them, but let us agree that we should provide for the two committees so that we proceed with the business of the House. We can even do that later, because after a week or so we shall come to approve a new rule so that whatever we put would be adjusted according to what we would have agreed upon.

THE SPEAKER: Let us get the formulation and vote on it. Do you have an idea hon. Atubo, for the formulation?

MR ATUBO: To get out of this scripture of numerical strength, since the independent members are being considered in their individual independent capacity, I think we have to use the word, “taking in consideration the independent Members of Parliament,” not the “numerical strength.” In other words, we are 36 in the House, taking into consideration the total numbers. 

Mr Speaker, we are trying to get out of this question of the numerical strength but we are trying to accommodate it in terms of mere numbers; we are 36 and you take into consideration the numbers of Members of Parliament who are independent without repeating the words “numerical strength”. So just take into consideration their numbers.  

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I just want to propose a small amendment to hon. Omara Atubo’s proposal that instead of the word, “number” I think we should say, “taking into consideration the interests of the Independent Members.”

THE SPEAKER: Is it right?

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, I accept hon. Okello-Okello’s amendment.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Then we consider 7 was amended to add the words “business committee.”

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: These are the minimum amendments we need for purposes of achieving what we want. The two committees -(Interjection)- number one will come when we look at all the committees.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, following your guidance, I think we have achieved the purpose of this motion, namely, we are now able to have the numbers of standing committees; we now know the criteria of constituting these committees. I, therefore, beg to abandon the rest of the amendments and leave them for the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Do we not approve the motion as amended?

MR WACHA: Before we approve the motion, I am looking at proposed rule 129; has it been abandoned?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, because we shall consider them later when we come back.

MR WACHA: No, but it impacts on what we have just passed.

THE SPEAKER: okay.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, it says: “The Committee on Appointments shall comprise 20 Members designated by party whips on the basis of proportional party membership in the House.” What we have just passed qualifies this and all I want us to do is to make sure that that qualification is also imported into this.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, can you read the formulation?

MR MWESIGE: I think I agree with what hon. Wacha is saying but it will be captured by the Committee on in Rules, Procedure and –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: But this committee is going to start work –(Interruption)

MR MWESIGE: Yes, but the committee will follow what we have already passed in 126 and 127(4) because these are general provisions affecting all standing committees without the exception of the Appointments Committee.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance. Does that mean that we shall have to wait for the Appointments Committee to bring a report to the House before even the Committee on Appointments is constituted? Are we going to wait for the Rules Committee to bring a report? If that is not the case, then I have guidance to seek regarding the way the constitution is proposed in this rule, which the minister said he abandoned. But I believe we need to constitute the Appointment Committee to start doing its work –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: He is saying that what we have approved is of general application on the two committees.  

MR EKANYA: Thank you for your guidance. I just hope that the Appointments Committee will not ignore the constitutional provision, which regards the approval of appointment of the Vice-President because this proposal was kind of ignoring it, according to my understanding.

THE SPEAKER: No, it is the entire House not the committee that does the approval of a Vice-President. So I put the question to the motion as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: So, now it is left to the whips to deal with the issue of constituting the committees and maybe the House will be informed tomorrow of what you have done so that work can start.   

This is an announcement to inform you that you are urgently requested to fill in the MP’s curriculum vitae forms and submit them to the Public Relations and Information Office not later than 19 May 2006 -(Interjection)- Well do what you can, but we need to know you so that even the responsibilities given to you take into account the background.

The other information, which I want to pass on to you honourable members before we adjourn is that one of our Members, hon. Sekitoleko Juliet, Woman Member for Kibale District lost her dad, Mr Sekitoleko, a former LC V Chairman, Kibale District and I think also former Member of the NRC. He died in India where he had gone for treatment and the body arrived this morning. It is at his residence at Nansana. There will be a requiem mass at 5.30 p.m. today and on Friday the body will be taken to Christ the King Church for a service at 10.00 a.m. then later it will be taken home to Kibale District for burial that afternoon. With this we should observe a moment of silence.

(The Members rose and observed a minute of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thank you for the business you transacted in the morning, and that of this afternoon. This brings us to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 4.21 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 19 May 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)



