Thursday, 10 May 2012 

(Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.) 

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you this afternoon for today’s sitting. We have a fully loaded Order Paper today and, therefore, time is going to be of essence. I will not be merciful in terms of our usage of time because the Order Paper is quite loaded. 

Honourable members, we have a deadline of 15th May to return the results of our budget framework discussions from our committees to the President. It is my prayer that the committees have gone a long way in concluding this process so that we do not violate provisions of our own law, the Budget Act. It is my prayer that we will be ready to submit it back to the President for his appropriate action as we prepare for the Budget, which will be read at the beginning of next month. 

Honourable members, I will at an appropriate time make an alteration to the Order Paper, or maybe I should do it now. Immediately after item No. 5, you will insert another petition from the hon. Lulume, Member of Parliament for Buikwe South, to be presented to the House. 

I will also adjust the Order Paper so that we can conclude business on the adoption of the report of the Committee on National Economy, which is item No. 7. Depending on the speed we take on the presentation of papers, we should be able to move this forward. I will look at the time and then take a decision on this. The matter has been pending for a while and we need to finish with it. We also have three petitions this afternoon and we shall be dealing with them as quickly as we can. Thank you. 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have looked at the Order Paper and I have a point of procedure to raise, which has become of concern. A number of times we raise questions for oral answer to ministers - I personally sent a question for oral answer, through the Office of the Clerk to Parliament, to the Minister of Agriculture about two-and-a-half months ago. I do not see it appearing to date, and yet it is on matter related to electronic branding of livestock in Karamoja.  

We have continued getting reports that many of the animals that have been branded have since died. When we tried to investigate what the cause of the deaths could have been, it was amazing to note that the boluses being introduced into the rumens of these livestock are very heavy. As a matter of fact, the boluses cause indigestion. We have shared this information with technocrats from the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine in Makerere and it is a point of concern. We need to save our animals, Mr Speaker. 

I had the opportunity to even get a sample of the bolus being used, which is weighing almost 300 grams. I would like to lay it on the Table. I really demand answers from the Minister of Agriculture because we cannot sit back and watch animals dying without explanations from the ministry. 

There are so many questions related to this electronic branding of livestock. How was the whole programme procured? What is the cost? What are the likely prospects for rolling it out? What is the impact of the programme? What is the involvement of the veterinary personnel on the ground? 

When that matter was raised by the vets in Karamoja, some of them were victimised and in fact they were even thrown out of office. Now, how can we allow amateurs drive us and stockmen play around with the livestock without the involvement of veterinarians – professionals - who would undertake the programme? 

I would like answers from the Ministry of Agriculture because I am made to understand that the programme is being implemented by the Office of the Prime Minister who certainly do not have the technical ability to handle livestock. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay this bolus on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, has it been certified by the Sergeant–at-Arms to be safe because we are not familiar with those kinds of items? Unless I have a clear certificate from the Sergeant-at-Arms that we can take it, I would be reluctant to accept it on the record of Parliament as an item that you can lay on the Table. For now, please keep it in your pocket so that if there is something serious, you will be the first victim. (Laughter)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, these boluses are being used on the ground. The reason why they cause death is because of their weight; they cause indigestion.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we get a confirmation that these are the things which are being used? 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, what is happening on the ground is that once an animal dies, the personnel from the Office of the Prime Minister again go back to the owners of those dead animals to buy these boluses at a cost of Shs 500. Now, most animal owners have decided to reject their Shs 500. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the point being raised by the hon. Epetait is that this matter was raised over two months ago and it should have been responded to by now. Could you say something? 

2.37
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, hon. Epetait is raising a very important matter. It had not been brought to our attention that you had already raised this matter but obviously, it requires urgent attention. I would like to give an undertaking that I am going to follow up on this matter so that on Wednesday next week, a response can be given. 

In the meantime, I am also going to request the hon. Minister of Agriculture and the Prime Minister’s office to make sure that they move down into the field so that the necessary corrective arrangements can be put in place. Thank you.

2.38
MR FRED EBIL (UPC, Kole County, Kole): Mr Speaker, yesterday, 9 May 2012, disaster struck my constituency in the parish of Apala and in the sub county of Alito, Kole County, Kole District. Five people died due to lightning - a catechist called Okullu Geoffrey who was a catechist of St George Barpii Chapel in Apala Parish; his wife, Dorcas Okullu, who was pregnant; the deputy catechist, Okello Daniel; a pupil of Barowo Primary School called Agnes Abalo; and Barbara, a daughter of Okwanga Yuventino. They died due to lightning.

On the other hand, due to heavy rain there was a lot of flooding and people’s crops were washed away. There is great fear among the population, especially in Apala and Alito sub county, that there is going to be famine. I would like to call upon the ever compassionate heart of the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness to move in very fast and do something about this. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members, for giving me full attention.

2.40
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Just two days ago, a calamity also befell my constituency and particularly the sub county called Buhimba; the whole parish had a very big challenge of hailstorms. As I speak, over 5,000 people have been affected including their crops, livestock and birds.

What worries me is that most of these peasants had to borrow money to buy seeds and cultivate with the hope that at the end of the season, they will be able to harvest, sell and perhaps get income. Now calamity has struck almost each and everything where they had hope. The district has tried its level best; all the local leaders have come in, but a solution has not yet been found because the problem is too great. 

I have received quite a number of calls from the people affected. They are asking: what are you going to help us with, honourable Member of Parliament? That is why I had to stand here and raise this matter and inform the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness. This is a very serious problem, which touches the lives of our people who are not sure of what to eat today and tomorrow because of the destruction we have had. 

We request for emergency relief supplies in the area and any other measures that the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness could think of. I will be very grateful as area leader to receive such an amount of assistance that will be given after the assessment has been made by the ministry. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.43
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance also related to what the two of my colleagues have raised about national calamities. In my district of Agago, since the rains begun we have received rains almost every day, and very heavy rains. These rains have destroyed crops that have been planted by my people. The following sub counties are severely affected: Lira Palwo, Lamyu, Omot, Patongo, part of Kotomo, part of Lukole, part of Parabong, part of Adilang and part of Lapono sub counties.

My people deserve urgent attention because the crops are being washed away. Above all, all the roads in Agago District are impassable. My children had gone home for holidays and yesterday they wanted to get back but they got stuck along the way and yet school is beginning next week. My children are stuck in the village and they cannot come back. I also have a function in Paimol Sub County in my constituency but I cannot go there because the roads are very bad.

Mr Speaker, I believe this is the responsibility of not only hon. Musa Ecweru but also the Ministry of Works. So I really request that these two ministries work hand in hand and as fast as possible to relieve my people. I thank you very much for this opportunity. By the way, I want my children back to Kampala.

2.45
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. We have had so many challenges in my district. A few months back I remember -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I thought you were debating the issues raised.

MS NYAKECHO: I was supplementing on something similar to what is being raised about the weather changes that are bringing about problems - lightning and so on. 

A few months back, I remember I reported to this Parliament that one of my primary schools had been struck by lightning and I lost four pupils in that attack. The ministries concerned promised to fix lightning conductors but up to date we are still waiting. Right now, we are having heavy rains. I got a report from my constituency a few days ago that four members of the community in a place called Okee Parish had again been struck by lightning; fortunately, they did not lose their lives. 

We have a bridge that connects Adwari Sub County to Alebtong District that has developed a very huge crack. I request the Ministry of Works to take interest and go and investigate. Very soon we are going to be cut off from the rest of the country because that is the main road and also the gateway to the rest of the country and to Otuke. So I request the ministries concerned to take note and please respond. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think these matters have been substantially raised. We need to conclude this particular issue of the disasters that are hitting people - rains, hailstorms, lightning. Hon. Ecweru, do you have something to say on this?

2.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, first of all, I want to say something about what has been raised today. I also want to promise this House that in a few days’ time, I will bring a comprehensive report here capturing the entire country and events that have unfolded in the last few days. The report will indicate what we are likely to do and the challenges we are facing-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you need to set a date because this Parliament is due for adjournment. You need to set a proper date and not just say, “in the near future”.

MR ECWERU: I will be happy to do that next Wednesday. First of all, I want to thank Parliament for the continued support you have extended to the ministry, particularly by way of supplementary budgets that we have always brought here. Parliament has always been positive in helping us meet the challenges of the unknown. 

I would want to report to this House that my ministry has indicated to the Ministry of Finance the urgent need to implement the constitutional command that directs us to set aside a contingency fund, which must be ring-fenced to take care of calamities of this nature. What is happening is that to-date the Ministry of Finance has not advised us as to what level they have reached in implementing that command of the Constitution. 

It is even compounded, Mr Speaker, particularly this last quarter of the financial year that we are in. There is a language that has been used by the Ministry of Finance – and I see the minister here – “suppressed budget”. This means most of the departments, including the critical department of disaster management, have received zero relief. 

While that is the case, Mr Speaker, the ministry has again prepared a request for supplementary intervention and this is going to happen. I will be indicating to this House when I come to present this report next Wednesday what exactly we have requested the Minister of Finance to do. 

When floods like these do come, when water logging occurs in a place, there are three obvious challenges they present to the population. First, the population gets cut off because the roads collapse – (Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did not intend to disrupt the minister but I would like to say that the matters being raised by members are of an emergency nature. The minister has come to tell us that he is only prepared to present a report on Wednesday and yet this report was asked for much earlier, about six or seven months ago. I can see the minister’s predicament in that he has cried out to the Ministry of Finance, but they have paid a deaf ear – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So you are now ruling on your procedure? (Laughter)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, the procedural question I would like to raise is: Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the Minister of Finance to tell this House why such monies that were requested for by the Prime Minister’s Office have not been released? Moreover, we had predicted that there would be heavy rains this year and therefore all sorts of problems would follow, including lightning, damaged roads, broken bridges, floods, famine etc. Why has the Minister of Finance deliberately, even after we as Parliament passed a supplementary budget, denied the department of disaster preparedness the money it so much needs?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I only wish hon. Amuriat had allowed the minister to complete his submission because he has not raised a procedural matter affecting what was on the Floor. The issue you raised on the question of the statement coming next week; I think the minister said the comprehensive statement will come next week but nevertheless he will make a response to the particular issues today. That is what I heard. On the issue of the Minister of Finance, I think that will come at a later time. 

I cannot rule on that procedural issue in light of what is going on right now. Let the minister finish and then we will deal with those ones. Honourable minister, you could focus on the issues raised now.

MR ECWERU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been in touch with the leadership of Kole and most of the districts around the Elgon Region and Karamoja and the challenge is quite big. Since it started raining in most of those districts, the population needs essential items like blankets, mosquito nets, tarpaulin. Above all, I have indicated to my colleague, the Minister of Works, that there is need to keep the communication lines open by keeping the roads navigable. I hope that will be handled by the relevant department of works.

Mr Speaker, while that is the case, the ministry cannot sit by and watch this bad situation getting worse. What we have done as a ministry is to engage our traditional auxiliary groups in humanitarian work. There are groups in this country, like the Uganda Red Cross, whose mandate is to supplement our intervention when it comes to issues of humanitarian work. I have discussed with them that while I am sorting it out with my colleagues from the Ministry of Finance, something must be done. 

I want to report to this House that within hours, I will be having a team reaching Kole with some basics like blankets and tarpaulin. I will also be having a team reaching parts of Karamoja - (Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank my brother, hon. Ecweru, for yielding the Floor. I would like to seek clarification. A supplementary budget is brought to this Floor by the Executive, knowing very well that Government has identified money somewhere and has also identified priority areas where to spend that money. We then debate that budget and pass it. The implementation of that budget is a function of the Executive. So, I would like to be assisted with how a member of the Executive comes again and says, “Yes, you gave us the money but there is no money.” Where did the money go? 

The biggest issue is if Parliament passes money for Government to undertake an executive function and it fails to release that money, and the minister is now telling us he has gone to Red Cross begging when we have already provided funds. You are now putting us in a very difficult position. How does your Executive function? We give you the money you asked for and instead you go begging!

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, I thought hon. Katuntu was attentively listening to what I was saying. The truth is that the resources that we had requested for supplementary support were not released. That is what precisely I said here. It is not that they were released and I am now coming back to demand for more. 

I also want to inform my colleagues that when we sound signals of distress to our partners – I want to indicate one recent case where we did indicate to one of our strong partners that this was going to unfold. They preferred, as they always do, not to send resources directly to the ministry but send them to the Government of Uganda through the Uganda Red Cross -[Mr Wamanga-Wamai: “No”] - Mr Ambassador, what the Japanese Red Crescent did, for example, is that they wrote to me saying, “We have received your signal of distress; we are going to support your country but through the organisation of Uganda Red Cross, and you will supervise the way they will handle the resources which will be mobilised.” So, we directly control what happens in those organisations - (Interjections) - We do. 

The Minister of Finance will probably explain why the supplementary budget has not been mobilised. That is for the Ministry of Finance. My business is to indicate to you the justification for going to work with the Red Cross. It is not by accident; they are supposed to do that- (Interjections) - They do that automatically.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have some order in the House?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the honourable minister for giving way. You made two statements. I do not want to purport in any way to speak for the Ministry of Finance but I think this is the challenge Government must face. You cannot advocate for the creation of a contingency fund when Government continues to financially misbehave with supplementary requests.

Mr Speaker, I want to tell you that currently, one of the issues the IMF Board is looking at critically in regard to the Ugandan portfolio is the issue of unpredictable supplementary budgets. So, if we have many supplementary budgets, the Ministry of Finance cannot have excess money to create the contingency fund. You cannot have your cake and eat it. We either stop supplementary budgets, stick to the budgets we have approved here and then allow excess funds to go to the contingency fund or we shall continue asking the Ministry of Finance, just like asking a cow to produce milk it cannot produce.

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, I do not want to agree anymore with the minister. I am part of the Executive but I have discussed with the Ministry of Finance the need to quickly set aside money for the contingency fund. This is a command that is given to us by the Constitution, and there is no shortcut to it. I am sure when it comes on board it will be very easy for us to fall back on it other than when a challenge presents itself.

I want to conclude by indicating to the House that we will do everything possible to ensure that we cushion the pain of those communities that are right now in distress as we also continue to engage the Ministry of Finance. Mr Speaker, if it is okay, the Minister of Finance is here and he would like to add some flesh to what we have said.

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I have picked two issues, which I think I should clarify so that this House and the country are very clear about them. 

On the question of funding the supplementary, when we present supplementary budgets here we are looking at projections of how either the revenue is being collected or we shall get some kind of grants from somewhere- (Interjections) – Yes, we get grants. That is the truth of the matter. Even today I think we are going to be discussing a loan request. 

Mr Speaker, we run a cash budget and I want this to be very clearly understood. They release money in accordance with the cash we have in our pocket. If the cash is not available, we cannot even meet the demands that Parliament here would have laid down. I have just been consulting with my colleague, hon. Ecweru; we have released to him Shs 300 million - (Interjections) – only! So, one point I want to make very clear is that releases are based on the cash flow. If our cash position is bad, then we have a problem and we cannot meet all the requirements. 

There is a question - and this is the second point- of priorities. We cannot leave Ugandans to die, for example; if it is an emergency, we treat it as an emergency. I want also to warn that if we have to reallocate money from one sector or from one budget line to another, we shall do it. I thought that also should be understood. We will not allow our people to die. We cannot leave an emergency unattended to simply because the little we have is going to something else. That means sacrificing one item for another. 

So, I thought I should warn this House. If for any reason you find that we have not been able to fulfil your desires somewhere, it means priorities have changed and therefore we have given the money to a sector which we think at that particular time is a priority. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I am a bit confused. The minister before us here is a minister of finance, planning and economic development; he knows the process of budgeting and he knows the purpose of budgeting. Maybe I want to educate the minister. Budgeting is about planning revenue and expenditure, and it is appropriated by Parliament basing on the prediction of collections of revenue. A supplementary, however, is unforeseen expenditure, which was not planned for within the normal planning process. 

I want to inform the minister that I have been in touch with Uganda Revenue Authority. Their collection is above normal, which means our cash - (Interjections) - I can inform you. I am informing you. It is the deficit. What we are lacking is only 70 billion less of the predicted collection - (Interjection) - I am informing you. Now you are coming with a supplementary of 490 billion. Is that planning or confusion, and yet the planned activities are not implemented? 

Right now, there is budget suppression of 60 percent in all the ministries. Ministries are not moving. Where is that money going? Sixty percent of what we approved in Parliament is not being provided. There is total confusion in our budgeting process and it is confusing our development. That is why there is inflation. That is why there is suppression of interest, suppression of demands of people and that is why our economy is collapsing! This is the truth. 

Why is the interest rate at 30 percent when a year ago it was at 16 percent? It is because of poor planning. It is because we are in deficit financing. We are spending what we do not have, honourable minister, through supplementary budgets, through draw-downs from Bank of Uganda. I can inform you that there is 4.0 trillion in draw-downs from Bank of Uganda. Honourable members, this is serious and it is affecting our economy. So, hon. Minister of Finance, if you talk like this, it seems you are not in charge. Please, be in charge!    

MR TANNA: I would like to thank the honourable minister. I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. It has been repeatedly practised in this Parliament that the minister stands up and makes a statement and says, “Soon, I am coming with a comprehensive statement.” The same Minister of Finance stood up here when I raised a matter of national importance and we are still waiting for a comprehensive statement on the state of the economy, which was supposed to have been presented a couple of months back. 

We are talking about a national disaster. The minister has said that finance has released Shs 300 million. Shs 300 million might be a lot of money to individuals but for the state and for the nature of disaster which our constituents are facing, which Ugandans are facing, Shs 300 million converts to only 15 tonnes of posho. That is one trailer. If he has given hon. Ecweru and the ministry Shs 300 million and hon. Ecweru got one trailer - he is going to send it to Tororo, to Pader, to Amuru – where is he going to send that one trailer of posho? I think we need to get serious. 

I am seeking clarification from the minister if we do not have the ability to handle the crisis. I heard him carefully saying, “We cannot let Ugandans die and the government is prepared to divert.” I request that a comprehensive statement be presented on the plan of action. How are we going to handle? Two days ago, you read in the newspapers that a bridge collapsed and I lost two constituents in Tororo, between Tororo-Lubongi. Two people died because the bridge collapsed.

There needs to be concerted efforts. Like hon. Amuriat said, we raised this issue four months ago that disaster is looming and hon. Ecweru stood again on that same delivery box and said that they are prepared; now he is falling flat. I would like the hon. Minister of Finance to tell us the truth. Are we really disaster-prepared or we are not? I seek clarification.

THE DEPUTY SEAKER: Honourable minister, please let us finish this. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: First of all, Mr Speaker, I want to correct my brother, hon. Okot Ogong. We are not confused in our heads; we are very clear but if he is confused, that is not my problem.

Hon. Tanna, I agree with you that we must plan, but I want to tell you that a plan and executing a plan are two different things. We could plan today as Parliament for something and tomorrow, parameters change and you have to change course. 

All I want to assure this House, as I said without the risk of repeating myself, is that emergencies are emergencies. Where people’s lives are involved, Government must take responsibility and move in as quickly as possible. The only thing which I want to emphasise again is that – and I also want to correct hon. Okot Ogong - in the last quarter – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This House operates based on the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure, and we have a system. Mr Speaker, I am seeking for your guidance. This Parliament is paid to work. When we take a decision here based on a request from the Executive, like to pass a supplementary, we expect that the Executive is aware that there is money. 

What I thought the minister would tell this country and the House is - why did you make a proposal for supplementary, we passed the supplementary and you have refused to release; when are you releasing the money? Instead of engaging in gymnastics, just tell us when you are releasing the money - full stop - and then you sit down and then we get into other business. So, I am seeking your guidance, Mr Speaker; do our rules allow a minister to become verbose and diversionary?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: I do not know who is more verbose, Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, capture those things and conclude quickly please.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Okay, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much. Colleagues, I will not repeat what I have said. Let us go and look at the case. We will come back to this House and give you an account of what is available in the kit. If Parliament were sitting tomorrow, I would come back here with the statement on this matter. The assurance I want to give this House is that measures will be taken in accordance with the resources available to ensure that people do not -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not see where this is taking us. The minister has not given a very clear response to this. Honourable minister, please be clear and give us a timeframe within which you are going to deal with this issue so that we can move to the next item.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, can I repeat this; releases are dependent on the inflows of revenue. I should make that very clear. So, it is very difficult for me to be very dogmatic right now and say, because I have not checked. I am sorry I must admit, I have not checked with the Uganda Revenue Authority how much –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, you said you are going to come with a comprehensive statement.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Okay, Mr Speaker, I will come back on this Floor - (Interjections) - on Tuesday next week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is coming back on Tuesday with a comprehensive statement capturing these subjects. Do you still have a point of order? 

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I want to draw the attention of the honourable minister to the Public Finance and Accountability Regulations. Before a supplementary comes on the Floor of Parliament, the minister has powers to reallocate as per these regulations. Where he cannot, he is supposed, in collaboration with the Secretary to the Treasury, to find out if there is money in the Treasury or not. 

If the relevant minister will have submitted to the Treasury that he needs money, it is the Secretary to the Treasury’s duty, in conjunction with the minister, to find out whether there is money. Once there is money, a supplementary is forwarded to Parliament.  Once it is approved, money is released. You cannot tell me that the minister consulted the Secretary to the Treasury and then presented a supplementary when there was no money. Therefore, is it in order for the minister, whom I know is well versed in this field, to come to Parliament and tell us that there is no money yet we passed a supplementary? Secondly, Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that a second point of order?

MR SABIITI: Yes, a second point of order. Could the minister tell the House whether the money allocated for that ministry was used somewhere else to justify the claim that this money is not available? Is it in order for him to come and mislead this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, these matters are being raised because people are knowledgeable on the subject (Applause). People are raising these matters because they are urgent and important for this country and its people. I, therefore, still ask you to make a distinctive response to the issues raised. Carefully select your words this time.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I already said that I will come back here on Tuesday. Please let me say the last word on this matter on Tuesday. Thank you (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the gallery this afternoon we have head teachers of Wakiso District Head Teachers Association. They are represented by hon. Rosemary Seninde (Applause).

We also have students from Kampala International University, representing the leadership of Kampala International University Association hailing from Kasese District. They are represented by hon. Winfred Kiiza. They have come to witness the proceedings today. Please join me in welcoming them. You are all welcome (Applause).

Honourable members, we are not doing well on time. Members had requested to raise some other matters so I would ask those with procedural matters to raise them then we move forward. Hon. Wamai, yours is involving, so I might not allow you now. I want people who can take only two minutes each. Hon. Obote, you come to the Speaker’s Office and you agree that you are going to raise a matter; you do not send a note to the Speaker when he is already sitting here (Laughter).

3.22
MS AKOL ROSE (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Two weeks ago, I raised an issue of national importance to do with the national population and housing census. This was to do with the resources that were appropriated by this House. By the time Ministry of Finance released the fourth quarter, they had not fulfilled their commitment to release the total Shs 19 billion that was appropriated by this House. They have another Shs 5.5 billion to release in order for UBOS to be in time with the calendar for the national housing and population census. 

I raised this issue and the Minister of Finance requested for two weeks in order to come and give an answer to this House. Today, it is two weeks and one day. Therefore, I would like to hear from the Minister of Finance whether this money amounting to Shs 5.5 billion appropriated by this House will be released in time in order for UBOS to be on schedule for the national census that is due in August. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is a straightforward matter; no debate. Honourable minister, please respond. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence to let me combine this one together with the question of disaster. Let me combine these questions and I answer them on Tuesday. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It means he does not have the information right now. We do not want to be groping in the dark seeking for information that is not here. 

3.25
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on an issue of national importance but also to seek your indulgence and guidance on the matter. As members are aware, we have been having protracted campaigns for members who want to go and represent this country in the East African Legislative Assembly. We started the process of amending our rules right from the time we started this session, which process was halted because we are waiting for a ruling from Arusha. Although I have not seen the ruling of the court, I am aware that court ruled today and granted an injunction halting the EALA elections until the Rules of Procedure are made by our Parliament taking into account the provisions of the Treaty, specifically Article 50 of the Treaty. 

Mr Speaker, according to the time table we have, we are supposed to be going for recess on 17th of this month, which is next week. The information we also have is that the current members of EALA are supposed to be going back to Arusha on 20th for their last sitting. That leaves a week in between. Also, EALA Assembly is supposed to be sworn in on the 4th June of this year. 

The guidance I seek is how our Parliament is going to handle these processes of having the rules in place, also bearing in mind that our members are also going to Arusha for their final session, but more importantly, being in time to elect the members of the Assembly before the 4th of June this year. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member, for raising that issue. We all know that by now we should have finished with our rules, and you all know the reasons why we did not. On three occasions, we tried to finish the rules but we could not. I do not want to raise the reasons why, but we know why. Because we did not complete the rules, we got caught up with these litigations in the court in Arusha. The rules, as we speak, are not complete. The amendments are not finished. Right now, all we have are the old rules, part of which have been challenged successfully in court. So we do not have rules under which we can carry out an election competently. 

The thing to do is to first finish with the rules quickly, and the circumstances that led us to finish the rules in the past should be changed. This requires all the whips in the House to deal with the members so that we can be competent to take decisions on matters of the rules. This should be done urgently so that once the rules are complete – the rules regulating the elections of the East African Legislative Assembly as provided for under the Treaty in Article 50 – nothing prohibits this Parliament from carrying out elections in one day. 

Can I call upon the whips and the members because in the course of next week, this matter will be brought back for its completion? We can then conclude the rules and a date should quickly be set so that we finish with the elections for these people. We need to first finish with the rules. For us to finish with the rules there are certain conditions to be fulfilled before we can deal with the rules, especially those that will require voting. You are aware of what I am saying, and I do not want to say more than that. Is it agreed that the whips and honourable members will make sure that we are there and we are able to deal with the rules? 

Hon. Wamanga-Wamai had a matter and I am giving you one minute to raise it.

3.31
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will take a very short time and I will oblige. 

I stand on a matter of national importance. As I speak now, my people in Mbale are living under fear. The security agencies, the RDCs who were appointed on patronage and tribal lines and are inexperienced, are arresting my people and dumping them in prison, and they do it on Fridays. They then extort money from those who have been locked in. This came out when the Inspector-General of Police visited Mbale. While at Mbale Resort Hotel, he had a list of about 40 people. So he sent his agents to go and summon these people to Mbale Resort Hotel. When they went, he was trying to convince them with envelopes to join the other side. I wanted to assure members here that the people of Mbale are a hard rock to crack. You know what the mountain people go through; they are not very easy to crack at all. 

Tomorrow is Friday, and the cases brought against these people are concocted - terrorism. Last Friday, they arrested Hajji Musa Miya and they put him in. He had to part with Shs 2.0 million before he was released. Surely, are we going back to those dark days of the 70s? If you want to convince somebody, do not intimidate. The Bagisu are intimidable! I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you, hon. Wamanga-Wamai. Is Government aware about this situation in Mbale?             

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I told the Minister for Security.

3.33
THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, the honourable member is raising an issue that some Government quarters had not heard about. I will ask the honourable member to avail us with information so that we can be in a position to relate with the ministries and agencies that are handling security matters because this is not our normal way of doing things. So I request hon. Wamanga-Wamai to provide information so that we can take up this matter.

MS OSEGGE: I thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I am bewildered and I need your guidance. Many a time when a situation is raised in this House, it looks like the ministers are not aware. It is like Government does not know what is happening to its people and yet we have all these agencies right from LCI. You have security agencies at all levels of governance in this nation, you have two RDCs with two assistants in every district and you have DISOs and GISOs. What are they doing and yet they are being paid with the taxpayers’ money?

Mr Speaker, you need to guide me; is it necessary to have this? Do we still have a government that is awake – (Interjections) – For every situation that is raised in this House, honestly speaking, the ministers give an excuse that they were not aware! So why do we have all these levels of governance and what are they doing? 

MS BUSINGYE: I thank you, Mr Speaker. My colleague is talking as if she is not part and responsible for her constituency and the people there. Is it in order for her, a person representing the people, to allege that it is the responsibility of the ruling party to take concern and report any inconveniences arising or happening in your district as if the Opposition is sleeping and does not care for its people? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it goes back to what I have repeatedly said. If there is a matter that has arisen, it is important that you notify the ministers responsible so that they can prepare to give a response. When they have the information and they say they do not have it, then you will be able to say that you told them and it will be easy. Hon. Musa Ecweru, for example, has already taken steps about the situation in Kole because the honourable member informed him in advance. He has already started action on Kole, but when the matter comes here and nobody seems to have information, what do you expect? 

What normally happens, and this is what I do, is that when members come to my Office and they say that they want to raise matters of urgent public importance, I go the extra mile to notify a minister. On Tuesday, hon. Betty Amongi was going to raise it but I could not get through to the Minister for Foreign Affairs on phone even after I called 15 times, but today he has come with a statement prepared. I have repeatedly said that it is helpful. It helps a lot!

I have guided you because you are saying the government team does not know anything on the matters that are being raised. I am saying that sometimes when they have the information, they do. Sometimes the matters come on the Floor of this House when nobody has previous information, just like matters have been raised now and we have pushed them to Tuesday as people look for more information on them. So it will be helpful.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I do appreciate, and I took that into consideration. I did write to the Minister for Security that week and he indeed answered but they have not done anything. I did raise it. I took your advice, Mr Speaker, and I wrote to the minister. He even replied and I have the reply.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But then you should have said that when you were raising the matter.


MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Yes, I did. He has not answered and he is the Leader of Government Business. I cannot stand on the Floor of Parliament and raise an issue which is not of national importance.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, what I am saying is that it is important but there has to be an immediate response from the other side. 

3.39
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On what hon. Jack Wamanga-Wamai has raised, I happened to have gone to Mbale Police Station on Labour Day; they had arrested four people and they had been arrested on Friday. One of them was still in chains even when inside prison.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chains or handcuffs?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Handcuffs but they were like chains -(Laughter) - Mr Speaker, he was a one Hassad Bbumba. What I am trying to say is that immediately I called the leadership of the Police and asked them why anybody could be in the cells while handcuffed. That was very bad!
Secondly, I contacted one of the ministers, and I do not want to mention him here, to kindly look into this matter urgently. So, Mr Speaker, for them to say that they are not aware is not true. That is unfair! What they are doing in Mbale is to arrest people on a Friday, and I am told that they demand money after. In fact, when we went there, the Police were hostile initially and I told them that people are entitled to see people in cells. So, this matter is very serious. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mafabi, which minister did you talk to?

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Speaker, for today I will spare him but I will – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please tell us the minister. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay. I spoke to the Minister for Security and we agreed that I talk to you and he said he was going to take urgent action. I even talked to the Police leadership. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the issue is that you are going to come back on Tuesday with this matter. In the meantime, steps should be taken to ensure that these things are dealt with while you come back with a statement on Tuesday. Is that okay?

STATEMENT OF BUSINESS FOR NEXT WEEK

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is happening? It is item No. 3 but nobody responding, so we go to item no. 4. 

MR DAUDI MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, I beg to request that we submit on item No. 3 at a later stage, if you will kindly permit us. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT
3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Richard Nduhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do note that copies for members are not yet here although I am very ready. I, therefore, propose that you give me a few minutes so that I can have enough copies for the members. They will be here in 15 minutes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What was the matter?

DR NDUHURA: This is an update on nodding disease, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have a copy here. What has happened? 

DR NDUHURA: I do not have copies for members. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are the copies being run? 

DR NDUHURA: The copies are not yet in the House. They are on their way here. So, if you could give me a few minutes – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am being advised that copies are supplied by the ministry and you brought only three copies. 

DR NDUHURA: Three copies are not enough for all the members. I have made arrangements to have enough copies and in a few minutes they will be here. So, I beg to propose that we consider the next ministerial statement as those copies come. 

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I stand to be guided. Several of us sit on the various committees of Parliament and we do interact with most of these ministers. The fact of the matter is that these ministers have a problem. Some of them seem to be willing and able to work but we do not see their effectiveness. Some of them seem to be willing but are not able. 

I sit on the finance committee of Parliament and if you look at our ministers especially of finance, God has exposed them here today and we have even been talking about it sometimes. There is some laxity in these ministers here! How can we, as Members of Parliament, be guided by you or this House to make sure that these ministers are working and are executing their mandate for which they were created for? Now some ministers come here and waste a lot of time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, on Tuesday we were here and I made the order that this statement be made today. I am also waiting for the statement whose copy I have in my hands. As to why there are no sufficient copies, I do not know. 

DR NDUHURA: Mr Speaker, I have been very clear; I said that copies of the statement are on their way here. You can be sure that we will not leave this House before this statement is made. If you could allow, just give me a few minutes and all these members will have copies. Mr Speaker, I pray. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think let us take the next statement and we will come back to this.

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, we have read in many newspapers about the so-called conflict between Parliament and the Executive. We know very well that the Cabinet is supposed to present what is supposed to be discussed because they are responsible for policy. How can Parliament be delayed, inconvenienced and time is wasted? The taxpayer is paying for Parliament to do its duties and we just come here to waste time. 

I need your guidance on this, Mr Speaker. Could you please direct the Executive to know their duties and come prepared? Many times have we found out that we cannot discuss what has been put on the Order Paper because of their negligence? So, I request that given your role as the Speaker of this Parliament, you direct the Executive to always do their duties as clearly stipulated in the Constitution and the laws of this country. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue we are discussing is about the lives of Ugandans. You did direct that the minister comes today. The honourable minister is telling the House that copies of the statement are on the way. We do not know how far away the statement is, whether it is now near the entry of the Parliament or Wandegeya or somewhere, and the mode of transport that will bring it here. We want the minister to be very clear on this because “before the end of the day” can be by 6.00p.m. or 7.00p.m.

With your guidance, Mr Speaker, I would like to say that since this issue is very sensitive and more are dying as we delay, probably we could have copies and we request our Parliament to run these copies so that this issue is discussed for the good and to save Ugandans out there. I beg for your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have already spent almost 20 minutes in the session but not moving at all. I had proposed that we give the minister benefit of doubt since he has said that the statement is coming. I am saying this because after all, we are still here and there are two other statements that are on the Order Paper. Can we keep handling those as we wait for the minister’s statement.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MINERALS (Mr Peter Lokeris): Mr Speaker and honourable members, because of the magnitude of the matter, – (Laughter) – we are yet making wider consultations. I therefore beg you to allow us present the statement next week. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have been informed that there is a statement on the limestone mining license for Hima Cement present in the House now. The minister is requesting that he presents it next week. Whatever you do, just bear in mind that this statement cannot be presented now. So, should we waste time on it?

HON. MEMBERS: No!

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Henry Okello Oryem): Mr Speaker and honourable members, permit me to present a statement on the situation in the Republic of Sudan and Republic of Southern Sudan. Members will recall that the ongoing violent conflict between Sudan and South Sudan has prompted the United Nations Security Council to pass Resolution 2046 of 2 May 2012 urging the two states to cease hostilities, failure of which will attract sanctions.

The 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) between the Khartoum regime and the South Sudan Liberation Army/Movement, which was signed in Naivasha, Kenya in 2005 provided for unity or self determination for South Sudan amongst other conditions. You will all recall that this question was subjected to a referendum in January 2011 in which the majority of South Sudanese voted for the cessation of South Sudan. Consequently, on the 9 July 2011, South Sudan became an independent state. 

However, even after getting independent, some issues in the CPA remained unresolved. These include: The sharing of oil revenues; demarcating the borders; the Abyei question; the rights of each nation’s nationalities; and status of the Blue Nile and South Kordofan States.

As members will recall, before the current violent conflict, the two countries had been engaged in negotiations facilitated by the AU High-level Implementation Panel (AUHIP) led by former South African President, Thabo Mbeki, to agree on the transit fees that landlocked South Sudan has to maintain to use the oil infrastructure in Sudan. However, before an agreement could be reached, the violence broke out.

Demarcating the border is another component of the CPA that has not been fully implemented. An agreement on the demarcation of the border was signed on 13 March 2012 and it provides for the immediate commencement of demarcation and completion of the exercise within three months. It also provided for the establishment of a joint border commission and committee by the end of March 2012 to oversee the demarcation of the boundary. However, this agreement is yet to be implemented by both parties.

The Abyei Question

Members will recall that the CPA provided for a referendum to be held simultaneously with the one that was held in South Sudan, in which it was expected that the people of Abyei would decide whether to remain part of Sudan or be part of South Sudan. Unfortunately, this referendum has not been held due to disagreements on eligible voters. The dispute over the ownership of Abyei caused violent clashes in 2011 until the UN Interim Security Force in Abyei was deployed to contain the situation. 

The rights of each other’s nationals is an issue that arose after the cessation of South Sudan. In March 2012, a framework agreement on the status of nationals of each state living in the other state and related matters was signed. This agreement addressed the issue of citizenships and nationalities by granting “four freedoms” to be enjoyed by the nationals of each state when in the other state. These freedoms are: the freedom of residence, freedom of movement, freedom to undertake economic activities and the freedom to acquire and dispose of property.

The situation in the Blue Nile and the South Kordofan States is yet another aspect of the CPA that is yet to be implemented. Members will recall that in 2005, the CPA provided for the withdrawal of forces by both parties from the 1956 border line. However, this has not been done. The CPA also provided for popular consultations in these regions to address political questions, but this too has not yet been done.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, you will recall that prior to the current violence, negotiations between Sudan and South Sudan had been ongoing facilitated by the AUHIP led by the former South Africa President, Thabo Mbeki, with the support of IGAD. The AU Peace and Security Council issued a communiqué on 24 April 2012 in which it ordered the two states to stop fighting within 48 hours. To reinforce the AU Communiqué, the UN Security Council adopted resolution 2046 on 2 May 2012 in which the parties were asked to immediately:
1. 	Cease hostilities; 
2. 	Activate border security mechanisms within a week;
3. 	Resume negotiations within two weeks;
4. 	Reach consensus on oil and related payments, status of nationals, demarcation of borders and status of Abyei within two weeks;
5. 	Cooperate with the AUHIP to reach a negotiated settlement on security arrangements in the Blue Nile and the South Kordofan States;
6. 	Permit humanitarian access to these areas; and
7. 	Reach a final agreement within three months.

Uganda is one of the guarantors of the CPA hence it has the obligation to ensure its full implementation, which will be the foundation of the stability of both Sudan and South Sudan. Uganda is committed to supporting a negotiated settlement of the dispute between Sudan and South Sudan within the IGAD/AU framework. Particularly, Uganda is committed to supporting the following:

1. 	The memorandum of understanding on non-aggression signed on the 10 February 2012.

2. 	The withdrawal of armed forces from each other’s territory and cessation of aerial bombardment.

3. 	The respect and protection of oil fields and installations.

4. 	African Union roadmap as contained in the communiqué issued on 24 April 2012.

5. 	Resumption of negotiations as outlined in the UN SC Resolution 2046 of 2 May 2012. 

Members will note that Government is concerned that continued insecurity in Sudan and South Sudan could directly threaten Uganda’s national security. It should be noted that the persistent violence between Sudan and South Sudan has already led to the influx of South Sudanese asylum seekers into Uganda, and we are likely to see a further influx of refugees. 

To contribute to the peace efforts in Sudan and South Sudan, the Government of Uganda shall support the AU and the UN resolutions and play an active role within the IGAD framework in the capacity as a guarantor of the CPA. Uganda stands committed to the need for peace and harmony between Sudan and South Sudan.  We shall continue to urge for tolerance, patience and avoidance of acts of provocation. We believe that the region will benefit with a peaceful Sudan living side by side with South Sudan. 

To this effect, I urge and pray to colleagues that we similarly restrain from any statements regarding the ongoing situation between these two countries. I request that henceforth, you allow the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to be the channel of communication and pronouncement on the South Sudan and Sudan situation.  

I thank the House for listening attentively and for the patriotic interest in this matter. This matter is at the moment highly sensitive and I call for utmost restraint. Wounds are still raw, tempers are high, so I kindly request that we leave the statement at that. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the statement that we requested for on Tuesday. It has been delivered by the minister responsible for foreign affairs. His plea is that the matter is sensitive, it is raw, it is current, and debate into areas that could escalate tensions or could misrepresent our country’s position should be avoided. That is the appeal made by the minister, which I am re-echoing. However, let me allow the hon. Betty Amongi who raised this question to make a comment within those confines. 

4.02 
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and to agree with him that this matter should be dealt with within the framework of IGAD, AU and UN as stated. 

The concerns of the members were that you should restrain some of the comments being made by the Generals, commanders and Army Spokesperson, which we felt were outside the confines articulated in your statement. So, I hope that now that you agree that this matter be dealt with within the framework and the context of the UN resolution, the AU communiqué and the IGAD, you will kindly restrain all government officials, including UPDF Generals, from dealing with this matter in the press and use the right framework to raise the matter. Mr Speaker, I think I should stop there. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We are trying to avoid going into debate on this issue. Let us hear from the Shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs. 

4.03
THE SHADOW MINISTER, FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Jack Wamanga-Wamai) Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Foreign Affairs for making this statement on the Sudan. However, in future, for any issue concerning Uganda and a foreign country, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should come and tell the nation instead of leaving the people in darkness. Until hon. Amongi raised the issue, the ministry had not made a statement and yet they had heard the Army Commander making a statement. So, such issues in future should be handled under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; the ministry should come out and make a statement so that the country knows which line to take instead of leaving the country to take other lines. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I said we should not debate this matter. Honourable members, can you respect this, please? (Mr Okot Ogong rose_) You have a proposal on what now? The statement has been made, the cautions have been made on the Floor; can we respect that and move forward? 

4.05
MRS CECELIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you for allowing us to at least give our comments, however short. Mr Speaker, I have listened to the statement of the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs but I have not seen any element that triggers hostility between Uganda and Sudan. Is there anything which has not been stated here which triggers hostility between Uganda and Sudan? It is important that we get to know that. 

Secondly, it is important that there are certain things we cannot keep hiding. If there is anything that Ugandans need to know so that we can intervene before it explodes in the war, it is important that we be informed so that we can see how best to handle it. However, it is very clear that when you hear the statement made by the Ambassador of Sudan on what is happening, it indicates that there is a very powerful force that is coming and is likely to trigger off war that will affect Uganda. So it is important that we discuss it in whatever forum. I thank you.

4.07
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for this important statement. I note on page 2 it says that AU Peace and Security Council and indeed the United Nations Security Council have come up with a number of measures that should be taken. I think that is what should guide what should really be going on. 

I would like to make one serious comment from page 3, the first paragraph, which states: “Madam Speaker…” (Laughter) That is what is stated here. I hope he meant “Mr Speaker”. It states: “Uganda is one of the guarantors of the CPA, hence under obligation to ensure its full implementation. Full implementation of the CPA will be the foundation of stability in both Sudan and South Sudan.”  If one can interpret this, I would request that Uganda being a member of the United Nations, this region and the AU, Uganda should not seemingly come out to be doing the work as if it is Uganda alone. We expect Uganda to work with other countries but not to champion the cause. 

We have seen in the past that our involvement in the neighbouring countries has cost Uganda a lot in terms of money and human beings. Therefore, I would request that Uganda be cautious in terms of just moving as a country alone without moving with other countries to sort out this problem. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you seen the next paragraph? It contains the same things you are making comments on.

MR SABIITI: Yes, but I am advising the Government of Uganda, which is responsible as per the Constitution, that they should be cautious in the move they take and not be alone but to move as AU and United Nations.

4.10
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, Parliament is a very critical institution in this matter, and I would like to appeal to Government or to Parliament that next time Government briefs Members of Parliament in camera so that we can discuss this matter in camera.

I also want to propose that Parliament should play an active role in this matter because even in the previous parliaments, we have actually played a big role in bringing peace in Northern Uganda, in the country and also in Sudan. Therefore, we should come out with a strategy of trying to bring the two warring parties together. Parliament can send a delegation to those governments to assure them that as Members of Parliament of Uganda we are willing to cooperate with them so that we have peace in the entire region. So, we need to constitute a team to play this role of mediating between the warring parties. That is what I would want to suggest, so that we move together. 

However, we need to be informed and discuss in camera. There is other information that we know but we cannot say now. We need to discuss with Government in camera.

4.11
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I know what is bringing a lot of problems in Sudan is really that pending referendum, which accordingly was – (Interjection)- There is a referendum, which was not held in Abyei area because according to South Sudan, there was a tendency of trying to rig by bringing in people who should not participate in that referendum to do so by the Khartoum Government. That is a big problem. At least I interacted with some of them and the contested area is the oil area.

It is very unfortunate because we do not want to live with war again. On 1st May, we had Labour Day in Gulu and I think what His Excellency said was not right. You know, even if you are as strong as anything, you must know that human lives will go if we choose the option of war. Accordingly, it was said that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we said we are not going to go into those areas. You are now adding what I had tried to avoid. Please, let us keep this thing within the framework of what has been presented. We should not escalate situations by our words again. Please, if it was said there, let it end there. Let us not get involved, please.

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, then I would like to suggest that Southern Sudan helped us alot to realise a bit of peace in Northern Uganda, so it is also upon us now to think hard about how we should come up with a peaceful option. We should see how to come up with a dialogue package to see that war does not break out in Southern Sudan or in Sudan.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but honourable member, you would also recall that it was Bashir who was the President of the whole of Sudan who gave the Ugandan government authority to enter Sudan and stay there and extend. That is why we are handling it in a delicate way. We cannot talk about South Sudan only; we need to balance the whole thing. That is why we are being cautious about what we are saying. Can we conclude this now? Honourable minister, was there an item that you needed to respond to?

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. Let me thank colleagues for their contributions, and I thank them for their understanding that we cannot have an open debate. I could not raise some issues in detail due to the nature of the subject matter.

As hon. Sabiiti said, the Government of Uganda will continue being cautious. Our position will be to ensure that the CPA is fulfilled to its full implementation, and the CPA again will be within the IGAD context and not outside it. We will continue working and making our position within the AU and within the Security Council. At no time will we make any statements or take any unilateral position on this matter. All statements and actions will be in the context of IGAD, AU or within the context of the United Nations Security Council and nothing unilaterally. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Is the statement from the minister ready now? 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) Dr Richard Nduhuura: Mr Speaker, following the arrival of the awaited statement, I now beg to do the needful. 

The Government of Uganda and its partners have continued to roll out emergency interventions in response to the nodding syndrome cases reported in the Acholi sub-region. These efforts are in fulfilment of the Government’s obligation to support response to all national emergencies. Substantial resources have been mobilised from government and partners to facilitate the implementation of the National Nodding Syndrome Response Plan. This report highlights key activities taken since the 28th February this year. 

The overall coordination of nodding syndrome response activities is currently being undertaken by the Office of the Prime Minister. The national coordination committee is constituted of key players from the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education and Sports, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. This committee meets weekly to ensure that there is adequate implementation of the agreed upon interventions as laid out in the response plan. 

At the ministerial level, the national taskforce continues to coordinate the health sector response. The taskforce constitutes technical programmes in the Ministry of Health, the Office of the Prime Minister, Makerere University College of Health Sciences, partner organisations like the World Health Organisation, Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, UNICEF, MSF, AFENET and the Uganda Red Cross. Sub-committees are in place to oversee the implementation of the priority activities including case management, surveillance, social mobilisation, research, and resource mobilisation. 

At the district level, corresponding taskforce committees remain active and operational and are directly responsible for coordinating and monitoring the implementation of the response plan. On May 2nd 2012, chairpersons and secretaries – who are the DHOs - of the respective district taskforces presented their nodding disease work plans and budgets to the national taskforce committee. 

The Ministry of Health acted swiftly in mobilising ample resources to facilitate implementation of the response activities. Initially, a total of Shs l00 million was mobilised internally from the Ministry of Health budget to support establishment of screening and treatment centres in the three districts of Kitgum, Pader and Lamwo. Subsequently, a supplementary budget request to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was made for Shs 3.85 billion. Out of this, Shs 2.75 billion was released and Shs 1.1 billion was obtained from reallocations within the Ministry of Health budget to support nodding syndrome emergency response activities till the end of December this year. A total of Shs l.8 billion from the supplementary funding will be used to support the health sector response while the balance will be used by the other sectors. 

Following the presentation of the district response plans, the Ministry of Health has approved, and is in the process of releasing, the funds to the affected district as follows: 
(i) 	Gulu District 	– Shs 50,000,000 
(ii) 	Pader District 	– Shs 115,700,000 
(iii) 	Lamwo District 	– Shs l01,369,000
(iv) 	Kitgum District 	– Shs 98,500,000 
(v) 	Lira Regional Referral Hospital  - Shs l0,000,000
(vi) 	Gulu Regional Referral Hospital - Shs l0,000,000.

The above funds are in the process of being disbursed to the district accounts to roll out implementation of the agreed upon activities. The funds will initially be released for two months and replenished after the first month to cover for the remaining months up to December 2012. 

Provision of food

Subsequent to the conclusion of a rapid needs assessment, the Office of the Prime Minister supplied 20,000 kilogrammes of posho and 11,000 kilogrammes of beans to the treatment centres. In addition, fortified meals are being supplied through the Uganda Red Cross Society for porridge for patients’ breakfast. 

The World Health Organisation has sent an expert from its regional office for Africa to work with nationals to develop standardised nodding syndrome guidelines. The organisation funded the training of health workers who are currently deployed in the treatment centres. 

The World Health Organisation sent an expert from its regional office in Africa to work with the Ugandan nationals to develop standardised case management and training manuals. As I have already said, the World Health Organisation together with the Ministry of Health funded the training of health workers who are currently deployed in the treatment centres. 

The World Health Organisation is in addition coordinating an international conference on nodding disease that will bring together experts to share best practices and initiate collaborative research projects to determine the cause and identify a cure for the disease. 

The Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has committed resources to support suspected nodding syndrome case verifications in the districts of Gulu and Amuru. The CDC will also fund and collaborate with local researchers to conduct at least three studies into the cause and identify effective medicines for managing the syndrome. 

CASE MANAGEMENT 

Following the establishment of treatment centres in the three affected districts, a total of 97 health workers were trained to manage the clinics and conduct outreach programmes to the affected communities. Assorted medicines, including Sodium Valproate, Carbazepine, Vitamin B Complex, and sundries worth Shs 150 million, have been supplied to the facilities for treatment of the registered cases. The National Medical Stores has received an order of 570,000 quantities of Sodium Valproate and is yet to deliver it. 

KITGUM HOSPITAL

At Kitgum Hospital, since March 2012, a cumulative total of 534 nodding syndrome and 332 epilepsy cases have been seen in the outpatient screening centres. Of these, 74 were admitted in the treatment centre. Access to the treatment centre is however limited due to long distances. 

Drugs

Since the opening of the centre, the hospital has received assorted medicines and sundries that include 33,500 tablets of Sodium Valproate. These were all consumed by the patients, forcing the National Medical Stores to replenish the stocks. The hospital has made a fresh requisition of 270,000 tablets of Sodium Valproate worth Shs 297 million, which is in the process of being dispatched from the National Medical Stores. 

Equipment 

Using the available funds, basic equipment has been provided at the treatment facilities. These include thermometers and blood pressure machines. In addition to the medical care being given at the centre, epileptic patients with severe burns are being provided with minor surgical services. The centre has also received eight patients from Atanga Health Centre under the referral arrangement. 

Health workers

The centre has a total of 20 health workers, including nursing officers, medical clinical officers and psychiatric medical officers working on the wards and screening centres. These will all be paid an allowance of Shs 10,000 per day. Modalities are being formalised with the district to ensure that they are paid in addition to the arrears obtained since the centre opened. 

Deaths

Since the opening of the treatment centres, Kitgum Hospital has registered only one death which was of an epileptic child from Abam Village in Lamwo District. 

LAMWO DISTRICT

Since March, a total of 82 nodding syndrome cases and 52 epilepsy cases had been seen in the OPD in Palabek Kal Health Centre III, Palabek Gem Health Centre III and Palabek Ogili Health Centre III, with only 16 of the nodding syndrome cases being treated at an outreach centre. Only five admissions had been registered; two cases in Padibe Health Centre IV and three cases in Palabek Kal. The centre has since its opening received 3,000 doses of Sodium Valproate, which is still available for more patients.

Health Workers 

In Lamwo District, the centres have 16 health workers managing the patients. The patients however, still face the same problem of long distance to the treatment centres. 

PADER DISTRICT 

Since the month of March, a total of 528 nodding syndrome cases and 346 epilepsy cases have been screened and treated at Atanga Health Centre III. 

Health Workers

Atanga Health Centre III has 15 health workers managing incoming patients. These are directly being paid for under the response plan budget under the Ministry of Health.

Outreach Programmes 

The Ministry of Health is working with Medical Team International to conduct weekly outreach programmes. So far, 231 patients from Lapul Cwida Village in Atanga Sub-county have received treatment under this arrangement.

Drugs 

The centre has sent in a requisition of 300,000 doses of Sodium Valproate, which is yet to be delivered by the National Medical Stores. Two deaths were reported to have taken place in the community in Pader District in Laguti and Angagura sub-counties.

Similar challenges are being experienced as observed in Kitgum and Lamwo and the ministry has taken appropriate measures to address them. Good clinical response continues to be registered in all the nodding syndrome and epilepsy cases that have been started on treatment and are taking the medicine as prescribed by the health workers. Parents and caretakers are therefore being counselled on the need to give the treatment daily. So far, 119 patients in Kitgum and 386 patients in Pader have reported for review and follow up.

Transport 

The Ministry of Health is in the process of procuring four vans and eight motorcycles to support transport for the treatment centres. Two vans and four motorcycles will be given to Pader District, one van and two motorcycles to Lamwo District, and one van and two motorcycles to Kitgum District. 

Surveillance

A total of 124 health workers from the three affected districts were trained on nodding syndrome surveillance with support from the World Health Organisation. The trained surveillance teams are currently coordinating the aggregation of data on all cases screened and treated. 

The Ministry of Health is in the process of facilitating the districts to train village health teams on case identification, registration and the eventual coordination of case referral and outreaches to ensure that all cases are screened and started on treatment. All the suspected cases registered at the community level by the village health team will be systematically assessed, treated and followed up. Nodding syndrome registers are currently being used to register all nodding syndrome cases and deaths at each of the designated treatment and screening centres in the three affected districts.

Interventions in Reported Cases in other Districts
Nodding syndrome case verification protocols have been finalised. This will facilitate investigations into the reports of new cases from various districts. Currently, two districts of Gulu and Amuru have reported new cases of nodding syndrome which the Ministry of Health is in the process of verifying. 

Research

All research activities are being coordinated by the research sub-committee of the national task force. The committee brings together several partners including the World Health Organisation, the Centre for Disease Control, and Gulu and Makerere universities that have offered to collaborate with the Ministry of Health. At least seven research teams have been reviewed by the committee and they are:
•	Clinical and neurological studies.
•	Epidemiological studies.
•	Burden of disease community census.
•	Ecological and environmental risk factors.
•	Nutrition studies.
•	Toxicological studies. 
•	Impact of nodding syndrome on 		education.
•	Nodding disease autopsy studies. 
•	Anthropological studies on nodding disease
•	Autopsy studies; this will help to identify the cause of the disease and its progression to death. This is very important in that it will help to understand better the disease.

The research protocols have received the necessary approval and will commence soon. A total of Shs 400 million from the supplementary budget funding has been allocated towards research activities up to the end of June 2012, that is, the end of the financial year.

Community Education and Social Mobilisation 
The communication strategy for nodding syndrome has been finalised and is being used to tailor the messages to the different segments of the audience including the parents or caretakers, local leaders, teachers and the village health teams.

Talking points for local leaders on nodding syndrome were finalised and translated to facilitate community mobilisation and sensitisation on the disease by all local and civic leaders in the affected districts.

Additionally, the Ministry of Health has conducted social mobilisation programmes by sending out radio messages and other programmes to mobilise parents and caretakers to bring affected children to the screening and treatment centres. The messages further enlighten people about the disease and the importance of adhering to the provided medicines.

In conclusion, the Government and partners have continued to show commitment towards mobilising adequate resources for the nodding syndrome response plan. As a result, substantial resources have been mobilised to initiate the critical emergency response activity. The clinical response from treated cases is encouraging, though a significant number of cases are yet to access the treatment centres. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have had lengthy debates on this matter. We passed a resolution on this matter and a question was raised on Tuesday as to why we are not getting updates on the things that are going on. We then requested that the minister comes with a progress report on what has taken place since we passed that resolution. The minister has now made a statement, so the discussions will be limited to the progress made so far and the gaps that are identifiable and the way forward in trying to fill those gaps. We are not going back to the first principle debates that we dealt with previously. We are now seeing how to move forward on this. I will start with Dr Chris Baryomunsi. Hon. Anywar, I will take you towards the end. 

4.39
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for the update and the informative report which he has given us. I just have some few questions I want to put to the minister.

I want to thank the ministry for the effort so far in containing this nodding disease, which is definitely very new to the scientific community. We appreciate the response so far put across. In your report, apart from one death in Kitgum Hospital you have not indicated to us how many deaths you have registered. When you read in the media, you get an impression that this disease is highly fatal and we are losing children. However in your report, apart from Kitgum Hospital where you indicated that there was one death from epilepsy, you never indicated that children are dying. 

It would have been beneficial for you to give us a tabulation of how many children or cases of nodding syndrome have been reported or have been received in various health centres, how many have been successfully treated and discharged, how many have died and how many are still hospitalised. This would help us get a clear picture of the situation. The way you have arranged your information is not very clear for us to get the situation on the ground. 

Secondly, we know that this case was first reported in 2009, a few years back, but from your report you are telling us you are ordering for Sodium Valproate and the National Medical Stores is yet to deliver. You are saying you are in the process of procuring ambulances and are yet to get them and many other items. What is the problem? This is an emergency situation; you should be able to get drugs in an emergency manner. Is there a problem with the National Medical Stores in delivering these supplies or you are just taking it as a normal and routine kind of process? I just want to know whether there are any setbacks you are experiencing. 

Lastly, are there any requests you want to make to Parliament in addressing the nodding disease syndrome? Any requests from the Ministry of Health or you are satisfied with the status quo? When we listen to the leaders from Northern Uganda, they present as if not much is being done. Do you agree with them or do you think you are fully satisfied? Have you received all the resources you require? I want clarification from the minister on those matters. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will limit it to two minutes. Make your observations quick and to the point. 

4.42
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the presentation and Government for the efforts put in. On the issue of un-dispersed drugs, I am grateful it has not been indicated that the drugs are not there but I wish to know when they will be dispersed. 

In this document, I see nodding syndrome and epilepsy being mentioned concurrently. I know we know a lot about epilepsy; I want to know whether the signs and symptoms of epilepsy and those of the nodding syndrome are similar. If we do not differentiate the two yet the main threat is the nodding syndrome - In the hospitals, epilepsy has been managed and at least the progress is fairly well. I wish to understand the difference between the two so that we know how to differentiate them. 

Lastly, I wish to be educated on what the mover raised about the age range being affected by the nodding syndrome. At first we were being made to believe it has been affecting children but later, she said even adults are being affected. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.45
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. From a medical point of view, features or symptoms of epilepsy are coupled with this nodding disease, but when I was asking the people who have been going to Northern Uganda they talked about a relationship of this disease with Onchocerciasis. For us, we know there is a test called Mazzotti test which you can do; you just give somebody 50mg of diethylcarbamazine and somebody will react in about 48 hours -(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you still speaking English? (Laughter) 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, I know that if you want to treat this Onchocerciasis, they know they should be giving you some ivermectin but I have not heard the minister talking about ivermectin doses from NMS going to Northern Uganda. I do not know why it has not been put in this report. I do not see it. It possibly means you have not given it. 

On top of that, the money has been spent and they have told us they have been doing some autopsy tests. Now, what do you mean by autopsy? That is doing a post-mortem and you take some brain tissues for studies. I want the Minister of Health to tell us, for those ones who have died and you have taken some brain tissues from them, what has happened? What has killed these children who have died in Northern Uganda? Tell us so that we can know. You are not reporting the outcomes of the autopsies you have taken.

Another important thing is that I have information that the money which was meant to go to Northern Uganda for this nodding disease was delayed in terms of releases. They know I have that information. I have always been saying that as a doctor, when things happen and they are involving lives of human beings, this is where the government has to come up very fast, like you come here for supplementaries when there is a problem in other ministries. When you are a doctor and you see people dying but the concerned are masquerading as if nothing is happening, it becomes a problem. I think it is high time our government learnt how to become very quick in terms of response when things are involving lives of human beings. 

I can assure you if we remain with this kind of attitude and we are always thinking about money from outside, in the event that outsiders do not help us, do we have the capacity to maintain the health of Ugandans ourselves? That is what I want to know, Mr Speaker. It should be the mandate of our government to make sure that we remove this dependency syndrome on outsiders. (Member timed out.)

4.48
DR KENNETH OMONA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the information given to the august House and the efforts his ministry is putting in place against the nodding disease. I just have two clarifications to see from the minister. 

One is why the regional referral hospitals in those areas are to be given only Shs 10 million; will this be able to equip those regional referral hospitals to deal with the emergencies and specialised cases? You may not want to see a case where my dear hon. Beatrice Anywar will again fumble and struggle to bring the children to Mulago. 

Secondly, I want to seek clarification on the research team on autopsy studies, those finding out the daily cause of the disease using parts of the body. Considering the cultural values in those areas, I want to find out from the minister how easy it is for the bereaved to accept autopsies to be carried out on those bodies. Recently, I learnt that of all the deaths, there were only two cases where a post-mortem was done. So I want to know if there are any hurdles this team is facing as far as the cultural and social beliefs are concerned especially with the dead bodies of the nodding disease victims. 

4.50
MS OKETAYOT LOWILA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the statement and I want to thank my sister, hon. Beatrice Anywar, for raising this concern. I know there are still so many fights and challenges as far as the fight against the nodding syndrome is concerned, but I also want to appreciate what the ministry is trying to do. 

In a very special way, I want to appreciate the efforts of the co-ordinator of the implementation of the activities down on the ground, Dr Opak. I appreciate his efforts. This is a man who is ever on the ground, moving to places inspite of the many difficulties and living in some parishes and sub-counties where life is not easy. So, I want to appreciate his efforts. 

My concerns as far as the gaps and challenges are concerned are two or three. One is the issue of transport, procuring the vans. As all of us might have learnt from the reports we have got in Parliament here that Pader District is the most affected district, with more than 1,800 cases. These are cases that are deep in the parishes with very many difficulties in getting all the patients to the health centre. Unfortunately, there is only one centre in Pader District. So I appeal to the ministry to speed up the procurement of these vans to help us bring some of these children to this centre where they can get treatment. 

Further, I have a concern about the distribution of the food items. I am happy about what is happening at the health centre, where meals are being prepared and given to the children while they are at the health centre –(Member timed out.)

4.52
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the efforts government is putting in to contain this situation. 

My concern is about the research. The way the statement is put shows that you have not started on the research. I have found out that the nodding syndrome is associated with epilepsy. I say this because I have information that epilepsy cases and nodding syndrome cases do respond to the same treatment. The minister may be aware that my constituency has several cases of epilepsy. Over 3,000 cases of epilepsy have been registered in Masindi District alone. I do not want us to run into a situation where we fail to contain the nodding syndrome. In your research, you should be able to tell us whether this nodding syndrome is spreading or you have been able to contain it. 

It is important for the research that is being talked about to start very soon. When you talk of using body parts to do research – so far we are very lucky that nobody, according to this statement, has died of the nodding syndrome. The only one you reported was an epilepsy case and not nodding disease. So, could you collaborate with all those and factor in the issue of epilepsy in this research so that our country - Northern Uganda and other areas that are affected by seemingly similar outbreaks - will be helped. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.55
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the good statement and thank him for mobilising the resources. Permit me to draw your attention to the resource utilisation as given on page 4 of this statement. The supplementary budget request was Shs 3.85 billion. Of this, Shs 2.7 was released and Shs 1.1 was obtained by the ministry. This means the ministry actually got the Shs 3.85 billion which was required for this activity.  Below that, we look at how it has been spent. I am yet to understand how out of the Shs 3.85 billion you were giving a district Shs 10 million or Shs 50 million. The total actually given to the districts for their district response plans is only Shs 385 million. That is only 10 percent of the total supplementary budget requested for and released.

Further, on page 5, it shows these funds are not yet there in the districts; they are still being processed. They will initially be released for two months and then replaced after one month and they will cover the period for up to December 2012. We have a problem here; I thought the supplementary budget was actually for this financial year and I thought it was meant to address an emergency, an immediate problem. So why are you telling us that the 10 percent which is going to the districts is for their plans up to the end of the year and the ministry is retaining 90 percent of the funds. Why don’t we allow the local governments, which are on the ground, providing everything in terms of immediate response access not less than 40 percent – (Member timed out.)

4.58
MS FREEDOM KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to respond to what the minister has raised. I would like also to thank him for the effort the ministry has put in. 

The minister has mentioned talking points that have been made for local leaders and also translated into the local languages to mobilise the communities. From what I have heard from the members, I think these talking points should not be concentrated in those districts mentioned. These talking points should be given to all of us so that everybody in the country is aware of what type of disease this one is. 

I also want to respond to the fact that motorcycles and vehicles are going to be procured. I know that in a situation of an emergency, you can mobilise resources from within. I know that in cases of emergency, motorcycles and vehicles could be got from neighbouring districts or from the ministry itself. So as we wait for this procurement to come to the districts, - the two or so - have we got some sources to support these districts? Vehicles from the ministries could be dispatched to the districts that are suffering with these cases.

The last question that I want to ask from the statement is about what the minister said that responses from the treated cases are encouraging. There are even some cases that were here in Mulago and were discharged and we also got the report that they are improving. I would like to know whether this disease is curable or contagious so that we can talk about these things in our communities. I thank you.

4.59
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish that a little more time would be allocated for this. 

That aside, let me start on page 4 where the minister is indicating that some funds are allocated to be disbursed and the districts he mentions include Gulu, Shs 50 million; Pader, Shs 115 million; Lamwo, Shs 101 million; Kitgum, Shs 98 million; Lira and Gulu regional hospitals, Shs 10 million each. I was wondering what these monies are supposed to do because in the subsequent statement, he states that the above funds are in the process of being disbursed and they will be released for two months. For a regional hospital like Gulu, for example, which you have allocated Shs 10 million, it means that you are releasing Shs 5 million and another Shs 5 million after some time. I really wonder what this money is specifically meant to do.

I would also like to reiterate the point that Dr Bitekyerezo made on Onchocerciasis. This syndrome began in Pader District way back, even before I became a Member of Parliament for Pader. I remember that I brought this to the notice of the ministry in the Eighth Parliament. It was called Onchocerciasis because it was actually showing the symptoms that we are now being told is the nodding syndrome. It began from nodding disease and now nodding syndrome but previously Onchocerciasis. So, can you tell us what the problem is? (Member timed out.)

5.02
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the government for the work so far done, however little it is. My concern is that on page 5, we are told about the provision of food but when you read through, you find that the Office of the Prime Minister is supplying 20,000kgs of posho and 11,000kgs of beans to the treatment centres. I feel that this is too little for the many patients that we have.

Secondly, this is not nutritious enough to handle the problem that these people have. We are told, for example, that they do not have appetite and once they see food, they almost fail to eat and just begin nodding. The children need a better – (Interruption) 

MR AMOS OKOT: I thank you so much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. A month ago, the ministry went to open a screening centre and I happened to attend that meeting. The report that has been presented here is quite different from what we found on the ground. On the ground, the Office of the Prime Minister dispersed food and that food was given to the Red Cross to implement the distribution. There was a debate that food should be borrowed and yet the Red Cross was the implementing agency for distribution of the food and the food was meant to be taken to the families that have been affected. 

From the day we had the meeting here regarding this supplementary budget and the money that I see being processed I had a big question mark. On that day, if I recall, even the minister was not willing for us to push for the supplementary budget and now this money is not going. What is happening? This is a very big question in which we have to interest ourselves.

MS ALUM: I thank you, honourable member, for that information. When you read on page 6, we are told that the research project is yet to identify the cause and cure for this disease. How long shall we need to identify the cause and then the cure for this disease? (Member timed out.)

5.05
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi): I thank you. I want to take this opportunity to thank the Government and in particular the minister for his response to this problem. Allow me also to appreciate the efforts put in by hon. Betty Anywar to bring this problem into the limelight. 

Given the magnitude of this problem, I think it is unfair – when you look at page 7 where it talks about health workers – for the minister to say that they are going to give them an allowance of Shs 10,000 per day. It has been said that this disease has been a problem and it is kind of contagious. So, these health workers have been running away from patients, as far as I have been informed. Therefore, this amount of money, I think, is not enough for the workers to be morale boosted. 

Another issue is about transport. Given the fact that people are dying at a very high rate, I do not think procurement would be the option. Let us re-deploy whatever we have in different areas and take these units to these patients so that they are saved from the problem.

The other problem is that the treatment centres are very far from where the patients are. Let us also - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have discussed this matter for a very long time and it is still important. Unless somebody is going to move with another way forward, we are now just repeating ourselves. 

5.07
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, SERERE COUNTY, SERERE): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to move a motion under rule 46 (1)(k) of our Rules of Procedure. Rule 46 is about a motion without notice and (k) is about any motion that the Speaker will certify to be a matter of emergency.

The motion I would like to move is for a resolution of Parliament to declare the areas in Uganda affected by the nodding disease syndrome as a humanitarian emergency area. Mr Speaker, if you will let me proceed.

 “AWARE that the nodding syndrome was first reported in the district of Kitgum in 1998 and reported again in 2009;

RECOGNISING that in subsequent years, over 210 children of Uganda have reportedly died, and another 5,000 children and a yet to be ascertained number of adults have reportedly contracted the nodding syndrome;

AND NOTING with great concern that to date, the growing number of those affected have not been fully facilitated with medical care, food supplements, among other needs;

FURTHER NOTING that the budgetary requirements needed to provide the basic needs and treatment have not been fully realised and yet the inter-ministerial committee handling this matter has now proposed Shs 15 billion towards efforts to curb the situation; 

CONCERNED that to date the full findings of the report by the Centers for Disease Control, Atlanta, on the nodding disease syndrome have not been shared with Ugandans, and yet there is urgent need for preventive intervention, care and management of those affected by the syndrome;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that:

1. 	Government immediately declares the areas affected by the nodding disease syndrome including the districts of Kitgum, Lamwo, Pader and Gulu a humanitarian emergency area;

2. 	Parliament urges Government to mobilise the international community, development partners, donors and well-wishers to urgently support interventions to avert the suffering of our people affected by the syndrome especially the children of Northern Uganda;

3. 	Government urgently tables in Parliament the report made by the Centers for Disease Control on the nodding disease syndrome to enable Parliament to monitor and follow up on the intervention;

4. 	Parliament mandates the social services committee to provide updates on a six-monthly basis on the progress in the intervention on the nodding disease syndrome.” 

I beg to move, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Honourable members, the honourable member has asked for a Speaker’s certificate under rule 46(1) (k): “…any motion certified by the Speaker to be a matter of emergency…” The request of the honourable member does not fall within the category of these rules but falls in the category of what we call incidental motions. These are motions that are moved on the basis of discussion on what is going on the Floor. You do not need to cite any rule to do that. The matter has come before the House, the debate is going on and you realise that there is a better way to resolve the matter and you propose a motion called an incidental motion. With this, you do not need to cite any rules. So, the motion is presented and seconded. 

I propose the question for debate and I will limit it to 20 minutes, allowing two minutes’ contributions after allowing the honourable member to justify her motion and the seconder to speak. It is an incidental motion. You have heard the content of what has been proposed; please speak to it and we allow the debate and take a decision on the matter if possible. 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you for your guidance on the procedures to be followed. 

The reason I am proposing this matter as an issue for humanitarian emergency is first of all, a recognition that the interventions that have been made by the Ministry of Health have been inadequate. We recognise their input and yet the Ministry of Health seems overwhelmed both in terms of capacity and resource availability. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, this is not new. In 1994, there was a drought in Nyabushozi and it was declared an emergency area. In 2003, this Parliament moved a resolution, owing to the humanitarian suffering in Northern Uganda, to urge Government to declare the area a humanitarian disaster area. So, this is not new. It is just premised on the difficulties, the challenges and the magnitude of the problem that we are confronted with.

Furthermore, the proposal is based on the recognition that already geographically, over five districts are affected. That is big enough. It is really big. Also, there are resource constraints. Only two weeks back, we discussed the supplementary budget and there were not enough resources available for the Ministry of Health to pursue the interventions. Perhaps if we open up, if we acknowledge the problem, then we can focus our own national resources and also be able to make an appeal internationally and maybe the dose of support could be redirected.
 
Thirdly, this problem is multifaceted. You are looking at the health burden on our already constrained and almost malfunctioning health service delivery system. Besides that, you are looking at all these 5,000 or so children not going to school because they are tied under trees and they cannot do anything because they are sick. Interestingly, even their parents cannot go to the garden; they are all suffering the same fate. So soon enough we will have food shortage in Northern Uganda. We will have hordes of people who will be asking for interventions from Government.

Mr Speaker, I would like to finally argue that it is important that when we consider this motion, we benefit from the findings of the Centres for Disease Control, again to help us appreciate how to move as a country and we present interventions. So, that is the justification. I would like to implore my colleagues to support this motion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Anywar, you have spoken on this subject so much, why don’t we give it to other members to contribute? [MS ANYWAR: “But I am the seconder”] I know but why don’t we give it to other members to contribute? Why don’t you waive your right and allow members to contribute on this issue because you have really spoken on this matter. I will take hon. Ibi Ekwau.

5.17
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this motion. When you look at the prayers that the mover of this motion is asking for, I feel it is really not asking for too much. Government could have had intentions possibly to offer a little more, but they are being constrained by the resource envelope. 

Just look at the level of the staff. A member from the region has just quoted and recognised the effort and the excellent services of a particular coordinator on the ground. Possibly, if this was opened up, the ministry could have sent more staff on the ground, but how do you do that when you are financially handicapped? So, I feel if this issue was opened up, we would have development partners outside there to come in and stand in. It is an emergency that cannot wait. 

Hon. Beatrice Anywar said that hands and other parts had started rotting off. How do we, in this case, continue witnessing such a thing? I do not blame Government on this particular issue. You could be willing to help but the resources available cannot allow you do this. Even in a family, if you cannot provide for a day you open up and say it out. That way, you will then ask those able to intervene.

Looking at the prayers that we have - the findings to be laid before this House, the social services committee making quarterly follow ups and reporting to this House, etc - I do not think we are asking for too much. It is upon that basis that I wholeheartedly request members to support this motion so that we can get a way forward. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.20
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kikinzi County, West): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for allowing debate on this motion. I also would like to thank the mover and hon. Beatrice Anywar for raising this matter of the nodding disease. 

I want to begin by saying that yes, the nodding disease is strange but not really new. It had been reported in Tanzania sometime back. It was also reported in Sudan and some other few countries, and now in Uganda. That is why I am saying that although it looks strange to the international scientific community, it has been reported elsewhere.

I want to oppose the motion being moved, but I also do not want some people to misunderstand me, that I do not feel for the families and the children who are suffering from this disease. I am a medical doctor and so I should be the first to be extremely sympathetic with the families and the children that are suffering. 

I do not agree with the first prayers in the motion that say that we should declare Northern Uganda an emergency area. I may agree with the other prayer of having the social services committee and the ministry updating the House on the progress, but I do not really support the fact that it warrants this Parliament to declare Northern Uganda an emergency situation. 

Like I said earlier, it is not like I do not really feel for the affected families. The question one would ask is: Has Government failed to contain the situation in Northern Uganda? I think the answer is no. This is because from the information given by the responsible minister and from what we have heard from the ground, a lot of interventions have been put in place.

Is the Government slow? Probably, yes. From the questions that have been raised, maybe more needs to be done by the Government and Ministry of Health in particular. The two maybe need to be much more serious and fast in acting than the way they have done.

The other question one would ask is: is the international community already involved? The answer is yes. This is because WHO, CDC and many other partners are already involved. Another one would be whether it is true that when we declare Northern Uganda an emergency area, money will just flow in? The answer is no. Will the system improve immediately with things working out? Again the answer is no. I am saying this because as a person who worked with these international organisations, I know how resources are mobilised from the UN and other donors. So, I really would want to ask Parliament not to politicise the suffering – (Interruptions)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. You know, when history is forgotten, the future is lost. We had Ebola, which was a very strange disease but the way it was handled is the same way the nodding disease is being handled. I would like to say that even when you declare Northern Uganda an emergency situation, it will be counterproductive. I am saying this because if it – (Interruption)

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, when we had Ebola, I was the secretary for health in Gulu. I know that the way Ebola was handled is not the same way this nodding disease is being handled. So, is it in order for a whole honourable member, who is also the former Minister of State for Primary Healthcare, to get up and deceive people that the nodding disease is being handled the way Ebola was handled?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think the debate is on whether to declare it an emergency or not. His point is that Ebola was not handled as an emergency. He could have made it poorly, but that is what he was trying to put across. If he had said that the way Ebola was handled is the same way the nodding disease is being handled, he would be completely out of order.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, I was developing a point to the effect that Ebola is one of the diseases that the Ministry of Health has handled and the statistics are there. It is one of the diseases that had been handled as strange diseases which had not been researched on by scientists. What I am saying is that that strangeness is almost similar to the one of the nodding disease that is currently affecting people in the North.

The other thing I want to talk about is that even then, there were challenges of resources that the ministry put across. What I was saying is that even if you declared Northern Uganda an emergency situation, it would not be necessary because all the counterparts in funding are on the ground helping. What else will you achieve? It has a multiplier effect, which is very – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now you are debating, honourable member. Dr Baryomunsi, continue. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, hon. James Kakooza, for that information. I want to say that there is a world of a difference between the Ebola infection and the nodding disease. Ebola is highly infectious and extremely fatal in a sense that the health workers handling patients have a high risk of contracting the disease. So, usually, the style of management differs.

It is not true that the nodding disease is infectious, with the health workers also getting infected by it when handling patients. We also know that it attacks children of between ages 5, 15 or 18 years associated with Onchocerciasis but the relationship is weak – (Interruptions)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable colleague. The information I want to give to hon. Chris Baryomunsi and the House at large is that much earlier, it was thought that the nodding disease was only affecting children of between the age of four and 18 years. I have reported to this House that I have three cases where the same disease has affected adults too. In Tumango village I have a patient aged 48, another, 35 and the recent one is aged 18 years. The disease is affecting both the children and adults. Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you for that information. However, you know in the medical profession we have a saying that the eye sees what it knows. So, I think since research is being done, it may not be fair for you to declare that the nodding disease is in this range. What we know scientifically and what is documented in a lot of information on nodding disease is that it affects children. So, until there is a scientific process that proves otherwise and is documented, we cannot just receive information like that. Therefore, as I conclude – (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: I had restrained myself, colleagues, but you know when you are talking about life, and I am both a mother and a Member of Parliament from the area of the affected children, I am tempted to put you on a point of order. 

Mr Speaker, the word “nodding” is not a name for a known disease; it is just one of the symptoms or behaviour of those children suffering from a strange disease. The name came about because of the way the affected people behave. It has not yet been established what particular disease it is. It has not been named “nodding” and, therefore, it could not have already established history; otherwise, we would not be gambling in this House and the world over looking for the source of this disease. 

Is it in order for the honourable colleague, who is even a doctor, and I even took him to my district and he saw the suffering of the children, to come and tell the House that there is already established information on a syndrome rather than an established disease called “nodding?” Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are calling upon the Speaker to pass scientific rulings on matters that the Speaker is not very competent on. (Laughter) I have heard from a doctor and I am now hearing from Maama Mabira. I am not able to rule on this particular one because I do not know the details really. It would be unfair for me to rule either this way or the other way. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Rt hon. Speaker. If I had time, I would give a lecture but this is not the time for that. The reason why it is called the nodding disease or syndrome is because it has occurred elsewhere. There are studies and there are symptoms that have been characterised and can be associated with that kind of ailment, and therefore we know what we are talking about. 

As I wind up, Rt hon. Speaker, I think this Parliament should greatly associate itself with the pain and suffering in the affected communities; there is no doubt about that. However, we should also urge Government and the Ministry of Health particularly to put in more effort in mobilising the communities and delivering the services to the affected communities. 

If it means mobilising additional resources, I think the ministry has not answered the question whether they want more money from Parliament. Within our own budget we can reallocate resources and continue with the current efforts of mobilising the international partners. It is, therefore, my view that we support the government and the Ministry of Health to get stronger on the ground but not to necessarily declare the affected communities an emergency area. In my view, it may not add a lot of value, but we should strengthen the efforts currently with the government to ensure that services can be delivered on the ground. I thank you very much. 

5.33
MS VERONICA BABIRYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buyende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Government for the efforts which have been put in place in the Northern region to save the lives of the children and also the adults. However, I do not support the motion to declare the Northern region an emergency area. This is not the first time that the Northern region has had an emergency like this, and this is not the first time that the nodding disease is emerging. The honourable member from Agago told us that in 2009, he presented this issue and this is 2012. So, it is no longer an emergency.

Mr Speaker, I would like to bring it to your attention that at least the government has done all it can. Some of us have on several occasions reported to the Ministry of Health about such emergencies and nothing has been done. One time I went to the Ministry of Health and reported about epilepsy in my district and yet I even had a team of medical doctors who were going to give free medical services. You remember, Mr Speaker, I came to your office and you gave me fuel and I transported the paramedics to my district at my own cost. I did not even get emergency drugs. So, I am very appreciative that the government has at least managed to give the northern region all it could. Thank you so much, but I do not support the motion to declare the North an emergency area. 

4.05 
MRS CECELIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Rt hon. Speaker. I would like to congratulate you and the rest of the members who have supported debate on the issue of nodding disease. Hon. Anywar and hon. Alaso plus many others who have supported this motion have really demonstrated a very high sense of responsibility. (Applause) This is a disease which we still do not understand; it is a disease which can erupt in Kampala and we would not understand how it has come. 

In all, it is something that is of a national concern. Whoever has spoken against prayer No. 1 does not understand the implication. It is absolutely important that we make it as a mechanism of gazetting certain areas so that we do not encourage this disease to spread beyond the area which has already been affected. (Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, on a scientific point of view, there is no information saying that this disease is highly contagious. I happen to be one of the doctors who buried the five patients of Ebola in Mbarara and I was the key clinician of that. Ebola is different, and I would like you to appreciate that things are very different. Now, when you talk about stopping people from moving from place to place and you quarantine people, then you are trying to show that what hon. Anywar did to move people from Kitgum up to here was already out of place. 

Is it in order for the honourable member to start submitting on scientific issues and she says that we quarantine people who do not have a contagious disease? How do you quarantine somebody who has malnutrition? Is she in order? I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it unfortunately falls in the category of imploring the Speaker to rule on scientific matters that I am unable to.  

MRS OGWAL: Rt hon. Speaker, thank you very much. It is a scientific matter as well as a linguistic one. Maybe instead of using “quarantine”, which is commonly used for animals, I should have used “ring fencing.” I was in Amuru recently- (Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for hon. Cecilia Ogwal, former Miss Uganda I am being told, to use un-parliamentary language that members who had a different opinion about a motion do not understand, and for insinuating that we are ignorant about the fate and the suffering of the children who are infected by this nodding syndrome? Is she in order to use un-parliamentary language just because members have a different opinion about this motion? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, earlier in the discussion on this debate I started wondering whether hon. Bitekyerezo was still speaking English. I was confessing to the fact that I did not understand what he was talking about anymore. So please, honourable, conclude.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was recently in the new district of Amuru, and I have also cited the district of Amuru and other districts in the report, if you read pages 6 and 9. I would therefore wish to move an amendment, if I am allowed by the movers of the motion, to include the districts of Amuru, Oyam, Lira and Kiryandongo. The reason why I am moving this amendment is because they share the same markets, circulation and close social interaction in the community. So, it is very important that the intervention must include the districts, which I have mentioned – (Interjections) - Agago also. Sorry, I forgot Agago. It should be Amuru, Agago, Oyam, Lira and Kiryandongo. 

I also wish to move a further amendment that there should be-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal, that would come at the stage when we are adopting. Let us first finish with the general issues. When we are adopting the motion, then you can bring those amendments because now we will lose them. Nobody is capturing them at the moment.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you for your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh, your time is up unfortunately.

5.42
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity and I wish to thank my sisters, the mover of the motion and the seconder of the motion. As far as I have heard and understand, nobody knows the cause of nodding disease. This nodding syndrome is a disease that is not known and as you know in medicine, it is easier to tackle a case of sickness whose cause you know because you can prevent it.

It is also true that none of us sitting in this House or listening to us knows where this disease could emerge from tomorrow. It could be in Kumi where I represent or Kisoro, Busoga, Rwakitura or wherever. None of us can ever determine whether this disease could erupt from any part of this country or beyond.

We also do not know how long this disease will take. It could take months, years, decades or even centuries. I would like to let you know, my dear friends and honourable colleagues, that scientific research is extremely expensive. My understanding of the import of this motion is to sound a loud alarm, not only amongst ourselves but also beyond the borders of this country, that this is a country in distress. If you do not consider this a distress situation then I do not know what you think it is. People, young human beings as they are, tethered like cows and their families unable to work and fend for themselves; this disease goes beyond the person who is infected and it goes beyond the family setting and the regional setting.

The paper presented by the honourable Minister of Health indicates that we are under resourced. We cannot run out of this. Shs 15 billion was recognised as the amount of money required to tackle just a fraction of what we are suffering as a country. To date, we can only raise Shs 3.75 billion, and in any case - (Interruption)

DR NDUHURA: I have a very simple clarification. I thank you for yielding the Floor and I thank you, Mr Speaker. I continue to hear a figure of Shs 15 billion. Is the honourable member aware that I presented the response plan, which was costed, to this House and the total amount was Shs 7 billion that was broken into two phases? Is he also aware that this financial year we needed Shs 3.85 billion, which has been provided, leaving a balance of Shs 3.1 billion, which is going to be provided in the budget of the next financial year? So, where is this figure of Shs 15 billion coming from?

MR AMURIAT: All I am telling you is from his own paper. They are not able to provide sufficient facilities. Look at the food you are giving. The food that you are reported to have distributed to the health centres, 20,000kgs, when translated into bags of 100kgs each is just 200 bags. How long is this food going to take and yet you are coming to tell us here that you have enough resources? 

I think let us face facts. The Government of Uganda as it is and the way it is allocating funds to this situation - (Member timed out.)

5.47
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Considering the well articulated arguments put forward by both the mover of the motion and supported by the seconder, and having run through ideas very well articulated and raised by various speakers, I propose that having exhaustively discussed this motion, the question be put. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am constrained by the rules. Once a motion of this nature is moved, I will put the question that the question be put and I am supposed to put it without debate. That is what the rules say. So shall I put the question then to the motion that the question be put? 

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, you had ruled by pointing out people who are supposed to speak. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is overtaken by the motion for me to conclude debate.

MR SABIITI: Which rule is that? (Interjection) Yes, I want to be guided, Mr Speaker. When you have already ordered - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From the time that motion is moved, I cannot extend anything. So I put the question to the motion that the question be put. That is the motion I am going to put the question to. Now, we need to determine whether we are able to take that decision because I do not want to fall into unnecessary traps. Are we able to take that decision? Honourable members, we currently have 52 members in the House and so we are not able to take a decision now.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I have seen it here as a practice that when we have situations like this that require quorum, the bell is sounded.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But that is exactly what I was going to do.

MR AMURIAT: Okay. (Laughter)

MRS BETTY OCAN: Mr Speaker, you will realise that women are also very few here now - (Interjection) - and also the men who are members of Uganda Women Parliamentary Association. There is another launch by the Speaker of this Parliament at Imperial Royale Hotel. So, I doubt if we shall realise quorum; can you allow us, the women, to go? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, on any matter that requires us to make a decision, we will not be able to. Next item, please.

PETITION OF THE HEAD TEACHERS AND OTHER STAKEHOLDERS IN SECONDARY SCHOOLS OF WAKISO DISTRICT AGAINST CERTAIN GOVERNMENT POLICIES IN THE EDUCATION SECTOR.
 	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Seninde, you have only four minutes. Just inform the House about the subject of the petition and give us the prayers then we will forward it to the committee.

5.54
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am presenting a petition under rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. This is a humble petition of head teachers and other stakeholders in secondary schools of Wakiso District against certain Government policies in the education sector, which include, the new A’ level policy of Government, composition of board of governors for schools and tax policies.

Mr Speaker, in the interest of time and basing on your guidance, I am just going to give a brief background to this and then I will – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just go straight to the prayers.

MRS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, I beg to present the prayers of the petitioners. Here they are:
(a) 	That Parliament resolves that the new A’ level policy which requires all A’ level students to compulsorily offer subsidiary mathematics or computer studies be lifted and maintain the Skilling Uganda policy. (Applause) 

(b) 	That Government carries out a survey and establishes a threshold for taxing schools while taking into account their returns on investment, financial competence and facilities such that those above a minimum threshold in a similar category are subjected to a similar tax while those below a minimum threshold are exempted. (Applause) 

(c) 	That the Education Act be amended to exclude local government representation and involvement on schools’ board of governors and allow the school founder bodies to forward at least three names from which the District Education Officer will appoint two of his representatives.

(d) 	That Government takes necessary measures to provide access to subsidised computers, laboratory equipment and chemicals and other learning tools for schools to enable even private schools to access these facilities given that all children, whether in public or private schools, belong to the country.

(e) 	That Government should revise its method of introducing policies by involving and consulting all the stakeholders before the policies are issued to ensure harmonised approaches and systematic and consistent implementation.

Mr Speaker, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures. For record purposes, allow me to lay this petition on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MRS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, allow me also to lay on the Table a circular, which was sent out to all head teachers of Government and private secondary schools, Circular No. 8 of 2011, which is forcing schools to implement this policy. It is dated October 10th 2011.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the records capture that.

MRS SENINDE: Finally, Mr Speaker, I also beg to lay, for the interest of the committee, a paper presented by Wakiso Secondary Schools Head Teachers Association. I believe this paper has all the details which will be helpful to the committee. I also beg you, Mr Speaker, to urge the committee to expeditiously handle this petition because of its urgency and importance since one policy is already affecting our senior five students. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the petition is presented. The petition is urgent by its nature because it is affecting schools. It stands referred to the Committee on Social Services and we are giving them the same time we gave the other committee the other day - three weeks - to get back to the House with some report and we move forward from there.

Honourable members, I did not conclude my statement on the motion that we debated. The impact of what happened is that because we are unable to take a decision on the motion raised by hon. Alice Alaso, at the next convenient sitting where there is quorum we will be able to take this decision on the motion raised by hon. Alice Alaso and seconded by hon. Beatrice Anywar. I had amended the Order Paper to allow hon. Lulume to present a petition in two minutes.

PETITION BY RESIDENTS OF BUIKWE DISTRICT ON THE DELAYED IMPLEMENTATION OF GRADING KYETUME- KATOSI- KISOGA- NYENGA ROAD

5.59
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Mr Speaker, your humble petitioners are residents of Buikwe South and Buikwe North constituencies. They are aggrieved because of the delayed upgrading of Kyetume-Katosi-Kisoga- Nkonkonjeru-Nyenga Road which has had budget appropriations by this Parliament for the last four years. 

Your humble petitioners are also aggrieved because of the delayed compensation for those whose property was identified for demolition to pave way for the road construction four years ago. No reason has been given or any courtesy explanation offered as to why their compensation has not been effected, and therefore, they have lost income out of that property including land and buildings. 

Mr Speaker, your humble petitioners, who have appended 600 signatures on this document, have the following three prayers to make:

1. 	That Parliament urges Government to compensate the people for the income lost from their properties since they ceased using them. These ones include people who owned buildings and people who had given up their land for the construction of this road four years down the road.

2. 	That Parliament urges Government to commence the implementation of the project whose funding has been appropriated for the last five years while I was in Parliament.

3. 	That Parliament urges Government to give a timeframe for the implementation of this project. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move and allow me to lay on the Table this petition on Kyetume-Katosi-Kisoga-Nyenga Road delayed project by the residents of Buikwe South Constituency. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate committee, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. It stands accordingly referred to that committee for quick action within the framework of the Rules of Procedure. The maximum number of days you are given to get back to Parliament is 45 days. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

6.03
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Patrick Amuriat): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table financial statements for the National Enterprise Corporation for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2010 for the Uganda Seeds Company Limited. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it 2010? 

MR AMURIAT: 2010, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the financial statements for the year ended 30 September 2011 for Uganda Coffee Development Authority. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the financial statements for Uganda Railways Corporation for the year ended 31 December 2008. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the financial statements for the Uganda Railways Corporation for the year ended 31 December 2009. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the financial statements for the Uganda Railways Corporation for the year ended 31 December 2010. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the financial statements for Uganda Cotton Development Organisation for the year ended 31 October 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Management Training and Advisory Centre for the year ended 31 December 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker I beg to lay a report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Mbarara University of Science and Technology for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the National Council for Children for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such. 

MR AMURIAT: There was an amendment on that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Uganda Property Holdings Ltd for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Nation Council for Disability for the year ended 30 June 2009. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the National Council for Disability for the year ended 30 June 2010. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the financial statements for the Uganda Railways Corporation for the year ended 31 December 2008. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. I do not see it on the Order Paper. 

MR AMURIAT: Sorry, I will read it again. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the National Council for Disability –

THE DEPUTY SPEKAER: One is 2010 and the other is 2011. The same. 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of National Council for Disability for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of National Council for Disability for the year ended 30th June 2010.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Uganda Communications Commission for the year ended 30th June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Uganda AIDS Commission and the AIDS Partnership Fund for the years ended 30 June 2010 and 2011. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Kilembe Mines for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 for the Uganda Investment Authority. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table financial statements for the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Makerere University for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Hotel and Tourism Training Institute (HTTI) for the year ended 30 June 2008. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Hotel and Tourism Training Institute (HTTI) for the year ended 30 June 2009. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Hotel and Tourism Training Institute (HTTI) for the year ended 30 June 2010. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Amber House Limited for the year ended 31 December 2010. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Rural Electricfication Agency (REA) for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Hotel and Tourism Training Institute for the years ended 30 June 2008, 2009, 2010 and 2011.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you had already laid up to 2010. Is that a combination of all of them? That should be 2011. Isn’t it?

MR AMURIAT: It is what the Auditor-General has brought to this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you look at 23, 22 and 21, those are all – Is that particular one headed for all the four years?

MR AMURIAT: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then present it as it is. 

MR AMURIAT: That is what I am doing. I beg to lay it on the Table, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture it as such.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of National Youth Council for the years ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of National Women’s Council for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Joint Clinical Research Centre for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of National Medical Stores for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium for the year ended 31 December 2010. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for Uganda Aids Commission for the year ended 30 June 2010.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a financial statement for National Planning Authority for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AMURIAT: Finally, I beg to lay on the Table financial statements for the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that, and congratulations hon. Amuriat (Applause).

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, there was an omission that I would like to correct now. We have another report here. I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Mbarara University of Science and Technology for the year ended 30 June 2011. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That one was laid under item nine.

MR AMURIAT: Okay, thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are issues that require decisions. We were unable to take a decision on items 7, 8 and 9. There was a matter that was pushed forward, and that is item No.3, statement on Government Business for next week. So I ask the Leader of Government Business to go through them and then we see how to move.
 
6.27
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, in accordance with rule 25 of our Rules of Procedure, I beg to inform the House that the following will form part of Government Business for the week of 14 – 18 May 2012. 

Bills for First Reading:
a) 	The Retirement Benefits Bill, 2011
b) 	The Regional Governments Bill, 2009;
c) 	The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substance Control Bill, 2007;
d) 	The Pharmacy Profession and Pharmacy Practice Bill, 2006;
e) 	The Uganda Forestry Association Bill, 2010.

Mr Speaker, we also have the following Bills for second reading:
a) 	The Public Order Management Bill, 2011;
b) 	The Transfer of Convicted Offenders Bill, 2007;
c) 	The Accountants Bill, 2012.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we shall also have the following ministerial statements:
a) 	On the progress of the implementation of the parliamentary resolution on the cotton sector by the hon. Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.
b) 	On the performance of PLE, UCE and Government’s commitment to increase teachers salaries by the hon. Minister of Education and Sports.
c) 	On financing of roads by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
d) 	On the state of the economy by the hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development;
e) 	On Youth Venture Capital Fund by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
f) 	On the status of the road infrastructure in the country by the hon. Minister of Works and Transport.
g) 	On the disaster situation in the country by the hon. Minister for Relief and Disaster Preparedness.
h) 	On the fire outbreaks that affected schools and markets in the recent past by the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs.
i) 	On the status of the health sector in the country by the hon. Minister of Health.
j) 	On the status of the labour sector in the country by the hon. Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of Government Business, you should also know that there is a statement on the limestone mining licence for Hima Cement that was moved to next week. So that should be captured.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I wish to be guided. The Leader of Government Business has read the plan for next week in the perspective of Government. Knowing that it is a programme for a maximum of five days, that is if we sat from Monday to Friday, I do not know whether hon. Migereko would consider bringing a realistic order of business. From what I see, that long list will not be covered. So I seek guidance from you, Mr Speaker; should Government just bring business as a formality or they should see if it is realistic and can be achieved?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is what the Government is ready with. It is up to the Business Committee to schedule what it can handle, but that is what Government is ready to present next week. 

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not very sure whether the position put by the Government is a serious one because in December, Government took a position to report to Parliament on the intervention of Government in the cotton industry and to listen to the cry of the farmers. As I talk now, we are in the month of May and it is getting late for farmers to prepare for cotton planting. It is getting late yet Government has not come up with a definite position on what they have done with the billions of shillings which was taken from the farmers. 

I am just hearing now that a report on cotton is just in the programme for the month of May. By the time we will be discussing this report, it will be June. Mr Speaker, I feel there must be something that this institution must do to save the cotton sub sector. Thank you.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal for raising this matter. Yes, we consider it extremely important that the report on the implementation of the parliamentary resolution on the cotton subsector should have got here way back. However, I am also aware of the various discussions that have been going on involving the various stakeholders in the cotton sector. It is because of those discussions, which I am aware were attended by critical persons both from Parliament and outside Parliament, that we have been enabled to produce the report which is going to be presented before the House. 

Mr Speaker, next week is not far; I would like to request members to await the delivery of this report by the minister in charge of the sector because as you realise, I have limitations in regard to attending to all the issues that members would want me to attend to at the moment. 

MS ALASO: I thank you very much. Mr Speaker, you know that all along I considered myself a very critical person in the cotton sector, given the area that I represent and the fact that they really grow cotton. They also suffered adversely in the last harvest when the price fell far below the expectations. 

I am trying to find out from the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business that since I did not attend, has he ruled me out? He says there have been meetings of people critical in the cotton sector; has he ruled me out as a Member of Parliament for Serere where we grow cotton? Has he decided somewhere that I am not a critical person to the extent that I was not invited? What was the criterion then for choosing the critical people and leaving me out?

MRS EKWAU: I thank you. The honourable minister, Kasaija, is aware that in the good old days, most of the people went to school out of the incomes from cotton growing. I want to know from the Prime Minister what meetings subsequently followed the particular meeting that we had on cotton. We had only one meeting and yet this was a meeting that was thrown over to the Office of the Speaker to expeditiously coordinate seeing the urgency that it really deserved. 

On top of that, that meeting opened more disgruntlement because the people who were mobilised by the Cotton Development Authority were the ginners who came to speak on behalf of the farmers. Honestly, hon. Prime Minister and your good office, be fair to members of this House because if you opened this up when the House is full, the bombardment that you are bound to get from both sides of the House will “kill” you. (Laughter) I do not say that you will die tonight but it was honestly very unfair. I thank you.

MR MIGEREKO: Cotton has always been –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First of all, were the words of hon. Ekwau figurative or real? You should say it on the microphone so that the records can capture that, otherwise you are asking the Speaker to make some deployment. 

MRS EKWAU: I thank you. I ironically used the figurative language and said the word “kill” to mean the many reactions that would open a Pandora’s Box from both sides of the House. I thank you very much.

MR MIGEREKO: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I have always known hon. Ekwau to be a person of her word and I was really getting scared. (Laughter)

As I indicated, as a member of government I happened to be aware that a number of meetings were taking place to address issues related to the resolution of Parliament in regard to the cotton sector. However, we should be able to get the details when the minister comes to present his statement. Nevertheless, I will be communicating some of the sentiments that have been expressed here.

Regarding hon. Alaso in particular, all of us are aware that hon. Alaso is a critical person in practically every field of life in the country. It is also true that her national and international engagements at times make it difficult for her to attend to certain invitations. I do not want to rule out the fact that she could have been invited when she was in Washington. (Laughter) As a Secretary General of FDC, you realise that she is not only attending to parliamentary and party business but so many other things of an international and national – (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have been able to move but not able to finish what we set ourselves to finish today. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 6.34 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 15 May 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
