Thursday, 19 May 2011

Parliament met at 10.42 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Chief Justice, Justice Benjamin Odoki, in the Chair.)

PROCLAMATION

THE CLERK TO PARLIAMENT: Your Lordship the Chief Justice of Uganda, hon. Members of Parliament, the five year term of office of the Eighth Parliament of Uganda ended yesterday, 18 May 2011. The Speaker of the Eighth Parliament issued a proclamation to this effect and I will read it:

“Proclamation by Rt Hon. Edward K. Ssekandi, Speaker of Parliament of the Republic of Uganda:

WHEREAS Clause 3 of Article 77 of the Constitution provides that the term of Parliament shall be five years from the date of its first sitting after a general election;

AND WHEREAS Article 96 of the Constitution provides that Parliament shall stand dissolved upon the expiration of its term as prescribed by Article 77 of the Constitution;

NOTING THAT the first sitting of the Eighth Parliament commenced on the 18 May 2006;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it proclaimed that Parliament shall stand dissolved with effect from the 18th day of May 2011.

Given under my hand at Parliament House Kampala:
Rt Hon. Edward K. Ssekandi; Speaker.”

Hon. Members, a new Parliament has been elected, the Members have been sworn in and are now ready to commence their five-year term effective today the 19th of May 2011 in Parliament.

Article 95 states that when a new Parliament is elected, the President shall, by proclamation, appoint the place and a date not beyond seven days after expiry of the term of Parliament or of the extended period as the case may be, for the first sitting of the new Parliament.
We have now received a proclamation by H.E Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda, which I would like to read verbatim:

“WHEREAS under Clause 95 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda when a new Parliament is elected, the President is required by proclamation to appoint the place and date not beyond seven days after expiry of the term of Parliament for the first sitting of new Parliament;

AND WHEREAS elections of Members of Parliament to the Ninth Parliament were concluded on 14 March 2011 and in accordance with the provisions in Section 59 of Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 the names and constituencies of the elected candidates were published in the Gazette; 

NOTING THAT under clause 3 of Article 77 of the Constitution the term of Parliament shall be five years from the date of its first sitting after the general election;

FURTHER NOTING THAT the first sitting of the Eighth Parliament was held on the 18th day of May 2006 and therefore the term of the Eighth Parliament expires on 18 May 2011;

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the President by clause 1 of Article 95 of the Constitution, it is hereby proclaimed that the first sitting of the 9th Parliament of the Republic of Uganda shall be held at Parliamentary Conference Hall, Parliamentary Building on the 19th day of May 2011 at 10 a.m.

Given under my hand and public seal this 18th day May 2011: 

Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda.”

Your Lordship the Chief Justice, accordingly today marks the first sitting of the Ninth Parliament of Uganda. However, following the end of the term of Parliament on 18th May 2011, the Office of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker fell vacant.

Clause 4 of Article 82 of the Constitution states that no business shall be transacted by Parliament other than an election to the Office of the Speaker at any time that office is vacant.

Clause 5 of Article 82 states that the Chief Justice or a judge designated by the Chief Justice shall preside at the election of the Speaker. In this regard, we are privileged to have the Chief Justice, His Lordship Benjamin Odoki, in person to preside over the election of the Speaker.

We pay tribute to him for having put off a very important international obligation in order to attend to this national duty.

We will now proceed with the items on the Order Paper.

STATEMENT BY HIS LORDSHIP THE CHIEF JUSTICE

10.51
THE CHIEF JUSTICE (Justice Benjamin Odoki): Hon. Members, first of all, I want to take this opportunity to congratulate all of you on your deserved election as Members of the Ninth Parliament. (Applause)

The people of Uganda have a lot of hope in your contribution to the peace, stability and development of this country. Today will mark almost the end of the formation of the Government when the three branches of the Government will be in place to conduct the business of running the state of Uganda.

We have the Judiciary which is in place, the Executive headed by the President and today, we shall have Parliament headed by the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker in place. I shall take this opportunity to wish you every success in your deliberations.

I am informed this morning that we have members in the public gallery. We have some visitors who have come to witness this occasion. We have a delegation from the Forum for Women in Democracy (FOWODE). (Applause) They have come to observe the election of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Hon. Members, we also have in the public gallery this morning the dean and student leaders of Gulu University who have also come to observe the election of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of Parliament. You are all welcome and please join me in welcoming them to this House. (Applause)

Hon. Members, I am informed that the main business for this session is the election of the Speaker. I have seen some items on the Order Paper which I do not know whether I have any discretion here - which I would like to modify if I have the power – item No.4 is not necessary, in my view. Are you going to read them? Okay.

I have been guided that an officer of Parliament will now read for you the Rules of Procedure which are going to govern the election of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker and that is a better item than the adoption. 

They will now read the Rules of Procedure which are going to govern the election of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker.

THE CLERK TO PARLIAMENT: Rule 4: “Election of the Speaker:	
(1)	The Speaker shall be elected by the Members of Parliament from among their number.
(2) 	A person shall not be qualified to be elected as Speaker if he or she is a Vice-President, Prime Minister or a minister.
(3) 	No business shall be transacted in Parliament other than an election to the Office of Speaker at any time that the Office of the Speaker is vacant.
(4) 	The Chief Justice or a judge designated by the Chief Justice shall preside at an election of a Speaker.
(5) 	No person shall be proposed as a candidate to the Office of Speaker unless that person has given his or her consent to the nomination.
(6) 	Subject to sub-rule (10) of this rule, the election of a Speaker shall be by secret ballot.
(7) 	At an election of the Speaker, the presiding officer shall invite nominations from Members of Parliament present.
(8) 	A Member making a nomination shall move a motion that, “(Name)...to take the Chair of this Parliament as the Speaker”, and shall give a brief statement of the background and qualifications of the nominee.
(9) 	Nomination shall be seconded without debate.
(10)	 If only one person is nominated, he or she shall be declared elected and conducted to the Chair.
(11) 	Where more than one person is nominated, the House shall proceed to elect a Speaker.
(12) 	When all nominations have been received, the person presiding shall announce that, “The ballot will now be taken”.
(13) 	Voting shall be in the following manner -
(a) 	First the clerk shall ascertain the number of Members present;
(b) 	Before voting commences, the person presiding shall cause to be produced one ballot box and cause to be demonstrated the fact that it is empty;
(c) 	The person presiding shall cause to be given to each Member of Parliament present a ballot paper on which the Member may record his or her vote by writing the name of the person for whom he or she wishes to vote and depositing it in the ballot box;
(d) 	After all Members who wish to vote have voted, the person presiding shall, in full view of the Members present, cause the Clerk to empty the ballot box and immediately count the ballot papers contained in it;
(e) 	At the completion of counting, the person presiding shall announce the result of the voting specifying -
(i) 	The total number of ballot papers contained in the ballot box;
(ii) 	The total number of Members who have abstained from voting;
iii) 	The number of both spoilt and blank ballot papers; and
(iv)	The number of votes obtained by each nominee;
(f) 	Where two or more persons are nominated for the Office of Speaker, the person who receives the majority of the votes of all Members present and voting shall be declared Speaker, and if no person receives that majority, a second election shall be held between the two persons who obtained the highest number of votes;
(g) Where at any ballot between two nominees the votes are equal, another ballot shall be held; and
(h) Where a second election has to be held under paragraph (f) and two or more persons receive equal votes in the second position there shall be a ballot to determine the person to stand in that second election and this shall be repeated where there are ties until one person can be identified.

(14) 	The person elected Speaker shall be conducted to the Chair.
(15) 	As soon as possible after the election of the Speaker and before assuming the duties of the Office of Speaker the person elected shall, in the manner prescribed by law, take and subscribe to the Oath of Speaker specified in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution as required by Clause (10) of Article 82 of the Constitution.
(16) 	In this rule, the “person presiding” means the Chief Justice or a judge designated by the Chief Justice under sub-rule (4) of this rule.

Rule 5: Election of Deputy Speaker
(1)	The Deputy Speaker shall be elected by the Members of Parliament from among their number.

(2)	The Speaker shall preside at an election of the Deputy Speaker.

(3)	A person shall not be qualified to be elected as Deputy Speaker if he or she is a Vice-President, Prime Minister or a minister.

(4) 	An election to the Office of Deputy Speaker shall be held at the first sitting of Parliament after that office becomes vacant.
(5) 	The rules prescribed for the election and the taking and subscribing to the oath of a Speaker shall apply, with necessary modifications, to the election of the Deputy Speaker.”

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: In reference to what has been read to us - my Lord, noting that this House now owns the content in the Rules of Procedure that have just been read to us, I seek to know if I can move an appropriate amendment?

JUSTICE ODOKI: Are you moving a motion or a point of procedure?

MR OKUPA: My Lord, before we deal with what hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi - I think we have to first adopt these rules before we move to that. I am saying this because as a new Parliament, we have no rules. I beg to be guided.

JUSTICE ODOKI: Are you talking about the same point? Is it on the adoption of Rules of Procedure?

MR BANYENZAKI: No, my Lord. First of all, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi should have cited the relevant rule under which he wants to move that amendment. 

Secondly, the rules that have been cited are Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, my Lord. My point of order to the hon. Member holding the Floor is that each Parliament adopts its own Rules of Procedure. What has been read to us is an extraction from the old Rules of Procedure which the new Parliament must adopt. When we get fully constituted with the Speaker and Deputy Speaker, we will choose whether to adopt the old rules or not. So, is it in order for the hon. Henry Banyenzaki to mislead the House by saying we already have rules yet this is just a new Parliament without Rules of Procedure?

JUSTICE ODOKI: Hon. Members, you are either fortunate or unfortunate to have the Chief Justice here as the presiding officer. (Laughter) But I will allow honourable –

MR BANYENZAKI: I can substantiate.

HON. MEMBERS: No.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: My Lordship, I do appreciate the concerns that have been raised over the adoption of rules by each Parliament. But I want to point out that the Eighth Parliament was the first Parliament under the NRM regime to operate under the multi-party system, which made us adopt rules that accommodated democratic practices that took care of diverse political views. And once those rules were adopted – until it becomes necessary for certain amendments to be done, then an appropriate committee would deal with that.

In the circumstances, I would like to guide this House that we proceed by the Rules of Procedure that were adopted in 2000; we should adopt them as they are; we should not get into amendments before we proceed.

MR BANYENZAKI: Clarification, my Lord.

JUSTICE ODOKI: Okay, hon. Member, you can substantiate before I give my ruling.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, my Lord. The rules under which we are proceeding are Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. They are very clear because they don’t say they only apply to the Eighth Parliament. This means that as of now, we are operating under these Rules of Procedure of Parliament. After the 2006 general elections, the Speaker and Deputy Speaker were elected under the Rules of Procedure that were there then.

JUSTICE ODOKI: Hon. Members, my jurisdiction and authority is limited to conducting the election of the Speaker. And that is the only business that I have here. I know you will ask me under what rule? Yes, that is a valid question, but you need to know that Parliament makes rules to govern this Parliament. Parliament is a living organ; it is an organisation which has perpetual succession. In my view, the Constitution ordains that Parliament shall make Rules of Procedure. It does not say that it shall do so every time a new Parliament comes into existence. Therefore, in my own interpretation, Parliament does not have to make rules every time there is a new Parliament. (Applause) You are free to change, adopt and amend the rules as soon as you assume office as Parliament. So, in my view, these rules should continue to govern Parliament until they are changed.

MR WADRI: Procedure.

JUSTICE ODOKI: I am sorry I have already made a ruling.

MR WADRI: This is not a High Court.

NOMINATIONS FOR THE OFFICE OF SPEAKER

JUSTICE ODOKI: I have already made a ruling that the rules that governed the previous Parliament be used to govern the proceedings today. That is the ruling of the presiding officer. (Applause) I, therefore, now call upon nominations for the names of honourable members for Office of the Speaker.

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

JUSTICE ODOKI: Yes, nominations.

11.12
MR AMAMA MBABAZI (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu):  Your Lordship the Chief Justice of Uganda, Justice Benjamin Odoki, the hon. Members of the Ninth Parliament, ladies and gentlemen. My name is Amama Mbabazi, I am a Member of this Parliament representing the people of Kinkizi West and I stand in accordance with rule 4(8) of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament to move as follows.

I move a motion that the hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, Woman Member of Parliament, Kamuli District, do take the Chair of this Parliament as the Speaker. I beg to move. (Applause)

11.13
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Your Lordship, my name is Rose Namayanja Nsereko, I am the Woman MP for Nakeseke District and I beg to second the nomination of hon. Kadaga as Speaker of the Ninth Parliament. (Applause)

11.13
LT COL (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (NRM, Isingiro County North, Insingiro): Rwamirama Bright Kanyontore, MP Isingiro County North and I second hon. Kadaga Alitwala. (Applause)

JUSTICE ODOKI: I want to ask whether the hon. Kadaga consents to be nominated. Does she agree? Is she within the House? (Laughter)

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: She is reluctant but -

11.14
MS REBECCA KADAGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamuli): My Lord the Chief Justice of Uganda, the distinguished Members of Parliament, I consent to the nomination. (Applause)

JUSTICE ODOKI: Can we have the hon. Kadaga introduced first? Do you like all the candidates to be nominated first and then they are introduced?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

JUSTICE ODOKI: Fine.

11.15
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Your Lordship, I rise under rule 8 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and after consultation, I move that [HON MEMBERS: “Who are you?”] My name is Hussein Kyanjo, Member of Parliament for Makindye West, Kampala District. I move that hon. Nandala-Mafabi do take the Chair of this Parliament as the Speaker and if you allow, I will give a brief statement, according to the rules. (Applause)

JUSTICE ODOKI: Is the nomination seconded?

11.16
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): My Lord, I am called Beatrice Atim Anywar, Member of Parliament Kitgum District. I hereby second the nomination of hon. Nandala-Mafabi as the Speaker of the Ninth Parliament. (Applause)

11.17
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): My Lord the Chief Justice, my name is John Ken-Lukyamuzi, Member of Parliament for Rubaga South. I strongly second the nomination of hon. Nandala-Mafabi. (Laughter)

11.17
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Hon. Chief Justice, I am William Nzoghu, MP for Busongora North, Kasese District. I second the nomination of hon. Nandala-Mafabi as Speaker of Parliament. (Applause)

JUSTICE ODOKI: Does hon. Nandala-Mafabi consent to the nomination? (Laughter)

11.17
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Your Lordship the Chief Justice of Uganda, my colleagues, Members of Parliament, I do consent to the nomination for speakership of Parliament of Uganda for transparency, accountability and independence. (Applause)

JUSTICE ODOKI: Thank you. Only two candidates have been nominated. Is the nomination closed or what? Is there any other nomination?

11.18
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): I move that the nomination be closed.

JUSTICE ODOKI: Yes, any other nomination?

11.18
MR SEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyaddondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Your Lordship the Chief Justice. I would like to move under rule 4(8) and nominate the hon. Edward Ssekandi Kiwanuka to take the Chair of this Parliament. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

MR KAKOOZA: For purpose of the record, I seek your guidance, my Lord. The rule cited by hon. Kyanjo is rule 8 -(Interjections)- no, he cited rule 8, which talks about the sitting arrangement. Unless it is clarified that is when this candidate can be nominated. Thank you.

JUSTICE ODOKI: Hon. Members of Parliament, to err is human. He may have misread the rule but the substance was that he nominated a candidate to stand for -(Laughter)- but we have a candidate who has been proposed. I do not know whether the candidate -

11.20
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): My Lord, I am Bakireke Nambooze Betty, MP Mukono Municipality. I stand to second the nomination of hon. Edward Ssekandi as the Speaker of the Ninth Parliament. (Laughter)

JUSTICE ODOKI: Thank you. Has he consented to the nomination?

11.21
MR EDWARD SSEKANDI (NRM, Bukoto County Central, Masaka): My Lord the Chief Justice, I take this opportunity as a Member representing Bukoto Central, Masaka District to welcome you and I note that you have sacrificed your time to come to carry out a national duty entrusted to you by the Constitution. 

I have not been consulted by the people or the hon. Member for Kyaddondo East and the hon. Member for Mukono; and I do not think we should waste our time. We came here very well knowing the position of the various parties and their candidates. I belong to the National Resistance Movement and the flag bearer for that position is hon. Rebecca Kadaga and therefore I have nothing to say except that I do not accept the nomination. (Applause)

JUSTICE ODOKI: I am not going to comment on that scenario, but we as lawyers never act without instructions. We will move on to the next stage. If that is the case that there are only two candidates, then that means the nominations are closed and I will invite the movers to make a short statement on the candidates. 

11.12
MR AMAMA MBABAZI (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): My Lord the Chief Justice, presiding over this very important first business of Parliament, my duty now is to give a resume of our candidate. 

The hon. Rebecca Kadaga - let me begin with her education. She studied for her primary education in Shimon Demonstration Primary School, Kampala from 1962 to 1968 –(Interjections)– I know there are new Members who have come here for the first time - in Parliament we try not to exhibit our ignorance, hon. Ssemujju. (Laughter) 

And for her secondary education, she left Shimon and went to St Catherine Senior Secondly School, Lira for her East African Certificate of Education from 1969 to 1972. For her East African Advanced Certificate of Education, she went to Kamuli College Namasagali from 1973 to 1974. She passed very well and then proceeded to Makerere University where she did a Bachelors of Law Degree in 1975 to 1978. After she had successfully graduated, she did her Postgraduate Diploma in Legal Practice at the Law Development Centre, Kampala from 1978 to 1979. 

Then she did a certificate in French, in 1999. She did a postgraduate diploma where she obtained a first class in Women’s Law at the University of Zimbabwe in 2000. In 2002, she studied a Master’s degree in Women’s Law which she completed in 2003 having successfully passed her exams. 

In addition to all that, she has had several publications:
1.	The first is entitled: “An overview of the school Education System in Zimbabwe: Legal Provisions relating to the Education of the Girl Child”.
 
2.	She published a book entitled: “An Insight into Workplace Related Harassment of Women in High-level Decision Making Positions with Particular Reference to Women in the Ugandan Cabinet, 2000”.
 
3.	She published another publication entitled: “The Dilemmas of an African Woman Politician, 2003”. 

So, in terms of her education, she is an accomplished lawyer; she has published and in addition she has experience. She was admitted to the Bar of the High Court of Uganda in 1982. She became a Member of the Uganda Law Society and in 1984, she established herself in private practice under a firm by the name, “Kadaga & Co. Advocates”. 

In that same year, she became a Member of FIDA Uganda. FIDA Is International Federation of Women Lawyers. From 1986 to 1989, she was the President of the International Federation of the Women Lawyers. And in 1988, she established the first legal aid service in Uganda - FIDA Legal Aid Clinic in 1988. 

In 1996, she became the Deputy Speaker of Parliament of Uganda. In 2001, she was elected the Deputy Speaker of Uganda’s Seventh Parliament. In 2002, she was the chairperson of the organising committee of the 33rd Commonwealth Parliamentary Association African Region Conference in Kampala.

In 2006, she was re-elected Deputy Speaker of the Eight Parliament. In 2009, she chaired the organising committee of the 12th Conference of Speakers and Presiding Officers of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association African Region in Kampala. 

In October, 2010, she was chairperson of the organising committee of the Forth Conference of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians, which was also held in Uganda. She spearheaded the lobbying for Parliament of Uganda to host the next global Parliamentary Conference called, “The 126th Parliamentary Union”, to take place in March–April, 2012.

She led several Uganda delegations to the International Parliamentary Union, to the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, to the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarian conferences and others. 

In April 2011, she led the Uganda delegation to the 124th IPU Assembly in Panama City, at which Uganda’s request was approved to host the Assembly in April, 2012. 

She has had other experience: she has worked in Cabinet. In 1990, she was secretary to the commission of inquiry into the affairs of Bank Paribus - you remember that matter which involved the Minister of Defence of Uganda? She was a Member of the commission of inquiry into that. 

In 1991, she was a member of the commission of inquiry that was set up to look into the activities of the Ministry of Lands. In 1998, she was appointed Minister of State for Communications in charge of Aviation and Communications. And in 1999, she was appointed Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, a portfolio responsible for relations between the Executive and the Legislature.

She has enormously contributed to public and community institutions and organisations by being a member of boards. For example, from 1990 to 1993, she was a member of the Board of Directors of the National Social Security Fund. From 1991 to 1994, she was a member of the National Council for Children. In 1990, she was a member of the Commission of Enquiry into the Death of Students at Makerere University and from 1993 to 1996; she was the Chairperson, University Council, Mbarara University of Science and Technology.

She has contributed enormously to women empowerment. There is a long list – I think the time I have, I cannot read all of it. Just to give you an example; in 2003 she led the Ugandan delegation for the African Women’s Meeting on Female Genital Mutilation in Addis Ababa. In 2008, she participated in The 2nd Stop Cervical Cancer Conference in Kampala. In 2008, she participated in the UN Public Hearing in New York on the Situation of Women and Girls in Conflict Situations and very many others. It will be my pleasure, My Lord, to publish all that.

She, of course, has also been very active in politics. In 1989 to date, as she introduced herself, she has been the elected Woman Member of Parliament for Kamuli District. She has been a very senior and active member of the National Executive Committee of the Movement.

She has held many international responsibilities. She was elected Secretary-General of East African Women Parliamentarians Association in 1996. From 1996 to 1998, she participated in peace initiatives under the IGAD for the Sudan-Arusha Regional Initiative for Burundi; Arusha Regional Initiative for DRC and many others which are well-known and will be published.

She is a well-respected international parliamentarian. She does not only have experience in Uganda; she has led parliamentary delegations to the global parliamentary conference called Inter-Parliamentary Union, two times every year. The first one was in Geneva at the IPU Headquarters. The second one was - in many other countries – from 1992 to date, she has participated in CPA International and CPA Africa Region conferences. She has also participated in international women empowerment conferences.

The candidate I present, on behalf of the National Resistance Movement as Speaker, is one who has a very well known track record. She has had the experience. We have seen her at work and the Movement had absolutely no doubt that she is the person to chair the Ninth Parliament. (Applause) 

I, therefore, beg to move that she takes the chair of this Parliament as the Speaker and you give her solid support, especially the Opposition, which has, for a very long time, benefited from her ability to be impartial in the chair. (Applause) I beg to move. 

JUSTICE ODOKI: Thank you, hon. Member for your introduction on hon. Kadaga. Can we have the introduction of hon. Nandala-Mafabi? (Applause)

11.15
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Your Lordship, I beg for a second that my candidate stands up for a flash [HON. MEMBERS: “Who are you?”]  to clean the memory of the Members present in the House. (Applause)

The candidate I have nominated to be Speaker is hon. James Nathan Nandala-Mafabi. Nandala-Mafabi was born in 1966 in Busamaga, Buwalasi, Budadiri, Sironko District in Uganda. He is married with five children.

He is a Fellow Chartered Certified Accountant and Economist. He also undertook a course in law, LLB and he is a professional teacher. 

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi holds a Bachelor of Science Degree, LLB, has an MA; EPP, has an FCCA, CPA (Kenya), CPA (Uganda), a Postgraduate Diploma in Education; and PGDITA.

The hon. Nandala-Mafabi my Lord, has been a professional accountant for 19 years with a clean record. For a reasonable time, he has been an international and is still an international financial management consultant without an international query. (Applause)

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi studied from Makerere University where he got the LLB from. He still studied from Makerere University for a Masters of Arts in Economic Policy and Planning. He studied from the United Kingdom where he obtained ACCA. He also studied in Kenya where he obtained a CPA and he graduated in public administration from what is today known as Uganda Management Institute.

My Lord and hon. Members, my candidate obtained a Postgraduate Diploma in Education from Makerere and a Bachelor of Science in Statistics and Economics with honours, from Makerere.

The hon. Nandala-Mafabi went to Busoga College Mwiri for A’ Level and obtained result 5 in all. He went to Busoga Primary School in 1972. He trained in the United Kingdom in Inland Revenue Investigation. He has a Certificate in Financial Management in the Public Sector from the Swaziland Institute of Public Administration.

The hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi has had working experience. He has been the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee of the Parliament of Uganda –(Applause)- where he has served with distinction and I  repeat, “distinction”.

For the sake of new Members who did not know who Mafabi is; listening to radios and viewing on TV; the man who has been making things right in the Public Accounts Committee is the candidate I am talking about; present in this House, ladies and gentlemen. (Applause) 

The hon. Mafabi has been Chairman of East African Public Accounts Committees. In 2001 and 2006; he was the Chairman of the National Economy Committee of the Parliament of Uganda.

Nandala-Mafabi is a practising accountant, auditor and an international financial management consultant.

Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, from 1988 up to 1998, worked with the Ministry of Finance in URA where he rose to the rank of Assistant Commissioner in Inland Audit. Hon. Members, you know what this means. 

My Lord, the hon. Mafabi worked with the World Bank as a consultant in financial management and he is still a consultant for multi nationals in finance on specific assignments all over the world. 

The hon. Mafabi is chair of Bugisu Cooperative Union -(Applause)- which he fished from deep under the sea and brought it to the surface. He found it with a debt of 1.7 billion and floated it up to a credit of 2.5 billion in two years as we talk. He has an impeccable record, my Lord.

The hon. Mafabi has awards. In 2010 he received an integrity award. (Applause) In 2009 he received an award on Who’s Who in the World. (Applause) In 2007, Mafabi received an award of the ACCA for the best performance he accorded.

Hon. Members, I want shortly to take you through the Parliament we want. The Parliament we want is a good reflection of our society and should, therefore, have the teeth to bite the corrupt and the record of Nathan is impeccable in that direction. So, this needs an upright Speaker and I think that Nathan is one such a Speaker. (Applause)

My humble view is that the balance of power should not be about our status as Members of Parliament but our ability to satisfactorily serve our constituents. I do not see any chance of the public conceding that we should receive any benefit merely because of the title, “honourable Member” before our names but rather that we must be able to promote, strengthen and restore public trust in parliament by making it accountable to the people. The Speaker our Parliament wants is one that has exhibited record in his past and is one who will be tough but at the same time [MR BANYENZAKI: “Procedure”.] reconciliatory. 

My Lord, I want to conclude the submission of the regime of my candidate by assuring hon. Members gathered in this House this morning that Nathan Nandala-Mafabi is competent. Nathan is consistent. Mafabi is strong and he fears God the Almighty. I kindly request [MR BANYENZAKI: “Procedure”.] all Members present to vote for Nathan Nandala-Mafabi as the Speaker of the Ninth Parliament. (Applause) My Lord, I beg to submit.

JUSTICE ODOKI: Thank you for that comprehensive introduction. We shall now move to the next stage of this process and now we are moving to the election. So, the ballot will now be taken. According to the rules - well, you are supposed to organise the election, aren’t you? Yes. Where are the ballot boxes? Is it going to be by secret ballot? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes!

JUSTICE ODOKI: You have the ballot boxes? Ok. As the ballot boxes are brought I call upon the Clerk to ascertain the number of the hon. Members of Parliament present in the House. The clerks are now counting the numbers. 

MR KATOTO: My Lord, point of order. I think it is better for the agents of the candidates to also count the members present. Is it in order? 

JUSTICE ODOKI: Agents? Is that required in the rules?

HON. MEMBERS: No!  

MR WADRI: I am Kassiano Ezati Wadri, former Opposition Chief Whip and a Member of Parliament for Terego County in Arua. My Lord, in the interest of time, while the staff of Parliament take stock of how many Members are here present, I beg your indulgence to consider a roll call as the Members go to cast their votes so that it is easier. People are called according to alphabetical order and they proceed and vote so that it will be manageable. (Applause) 

JUSTICE ODOKI: Any objection? 

HON. MEMBERS: No!

JUSTICE ODOKI: Fine. Now each hon. Member must be given a ballot paper. They already have? You will read one by one? And where is the secret ballot? Where are they going to mark? Ok. Read one by one. 

Hon. Members, we can now start the process of issuing ballots and the Members will proceed and write the name of their candidate for the position of Speaker of Parliament. There are two tables; one in the corner on my left –(Interjections)- it is the opinion of Members that you write from in front here. So be it. There are two tables; one on my left and the other on my right and you can use either of them. The ballot papers will be picked from the Clerk’s table.

(Members voted by secret ballot.)

MR BANYENZAKI: I am suggesting that five people be called at the same so that the process is faster. Otherwise, we may leave here very late and may not even vote for the Deputy Speaker. I am sorry my Lord that I had not introduced myself at the beginning but I am Henry Banyenzaki representing Rubanda County West.

JUSTICE ODOKI: Is his proposal accepted? 

HON. MEMBERS: No.

JUSTICE ODOKI: Do you want three Members or only one at a time? 

HON. MEMBERS: One!

(Members voted by secret ballot.)

JUSTICE ODOKI: That is the close of the ballot. Can the ballot box be emptied and the votes counted? 

Hon. Members, in the strangers’ gallery we have His Royal Highness, Prince William Nadiope Gabula of Bugabula. (Applause) We welcome our guest, His Royal Highness. 

Now, have you emptied the ballot box? We are now going to ascertain the number of votes by counting the cast votes.

Hon. Members, I now wish to declare the results for the election of the Speaker of Parliament. The total number of votes cast was 361; valid votes cast were 359; invalid votes were two.

DECLARATION OF THE SPEAKER

JUSTICE ODOKI: Hon. Alitwala Rebecca Kadaga obtained 302 votes. (Applause) Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi obtained 57 votes. (Applause) I, therefore, now declare that hon. Alitwala Rebecca Kadaga who has obtained majority votes cast is the Speaker-elect of the Ninth Parliament. (Applause)

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to Ms Alitwala Rebecca Kadaga.

JUSTICE ODOKI: Madam Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament, it is my singular honour and privilege to address you for the first time as Madam Speaker in the history of this Parliament. (Applause)

I have to congratulate you most warmly for winning this election deservedly due to your very exemplary record in and outside Parliament. I have had the privilege of working with the Speaker for a long time since she was a student, where I had a privilege of seeing her in the classroom. (Applause) It is, therefore, a singular honour for me to see her assuming this high office in the Republic of Uganda. (Applause) Congratulations and I wish you every success in handling this august House; and I believe they are in good hands.

In the same spirit, I wish to also commend the outgoing Speaker, my good classmate, who I also had the privilege of teaching with and I have also followed his record. He has been a very good leader of this House and definitely, we want to commend him for the service he has rendered. (Applause)

Finally, I want to thank the honourable members for being patient. One of the qualities a judge must have is patience; he must be able to be a good listener. I do not know about the Speaker, but I suppose, a Speaker too must be a good listener and I have listened and I hope I have given everybody an opportunity to participate honourably in this process. I believe the elections have been free and fair or transparent. I want to thank you for your participation and your patience. I wish you every success in the Ninth Parliament. (Applause)

STATEMENT OF ACCEPTANCE OF ELECTION TO THE POSITION OF SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT

2.16
MS ALITWALA REBECCA KADAGA: My Lord, the Chief Justice of Uganda, the outgoing Speaker, the outgoing Vice-President, the outgoing Prime Minister and members of the Cabinet, and distinguished Members of Parliament; I want to thank so much the Members of the Ninth Parliament for the confidence placed in me by overwhelmingly electing me to the Office of Speaker. (Applause) I promise I will be a Speaker for all the Members of Parliament. 

The Ninth Parliament is the second after the country went multi-party after several years of the individual merit system. Certainly, there were bound to be challenges of adjustment from one system to another that is why I wish at this stage to pay tribute to my predecessor, Rt Hon. Edward Ssekandi, for steering the transition from the Movement system to the multi-party system.

I also pay tribute to the Leader of Government Business who equally had to make adjustments to manage groups rather than individuals.

I pay tribute to the Leader of the Opposition, a fairly new creation which has been missing from the political scene for several years. He too had to grapple with the organisational aspect of managing several smaller political parties within the Parliament as well as the interests of the independents.

Given the challenges of the first multi-party Parliament, I wish to appeal to all Members to apply themselves diligently to their duties. Much is expected from us; we are part of a very vibrant society with access to information, the media; and they are well informed. The public wants good services and they also want value for money; they want transparency, accountability and overall good governance. This should be the main focus of the Members of Parliament.

It is also my intention to continue bridging the gap between Parliament and the population by conducting regular outreach programmes of which the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, the members of the Commission and the ministers attending the outreach will engage local government leaders, civil society organisations, non-governmental organisations and community-based organisations in building strong partnerships with them in the work of Parliament and making Parliament more relevant to the population.

I do apologise at this stage for the fact that we are not meeting in the plenary chamber, but I wish to assure you that the Parliamentary Commission is assiduously working towards creation of more office accommodation and parking space. You will be inconvenienced for some time, but I appeal to you to bear with us even if you are called upon to share offices. The Parliamentary Commission anticipated your arrival and your welfare will be handled accordingly.

Hon. Members, when you took oath early this week, you were given a bag containing the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Rules of Procedure and a copy of the Parliament Powers and Privileges, which I urge  you to study carefully as they are your instruments of office.

My Lord, distinguished colleagues, I wish to reaffirm my commitment to be objective and fair to all of you in conducting the business of the House. I will always be available for consultation and call for the co-operation of all the new Members. Thank you very much. (Applause)

I now wish to suspend the House for ten minutes to permit my Lord, the Chief Justice to withdraw. The House is suspended for ten minutes.

(The House was suspended at 2.20 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.40 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, between Monday and Wednesday, Members of the Ninth Parliament took their oath of office. I have also taken office, but the Parliament is not fully constituted until we have elected the Deputy Speaker. We shall now proceed to that phase of this exercise.

NOMINATIONS FOR THE OFFICE OF DEPUTY SPEAKER 

2.42
MR ADOLF MWESIGE (NRM, Bunyangabu County, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I move the motion, allow me to warmly congratulate you upon your well deserved election to the Office of the Speaker of the Ninth Parliament. (Applause)

Given your experience and professionalism, Madam Speaker, I have no doubt that you will steer this august House to greater heights. I congratulate all the honourable members for the function they have performed of electing the Speaker and also congratulate them upon their own election to the Ninth Parliament. 

Pursuant to rule 5 sub-rule (5) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to move that the hon. Jacob Oulanyah -(Applause)- do take the chair of this Parliament as the Deputy Speaker of the Ninth Parliament. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the rules require that the nomination be seconded. Are there seconders? Yes, hon. Nabbanja.

2.44
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am here to second hon. Jacob Oulanyah for the Deputy Speaker of the Ninth Parliament. 

2.45
MR ASUMAN KIYINGI (Independent, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the rest to congratulate you most heartily upon that elevation. I rise to second the nomination of hon. Jacob Oulanyah for the position of Deputy Speaker. (Applause)

2.46
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I would like to follow suit and congratulate you upon your election as the Speaker of the Ninth Parliament. I stand here today to second the nomination of Jacob Oulanyah for the position of Deputy Speaker. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Are there further nominations? Hon. Ibi.

2.47
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker of Parliament. You have done all of us here present in this august House proud. (Applause) You have done the women of Uganda proud. We are very proud of you and wish you the very best of luck. 

I wish, in the same vein, to really appreciate the efforts of all the women organisations that have been pushing so hard to have a female Speaker of the Republic of Uganda. We thank you so much. (Applause)

I, Ekwau Ibi Florence, move this motion under rule 5 sub-rule (5) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, that hon. Odonga Otto -(Applause)- MP Aruu County, do take the chair of this Parliament as the Deputy Speaker as stipulated in Article 82 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Let us start with the lady behind hon. Fungaroo, then hon. Okupa and your colleague. Within a week, I will know all your names. Do not worry - Sironko? Okay. 

2.48
MS FEMIAR WADADA (FDC, Woman Representative, Sironko): Congratulations, Madam Speaker. I am here to second hon. Odonga Otto. (Applause)

2.49
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, on a special note, I extend my congratulations and those of the people of Kasilo to you upon your ascension to that high office. Congratulations!

I stand here to second hon. Odonga Otto Samuel (Jr) to the position of the Deputy Speaker of the Ninth Parliament. I find it fit that he deputises you. Thank you. (Applause)

2.50
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second hon. Odonga Otto -(Laughter)- as the Deputy Speaker. I am grateful that hon. Oulanya would even vote for hon. Odonga Otto. Thank you. (Laughter)	

THE SPEAKER: We are delighted to hear that we have two Olanyas in the House. Thank you. 

2.51
MR JOHNY SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): I second the nomination of hon. Odonga Otto as the Deputy Speaker of Parliament. (Applause) Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: The rules require that we find out from hon. Odonga Otto whether he consents to the nomination. Hon. Odonga Otto – Oh! Sorry. We have had two nominations. The first was hon. Oulanyah; let us establish whether he consents. Thereafter we shall hear from hon. Otto.

2.52
MR JACOB OULANYAH (NRM, Omoro County, Gulu): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, with great humility, I accept the nomination and consent to it. Thank you. (Applause)

2.52
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, I first of all congratulate you for ascending to that higher office. And I am speaking in a capacity of a potential person to deputise you. (Laughter) I stand up to second and support my nomination and candidature for the position of Deputy Speaker. I accept and consent and I am ready to assume office as soon as I win the elections. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members. Are there any further nominations? 

HON. MEMBERS: No. 

THE SPEAKER: Nominations closed. Let me now invite the proposers to speak about their candidates.

2.54
MR ADOLF MWESIGE (NRM, Bunyangabu County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to mention right away that hon. Jacob Oulanyah is a duly elected Member of Parliament representing Omoro County in the Ninth Parliament. He has already taken the oath of office of Member of Parliament representing Omoro constituency. 

Hon. Jacob Oulanyah graduated with a Bachelor of Arts Degree in Agricultural Economics in 1991 before pursuing a degree in law in 1994. He holds a Postgraduate Diploma in Legal Practice from the Law Development Centre. He is an advocate and a notary public practising under Oulanyah and Company Advocates. 

He has four professional certificates in legislative drafting obtained from the International Law Institute, Kampala, the Bureau of Parliamentary Studies and Training, New Delhi and the Bureau of Parliamentary Studies in Gujarat, India. 

He attended the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Westminster training on parliamentary practice and procedure, in London. (Applause) 

From 1997, he taught legislative drafting and constitutional law at the Law Development Centre and only left in July 2001 when he was sworn in as the elected Member of Parliament for Omoro County. In Parliament, he was a member and later became the Chairman of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee which handled the challenging process of political transition from the Movement System to multi-party system and constitutional review. He steered his committee to process two constitutional amendment bills and nine other bills to implement the provisions of the Constitution. 

His committee supervised, among other institutions, the Parliamentary Commission. He presented the only private Member’s Bill in the Seventh Parliament. He was founder member of the Consultative Assembly of Parliamentarians on the International Criminal Court. From 2006, after he lost his seat in Parliament, hon. Oulanyah continued to engage himself actively in legislative activities such as training Members of Parliament in Kenya, Swaziland and the Sudan on parliamentary practice and procedure, legislative drafting and other subjects relevant to the proper functioning and administration of parliaments.

He has drafted several rules of procedure for other parliaments. He has been a legal advisor to high level persons including Dr Riek Machar, the chief mediator in the Juba Peace Talks and President Joachim Chissano, the UN Special Envoy to the LRA affected areas. He drafted the Juba Peace Agreement and he was also an advisor to the Government of Southern Sudan. 

Hon. Oulanyah brings to this House experience of 14 years in legal practice and 10 years experience in parliamentary practice. (Applause) He is a believer in the parliamentary system of representative democracy and is an ardent believer in procedural prowess and orderly conduct of business. He is a persistent and tenacious seeker of high standards of parliamentary service delivery and capacity building for the effective performance of representative and oversight roles of Parliament. 

He is professional in appearance and presentation; he is energetic and has an independent mind with a positive and inspiring outlook. He is also reliable and dependable. (Applause) He also firmly believes that while the majority may have their way, the minority rights have their say and must be protected, preserved and observed as a cornerstone of parliamentary democracy. He respects authority and, therefore, will make a very good deputy speaker. He is a bridge between the old generation of parliamentarians and the new generation. (Applause) 

It is now my honour, Madam Speaker, to recommend hon. Oulanyah as a fit and proper person to assume the office of Deputy Speaker. I, therefore, commend his candidature to you, hon. Members, to elect him as Deputy Speaker of the Ninth Parliament. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Mwesige. I now invite hon. Ibi to speak about the candidature of hon. Odonga Otto.

3.00
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Odonga Otto is a gentleman with rare distinctions. (Laughter) He was the Vice-Chairperson of the Government Assurances Committee from 2008 to date. He has ably served on the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs of this Parliament. Hon. Odonga Otto also served as a member of the Defence and Internal Affairs Committee. He ably performed in his capacity as a committee member of Presidential and Foreign Affairs of this Parliament.

I support hon. Odonga Otto’s candidature because of his good performance in the Appointments Committee of 2006. It is for these strong reasons that I support his candidature. 

He also participated in the CPA in Bangladesh and ably represented this Parliament. In 2008, hon. Odonga Otto participated in the African Union Summit in Addis Ababa distinctively to represent this Parliament and was nominated by the Speaker then. 

As if that were not enough, honourable colleagues -(Laughter)- hon. Odonga Otto also represented this Parliament in 2010 in the World e-Parliament Conference in Johannesburg in South Africa. 

It is for these strong reasons that I confidently believe that hon. Odonga Otto can steer the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda as the Deputy Speaker.

Madam Speaker, hon. Odonga Otto has the following education background. He has distinctive qualifications that merit his sitting in this chair with a Master of Arts in International Relations and Diplomacy, 2004 to 2007, Makerere University. The work of a Speaker needs someone who is well acquainted with a lot of diplomacy. (Applause) (Laughter) 

Hon. Odonga Otto has a Bachelor of Arts in Political Science of Makerere University, 2001. He also has a Degree in Laws of Uganda Christian University. Hon. Odonga Otto also acquired a Diploma in Legal Practice of LDC. You remember that year how many people failed that exam, but hon. Odonga Otto ably succeeded and passed with distinctions. 

Hon. Odonga Otto went to St Joseph’s College Layibi for A’ Level and attended Sacred Heart Seminary, Lacor, for his O’ Level. He also authored the “Parliamentarian’s Perspective 2010", a book that is available in the northern wing. He is a young and youthful parliamentarian; that shows his commitment and dedication to this Parliament and to this country. And he is ready to be a servant of this Parliament, this nation and to represent the Parliament of Uganda. I will also say he is the first author, since independence, to write such a book at such an age and it is for these reasons that I support his candidature. 

Hon. Odonga Otto also has some distinctive virtues; above all, oratory skills. Odonga Otto speaks with a lot of eloquence that makes him very articulate. He also has a distinctive sense of humour. (Laughter) If he stood here for two minutes, you would hold your ribs as you laugh. 

As far as courage is concerned, hon. Odonga Otto has the dare alacrity of a statesman. He is patriotic, objective, and consistent. His consistency can be measured when he always brought out issues related to corruption and all the vices that tend to rip our country bare. 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, it is for these strong reasons that I recommend and urge this House to support the candidature of hon. Odonga Otto as the Deputy Speaker of the Ninth Parliament. 

At his age, Odonga Otto has ably achieved so much by any standards that cannot be disregarded or disputed -(Applause)- and for these reasons, I ask that we give him the platform to rise. 

Lastly, he has ably represented the people of Aruu County, the third time, effective his swearing in yesterday. I ask and plead with you to find room in your heart to give hon. Odonga Otto the vote that would make him the Deputy Speaker of the Ninth Parliament. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: First of all, Madam Speaker, I also want to congratulate you for having won to become the Speaker of the Ninth Parliament. I am very sure that not all Members here know each other. I know that when you and I were standing, we were not given an opportunity to address our colleagues -(Interjections)- please, give me a chance to complete. I request that you allow our two colleagues, hon. Odonga Otto and hon. Oulanya at least two minutes such that the Members can understand Otto’s eloquence. 

In fact that is the best and democratic way because presenting a CV, where they say he is eloquent, yet nobody has heard about his eloquence, does not make sense. We want to plead with you, Madam Speaker, on this procedural issue so that you allow – if hon. Oulanyah does not want to talk, at least allow hon. Odonga Otto just two minutes to make his case. I plead with you.

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rule 5, sub-rule (5) talks about the process of electing a Deputy Speaker. And it says the rules used to elect a Speaker should be followed to elect the Deputy Speaker. So, if the Speaker was elected without addressing the House, is the honourable Member following procedure at this time when he calls upon one of the candidates to address the House? Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am happy that my brother from Makindye East is talking but I want to tell him that in this House, it is give and take -(Interjections)- yes, give me an opportunity to explain. You are talking about dialogue and this is how dialogue begins. 

Madam Speaker, you can make a lot of decisions in that chair. What we are asking for is not too much - only two minutes so that hon. Odonga Otto and Oulanyah can make their case. Hon. Oulanyah might fear to talk, but I am sure hon. Odonga Otto would love to make his case so that the new Members can get to know who hon. Odonga Otto is.

I understand my colleagues want us to get quickly to voting, but if you have come to this House and your job is only to vote, it is very dangerous. We want you to understand issues. (Applause) You should not be a voting machine. If you want to be a voting machine, we would rather place the machines there and you do not attend proceedings. In that regard –(Interruption)  

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to raise a point of order. I find it intriguing for the honourable member to continue derailing the House when the Rules of Procedure are very clear. Rule 5, which has been cited by hon. Ssimbwa, is to the effect that we follow the procedure that was followed while voting for the Speaker. Rule 4 sub-rule (9) is very clear that nomination shall be seconded without debate. Is the Member in order to continue derailing the House on whether we should allow the candidates to speak when we never allowed the candidates for Speaker a chance to campaign?
 
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this morning when the Chief Justice was presiding, we all agreed that we are going to abide by the Rules of the Eighth Parliament which subsist until we change them. In that regard, I think we should do what we did with the position of the Speaker and not engage in a debate because that is what the rules say. They say that nominations shall be seconded without debate. If you want to change, we shall change it at a later stage. When the rules committee sits, we can make a case for changing the process, but for now, that is the procedure that we are following.

3.13
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, you are the head of the Inter-parliamentary Union; we are also members of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. The global practice of this global organisation to which we are members, and the unwritten and the written practice of the Ugandan Parliament since independence, provide that in absentia or in case of a lacuna, the Speaker shall use his or her wisdom to make a ruling in the interest of the country -(Ms Kabakumba rose_)- I would like to remind my colleague, hon. Kabakumba, that procedure takes precedence and that is parliamentary practice.

MR ASUMAN KIYINGI: Madam Speaker, you have a made a ruling on a matter which was being contested and our rules of procedure are such that when a ruling is made by the Speaker, it is final. You have ruled and that is it. Is the hon. Member, therefore, in order to keep on labouring, wasting time and challenging your authority?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I said that if we want to change the rules, the rules committee of this House will make the necessary changes. This morning we agreed that we abide by the existing rules.
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, rule 5(5) says that rules for the election of the Speaker shall apply with necessary modifications to election of the Deputy Speaker.

Since Parliament began here, this is the first time we have elected a Speaker. What has been happening here is that people come and nominations open and then close. That is why I must stand by the people who voted me because they have put democracy in this place.

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, you have clearly guided this House and I believe you are aware of rule 5(5) and you made a ruling. Is it in order for hon. Nandala-Mafabi, who contested with you and lost, to continue challenging your ruling hiding behind rule 5(5)? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we are going against our rules because we are now debating. The rules we have dictate that we second and not debate. I also wanted to remind hon. Nandala that we have had elections before between the late hon. Ayume and hon. Wacha. The procedures that were followed then are the ones that have been followed today. I would not want to usurp the work of the rules committee; you will have an opportunity after you set up your committees to review. Let me now invite the clerk to call the names for voting.

(Members voted by secret ballot.)

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence on a matter directly regarding our health because it is increasingly becoming too hot and the air conditioning is off. I would beg that you allow Members to suspend the dress code and we remove the jackets -(Interjections)- it is too hot, honestly.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I apologised to you in the morning, we are not sitting in the Chamber which is ordinarily very well air conditioned. The system here is a bit faulty and is working at 50 percent capacity. So, I will allow the hon. Members to take off only their coats –(Laughter)- they should not take off anything else. Let us proceed with the voting. (Laughter)

(Members voted by secret ballot.)

THE SPEAKER: Is there anyone in the room who has not yet voted? If all Members have voted, counting can proceed.

DECLARATION OF THE DEPUTY SPEAKER

THE SPEAKER: My Lord the Chief Justice, declaration of the results for Office of the Deputy Speaker, 19 May 2011: total votes cast are 369; valid votes cast are 257 and invalid votes are two. 

Votes obtained by the candidates: Hon. Odonga Otto Samuel, 58. (Applause) Hon. Oulanyah Jacob L’Okori, 299. (Applause) 

I, therefore, now declare that hon. Oulanyah Jacob L’Okori who has obtained the majority votes, is the Deputy Speaker-elect of the Ninth Parliament. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CLERK, LEGISLATIVE SERVICES: The Rt Hon. Speaker, your Lordship the Chief Justice, hon. Members; clause 10 of Article 82 of the Constitution stipulates that: “The Speaker and Deputy Speaker shall each, before assuming duties of office, take and subscribe the Oath of Speaker or Deputy Speaker specified in the Fourth Schedule to this Constitution.” 

The Second Schedule of the Oath Act, Cap 19 of the Laws of Uganda, states that: “The Oath of Speaker or Deputy Speaker shall be tendered by the President or a person authorised by the President.” 

In this regard, His Excellency the President has authorised His Lordship, Benjamin Odoki, the Chief Justice, to administer the Oath of the Deputy Speaker to hon. Oulanyah Jacob L’Okori, the Deputy Speaker-elect in the following terms - I will again read the letter which His Excellency the President addressed to the Clerk to Parliament: 

“Mr A.M. Tandekwire, Clerk to Parliament, Parliament of Uganda, P.O. Box 7178 Kampala. 

Authority to Tender the Oath: 
I hereby authorise the Chief Justice, His Lordship Benjamin Odoki, to tender the Oath of Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Parliament elect. Yoweri K. Museveni, President.”

Rt Hon. Speaker and the My Lordship the Chief Justice, I would like to invite the Chief Justice to administer the oath to the Deputy Speaker elect. (Applause)

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS 

The Oaths were administered to Jacob Oulanyah L’Okori.

THE SPEAKER: My Lord the Chief Justice, we want to thank you very much for the time you have spent here at Parliament. We hope that we will be able to release you forthwith to proceed with your other duties. However, before we allow you to go, I would like to invite hon. Oulanyah to give his acceptance speech before we close the proceedings. 

STATEMENT OF ACCEPTANCE OF ELECTION TO THE POSITION OF DEPUTY SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT

5.34
MR JACOB OULANYAH: Madam Speaker, the Chief Justice, my dear Members of the Ninth Parliament, I address you with all the greatest humility. I thank God Almighty for His grace and the gift of life that has enabled me witness this day. 

I congratulate you, Madam Speaker, upon your well deserved elevation and I pledge my full and total support to you. (Applause) 

Hon. Members, I thank you for the confidence you have put in me. I can only promise to do my best to deserve your trust and confidence. (Applause)

I thank my party, the NRM, for nominating me. I thank the people of Omoro County because without them, all this would not have been possible. (Applause)

An English professor, Prof. Dicey said, “Parliament has the power to do anything under the sun except to turn a man into a woman” -(Laughter)- but even that is now possible with modern surgery. This Parliament has the power, under Article 79(1) of the Constitution, to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, you have made an elaborate speech on the way forward and the policies that need to be introduced in this Parliament; I associate myself fully with those and will support you fully. (Applause) There is no question that my role as Deputy Speaker will be to execute, with utmost diligence, all assignments given to me by the Speaker. This standard should apply to all of us when executing whatever assignment we will get as Members; utmost diligence is the catch phrase. To achieve this, I strongly believe we will need to adopt some guiding principles on how to effectively deliver the bigger purpose of Parliament and its service to the people. I, therefore, humbly suggest some method of work which I found very useful when we, then as the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee of the Seventh Parliament, used when we handled the political transition and constitutional review process in 2005.

The first one is facing facts. We should agree from the outset that we will lay facts on the table and use them as a reference point when expressing sometimes divergent opinions. (Applause) 

Two, reason as a guiding principle; we should agree that we will endeavour to use reason and sound logic in tabling our positions. This will enable us derive correct interpretations from agreed facts. 

Three, tolerance and mutual respect; we should agree that no view will be suppressed. All views will be received with tolerance and given fair treatment based on known facts and reason. We must pledge to overrule intolerance.

Four, harmony; we should agree that monumental as the task before us is and will always be, it is still important that we adopt a collegial approach and debate, in such a manner that will bring our collective wisdom to bear on the problems presented before us. This spirit of harmony should and will keep us conscious that the people did not give the task to any individual among us, but rather to the august House as a whole. We, therefore, have a collective responsibility to work together harmoniously. 

Five, national interests above self and party. In one’s lifetime, one can change political affiliation, party affiliation, but it is very unusual and indeed unlikely that one would easily change nationality or citizenship. We, therefore, must resolve from the outset that our supreme guiding star, like the unchanging truth north of a magnet, would be the enduring interest of the people of Uganda. (Applause) 

As individuals, we have interests and even as members of political parties we are party to very partisan positions. We should find occasion to declare these interests boldly before this House and its committees. When decision time comes, we must measure them alongside the national interest. More often than not, we will find that the national interest rings true. All of us, without exception, will face moments when we will have to abandon strongly held partisan positions when the bright light of national interest is shone. (Applause)

In short, our work will enable us learn more about and from each other. Prejudices will be abandoned as we discover how much we all care about our country and people. Convictions will be entrenched as we find new reasons to work together. None of us will claim not to have learnt something new in the course of our work. I can say, without any fear of contradiction whatsoever, that whether you agree with an opinion of an individual Member or not, you will find that you are all women and men of conviction determined to make a difference in the lives of the people you represent. You will work long hours, at night and sometimes even on weekends. You will listen to sometimes highly offensive view points. You will even endure threats of lawsuits and other veiled threats. 

I can only say that I feel greatly honoured to be called your Deputy Speaker and to serve under the hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga. I hope and pray that the guidance and decisions I will have opportunity to make will make me truly deserve the overwhelming confidence you showed in electing me. I invite you, honourable members, to pick a leaf from the statements I have made and consider adopting this method of work in your work. When this happens - when we allow facts, reason, tolerance and mutual respect to shape our actions - harmony, consensus and legitimacy is bound to be the inevitable result. Our people will delight in our handiwork. They will refer to us no longer as mere politicians, but rather as true leaders and patriots. Thank you all again and God bless you all. I say this for God and my country. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Oulanyah. My Lord the Chief Justice, I have three announcements to make. One, I would like to call upon all the political parties here to make consultations and indicate to the Office of the Speaker and the Clerk, the whips of the various political parties. 

Secondly, we would like to start orientation on the Rules of Procedure on Monday next week at 2.30 p.m. So, I invite all the Members of Parliament to come and attend the orientation, which will start on Monday and run till Wednesday. 

I am giving you time to go back and say hello to the voters -(Interjection)- it will be here. I am giving you an opportunity to go back and say hello to the voters, to report that you have taken the oath and that you are ready to work. So, 2.30 p.m. on Monday, Tuesday at 10.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m. and Wednesday 10.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m. We think that should be adequate for you to capture the Rules of Procedure. 

Third, hon. Members, we would like to know more about you. Concurrently, as we are handling the orientation, there will be registration of your particulars. So, the following rooms will be available: Committee Room 7 on the ground floor of the North Wing will be used by Members representing Persons with Disabilities. Ground floor, room 13 in the North Wing will be used by the other Members. In the South Wing, South Committee Room on the second floor will be available and the East Committee Room also on the second Floor of the South Wing will be available. So, you are welcome to use any of those save for that which we have reserved for the Members representing Persons With Disabilities on the ground floor of the North Wing. The North Wing is the side where you took the oath. The South Wing is this side which is under rehabilitation.

I would like to thank you very much for the work done today and for finally constituting the Parliament. I wish you all a very successful tenure. As I reiterated, my office will be open to all Members of Parliament. I would like to adjourn the House to 2.30 p.m. on Monday. Tomorrow is Friday, so the House is adjourned to 2.30 on Monday. Thank you very much. 

(The House rose at 5.45 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 23 May 2011 at 2.30 p.m.)
