Tuesday, 12 May 2009

Parliament met at 2.48 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is my pleasure to welcome you to this sitting. Over the weekend, two of our colleagues lost their mothers. On Friday as hon. Rose Akol, Member of Parliament for Bukedea, was travelling to Geneva, she received sad news about the demise of her mother. The burial took place in Bukedea on Sunday. On Saturday, hon. Maj. Guma, Member of Parliament and Commissioner, lost a mother and the burial took place yesterday at his home. May we please observe a moment of silence in honour of the deceased?

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have very little time remaining for this session, which is due to end on 21st May, so we must maximally utilise the time available for us to complete as much business as we can. We have a lot of business pending but we should at least clear some of it before that date. Therefore, I will be constrained to allocate time for contributions so that other matters can be debated. Actually, we intend to buy clocks which will be placed around the chambers so that whenever you are given time, you look at the clock and find out whether you are within time or not. Once your time is up, we shall use certain methods to cut you off. This was agreed on in the Business Committee. 

We may have to adjust today’s Order Paper a little to allow for the first reading of one of the Bills that has been pending here for some time, and that is the Government Assurances Bill.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE IMPLEMENTATION OF GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES BILL, 2008

2.52
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to present before this Parliament a Bill for first reading entitled, “the Implementation of Government Assurances Bill”. I am presenting this Bill under rules 107 and 133(b) of our Rules of Procedure. I wish to attach the Certificate of Financial Implications to the Bill. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now, I have a problem. This is a Bill originating from the Committee on Government Assurances. It seems to be private but I think it is originating from there. I do not know whether I should send it to that committee –(Laughter)- or to another committee. I think it would be fair that it is committed to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee for consideration. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.54
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategaya): On Wednesday, 29 April 2009, this august House held a debate on the issue of Migingo Island, and the deployment of Ambassador Julius Onen also came up.

On page 54 of the copy of the Hansard, I hope members have got a copy - Mr Speaker, with your indulgence, can I pause and have the statement distributed? 

THE SPEAKER: You can read. We are aware that you are going to distribute. 

MR KATEGAYA: Thank you. On page 54 of the copy of the Hansard of the day, hon. Mrs Janat Mukwaya, Minister, General Duties, Office of the Prime Minister, promised that the Minister for East African Community Affairs will at an appropriate time, “…come back to explain how Ambassador Onen was removed from his office, simple”. This is the appropriate time to do so and thank you for availing me this opportunity. 

(a) Delegation to the Summit: on page 51, hon. Livingstone Okello-Okello is quoted as follows: “Today as we speak, there is a meeting in Arusha and the Uganda delegation is composed as follows: The leader is President Museveni, there is also hon. Eriya Kategaya, hon. Sam Kutesa, hon. Nasasira and for the Attorney-General they have taken hon. Fred Ruhindi. (Laughter) Look at the composition of that delegation. What is Ugandan about it? It is wrong for us as leaders to practice tribalism.”
     
There is a document purportedly signed by hon. Okot Ogong Felix demanding the renewal of Ambassador Julius Onen’s contract. It has nine paragraphs and in paragraph five it says the following on the delegation of Uganda to the East African Community Summit: “As I speak now, the East African Community Summit, which started yesterday at Arusha, Tanzania is ongoing. The Uganda delegation to that meeting consists of the following: (a) His Excellency President Yoweri Museveni; (b) Hon. Eriya Kategaya, Minister for East African Community; (c) Hon. Sam Kutesa, Minister of Foreign Affairs; (d) Hon. John Nasasira, Minister of Transport and Communication - which is wrong - and (e) Hon. Ruhindi Fred, Deputy Attorney-General. The composition of this delegation speaks for itself.”

Facts

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the following was the composition of the Uganda delegation to the East African summit in Arusha, Tanzania on 28 to 29 April 2009:

1. H.E. President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni.
2. The Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for East African Community Affairs, Eriya Kategaya.
3. The Minister for Foreign Affairs, hon. Sam Kutesa.
4. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Syda Bbumba.
5. The Minister of Works and Transport, hon. John Nasasira.
6. The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, hon. Gabriel Opio.
7. The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, hon. Hope Mwesigye.
8. The Minister of State for Trade, hon. Eng. Gagawala Nelson Wambuzi. 
9. The Minister of State for Finance (General Duties), hon. Fred Omach.
10. The Minister of State for Lands, hon. Asuman Kiyingi.
11.	The Minister of State for Higher Education, hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana. 

Included in the delegation were the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs, hon. Lule Mawiya and hon. Stephen Kaliba respectively. 

(b) The procedure of appointment and renewal of contracts of Deputy Secretaries-General at EAC Secretariat.

When the EAC was established in 2000, we were three partners namely Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda. The arrangement was that when one partner took the post of Secretary-General, then the other two partners would take Deputy Secretary-General each, making two Deputy Secretaries-General. 

The procedure and practice has been that the nominee of each partner state is automatically accepted and appointed by the Summit. This is still the procedure and practice in the EAC. The renewal of contract of Deputy Secretary-General is the prerogative of the partner state which originally nominated him or her. 

Chapter 10, Article 68 of the treaty for the establishment of the EAC says: The Deputy Secretaries-General shall each serve a three year term, renewable once.” 

In the instrument of appointment dated the 5th day of April 2006 signed by the three presidents of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda, Ambassador Julius Baker Onen was appointed Deputy Secretary-General of the East African Community. It says: “This appointment shall take effect from the 25th day of April the year two thousand and six…” By simple arithmetic, Ambassador Onen’s contract was ending on the 25th day of April 2009. It was due for renewal, which was at the discretion and prerogative of Uganda and nobody else. 

On page 51 of the copy of the said Hansard, hon. Livingstone Okello-Okello is quoted thus: “The information I have is that the four other countries recommended that Julius Onen remains but the leaders of this country went to Arusha and removed Onen and Kiraso remained. Onen is coming without any designation.” 

This same sentiment is echoed by Prof. Ogenga Latigo, Leader of the Opposition, on page 54 of the copy of the said Hansard. It says: “…and therefore it pains extremely when the whole East Africa - Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda, Burundi - recommend that Ambassador Onen remains and when he is removed on issues that have nothing to do with competence and maybe social interest ….” 

Then in the document signed by hon. Okot Ogong Felix, paragraph four contains the following: “As a matter procedure, the other four member states of East African Community namely Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda and Burundi had to appraise the two Ugandan officials, Ambassador Onen and hon. Kiraso Beatrice, and recommend to the EAC authority which one should be retained by the Community. The information we have indicates that the four partner states mentioned above unanimously recommended that Ambassador Onen’s contract be renewed for a further three-year term. In spite of this unanimous recommendation, Uganda Government went ahead to drop Ambassador Onen in preference of hon. Kiraso Beatrice.”

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I have respect for the three honourable members - hon. Livingstone Okello-Okello, hon. Okot Ogong Felix, but more so Prof. Ogenga Latigo, Leader of the Opposition. They should not allow themselves to be conveyors and purveyors of rumours and untruths to the public. There was no such a thing as appraisal or recommendation from the four fellow partner states about the renewal of Ambassador Onen’s contract. This is not the procedure and practice for the renewal of contracts for Deputy Secretaries-General in EAC. My honest advice is that whoever gave them that information should be avoided and shunned in future. The other four partner states cannot vouch for what is contained in the statements made by the three honourable members. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, let me briefly give the history of this saga. When the Rwanda Republic and Burundi Republic joined EAC, there were three posts of Deputy Secretary-General: (i) Deputy Secretary-General in charge of Finance and Administration; (ii) Deputy Secretary-General in charge of Projects and Programmes; and (iii) Deputy Secretary-General in charge of Political Federation 

Slots (ii) and (iii) above were occupied by Uganda - projects and programmes under Ambassador Julius Onen and political federation under hon. Beatrice Kiraso. 

In the Seventh Extraordinary Summit held on 22 October 2008, the Heads of State endorsed the decision of the Council to split the position of the Deputy Secretary-General, Projects and Programmes into two, namely, Deputy Secretary-General Planning and Infrastructure and Deputy Secretary-General Productive and Social Sectors. This was done to accommodate the new partners of EAC, Rwanda and Burundi. 

It was made clear that when the contracts of Ambassador Onen and hon. Kiraso came to an end, one of them had to go. Hon. Kiraso Beatrice was specifically appointed to be in charge of fast tracking the political federation as per her instrument of appointment dated the 5th day of April 2006 signed by H.E. President Mwai Kibaki of the Republic of Kenya, H.E. President Mrisho Kikwete of the United Republic of Tanzania and H.E. President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni of Uganda. The effective date of appointment was 25 April 2006. Contracts of both Ambassador Onen and hon. Kiraso were ending at the same time. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the last summit meeting was a landmark in our integration process because: 

(i)	The bracketed issues on the Draft Protocol of the EAC Common Market were resolved; 
(ii)	Instructions were given by the summit that the remaining work on appendices/annexes of the protocol should be negotiated and agreed upon so that the full protocol can be signed in November 2009; and 
(iii)	Rwanda and Burundi have completed their consultations on the issue of political federation and the results are positive and encouraging. That means the process of integration is on course. 

In view of the above reasons, the appointing authority, H.E. President Yoweri Museveni, decided that hon. Kiraso Beatrice’s contract is renewed so that she can continue pursuing her programmes on political federation. He also decided that Ambassador Onen, who is a very competent diplomat and civil servant, will be deployed elsewhere in the service of this country. 

Lastly, I am reliably informed that Ambassador Onen is not interested in but embarrassed by this type of debate. I share his feelings. Mr Speaker, that is the end of my statement. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We have 30 minutes for debate. I think we should take five minutes each.

3.05
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for bringing this statement at this particular time. 

At the time when this issue was brought on the Floor of the House, I was not around but with modern technology I was able to follow events. It is very unfortunate that the name of Ambassador Julius Onen is being mentioned here as a person but I think we need to appreciate that this is just nothing but the tip of the iceberg. (Applause) Ambassador Julius Onen may not want his name to be mentioned but I think it is only fair that we as Members of Parliament, as people who believe that we are all Ugandans with equal rights, should be able to express our inner most and sincere feelings about the manner in which this country is being managed. 

In this Parliament we have educationists like the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister through whose hands many Ugandans have passed and I think academically we are all well endowed with knowledge to be able to serve in any position if we are given a fair assessment. There is no known fact to say that only people from one region are better endowed with knowledge and therefore education to serve. 

I would be very grateful if one of these days the government could come up with an audit of positions in government and in public offices being held in this country. I think that is the time when all our eyes will open. Start with Cabinet or with permanent secretaries in this country. Where are they coming from? (Applause) 

Recently we had promotions for army officers and they even included those that had retired but were promoted. When you look at that list, it is all skewed towards one region. All we are saying is we need a purposeful programme of social inclusion whereby everyone in Uganda should feel that he is a member of this country and therefore enjoys equal rights. The moment that is not done, I think it breeds some discontent. 

I want to share the experience –(Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)     

THE SPEAKER: There is no information! Allow him to develop his argument. (Laughter)

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, it is not the first time that persons from a particular region of this country are being ostracised and isolated. I have a case of Ambassador Olara Otunu. Ambassador Olara Otunu had to change citizenship. He had to become an Ivorian in order to earn a UN job and yet his own country, his mother country, Uganda, refused to give a signature to support his candidature for the UN job. So are we going to change our citizenship every now and then in order for us to earn jobs in this country and in this world? 

I think it is only fair, colleagues, that we analyse these things coolly; let us not be emotional, protective or defensive. Let us be what we are. Professor Kabwegyere, today may be my turn to be marginalised, not to be accessed for social inclusion, but you never know tomorrow, you never know tomorrow! 

You see, this is comparable to the spokes of a bicycle. If you want to know whether a bicycle is moving or not then the spokes should not be in one place. The spokes must keep moving from the top to the sides, down and up and then you will know that the bicycle is in motion; equally so for a country like Uganda, in order for us to be seen to be advancing. We are building patriotism, which has become a keyword today. We are building patriotism clubs, which should instil love for our country. We should then be practical. If we are not going to be practical and we are going to continue to exercise nepotism or to isolate other people, especially from those other regions that you consider barbaric that you should not sit with, I think it is very unfortunate. Let us reconsider -(Interjection)- those are not my words. You can go to archives of this country; those were statements which were made in 1986. It was the first statement. You go check and you will find them, if you think I have quoted them out of context. 

My appeal to us is that we should accept that the 31 million Ugandans as projected by our population position today have a stake in this country. They deserve equal treatment. They deserve to be heard. 

Please, once again as I wind up, I challenge and request government to come up with an audit. Come up with an audit and it will talk for itself. How many positions are there in Uganda Revenue Authority? How many permanent secretaries are there? Are they well structured and shared by all regions? If we do that, we will be able to know whether we really mean well for this country or not. Otherwise, the way things are, I am afraid it is not only Members of Parliament who are feeling the itch but the entire country. I wish you could have your ears to the ground to listen to the cries of the people so that we can then be able, as an organ charged with management of affairs of this country, to sit down and reasonably come up with what is fair for all of us. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.11
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County Lira): Mr Speaker, I stand here first of all to thank the minister for making this statement. Actually, he just attempted to make a statement but it is not a clear statement to me. I want to appeal to honourable Members of Parliament; the issue that we are raising today is not based on politics. It is based on the principle of equality, on the principle of Ugandans being treated equally. 

The issue of Onen is the last nail that sends shivers down my spinal cord. We have been seeing the trend of deployment in our country. I also have clear records. When you look at all the records of deployment here, it is actually abominable; the North is clearly nowhere in that deployment. When you go to the East African Community, which is supposed to integrate the peoples of East Africa, you find that the people of the North are not integrated in the list. 

I have the list here; it is generally very bad. At the Council of Ministers - these are the people who make decisions - I am told we were represented in this last time by our Minister, Jachan Omach, who is a minister of state. His minister, Syda Bumba, was also there. So he was there to carry the briefcase of the minister because he could not sit there when the other minister was there –(Mr Omach rose_)– you just sit down. (Laughter) 

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, you and this House know that we have hon. Syda Bumba as Minister for Finance and hon. Omach as the Minister of State for Finance and the two did travel to Arusha to fulfil their ministerial duties. Is it in order for hon. Felix Ogong, who was not even there, to impute improper motives – actually to insult – and say that hon. Omach just went to carry the briefcase of hon. Syda Bumba whereas he did not? I would like to request that hon. Okot withdraws that statement.

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is out of order to demean a minister of state simply because he moves with his minister. 

MR OKOT: Mr Speaker, I take your guidance, but my statement remains in the Hansard. I beg to withdraw it from the Floor, but it should remain in the Hansard. 

The statements we are making today are for the good of this country. We should make every effort to integrate this country. It is our duty as Members of Parliament and the other leaders of this country to try as much as possible to integrate this country. 

We can see a trend in which the North is not being treated equally. I have clear records here that even in our administrative service in this government the North is not treated equally. When you look at the PS level, we have only one. At the under secretaries’ level, from West Nile to Teso we have only one, that is Olon Atipo. When you go to principle assistant secretaries, we have only one but they have the majority. Many of these have stayed in the same posts for long without promotion.

I went through the records. There were seven positions that were advertised for under secretaries. Six were filled and none of them came from the North, and the person that was not promoted was from the North. I went to the principle assistant secretaries and 18 officers were promoted but none from the North. Members of Parliament, these are the people who plan for government. They are the people who plan for the entire country. When part of the country is not integrated within the planning, then that is a sign of doom to our people. Therefore, we want to appeal to this government: if we are here to work for Ugandans and to integrate our people, we do not want semantics. We do not want people to deny facts. 

I was talking about the integration and I had talked about the Council of Ministers, but when you go to the Secretariat itself, we are nowhere to be seen. When you go to COMESA, we are nowhere to be seen. When you go to our representatives in other countries – I have details here, but time will not allow. I just want to make an appeal and suggest a way forward for this country –(Member timed out)

3.19
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern Region): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. I want to thank the minister for his statement. I also thank him because at the East African Community, he is known for defending the rights of Ugandans who are employed at the Community. 

I think what brings this fundamental debate to this level is what the minister has not explained. Originally, Uganda was occupying two portfolios at the East African Community. Ambassador Onen was the Deputy Secretary-General in charge of Projects and Administration. Beatrice Kiraso was in charge of the political federation. When Uganda was requested to drop one portfolio to accommodate Rwanda and Burundi, after creating one position for a Deputy Secretary-General, Uganda chose to drop the one for the political federation, which was originally occupied by Madam Beatrice Kiraso. 

Now the fundamental point is the fact that after the country chose to drop this position, they dropped Onen from his portfolio, which had been retained at the East African Secretariat, and replaced him with Madam Kiraso. This is where the question of fairness comes in; this is where the question of nationalism comes in; this is where the question of patriotism comes in; this is where the question of social exclusion comes in. 

If I may pose a simple question: what is the qualification of Ambassador Onen? What is the qualification of Madam Kiraso? If I may ask: what was the performance of Ambassador Onen as Deputy Secretary-General in Charge of Projects and Administration? Was there any doubt on his performance?

As a young leader I think we must build the country based on the principle of patriotism; if we are preaching it, we must practice it. (Applause) We must build the country based on the principle of nationalism. So, I want to join hands with the rest to say that the point on Ambassador Onen is a precursor and curtain raiser to the long list that we have. In fact, I would even propose that the best for us to do as leaders is to be given an opportunity to negotiate, either with the Prime Minister or the President; we table the list such that our position is loud and clear. 

If I may bring up one or two cases: in 2004, a career ambassador called Ambassador Onyanga Apaa was posted to Berlin. He served for one year and was recalled and replaced with Madam Bagaya and ever since 2004, he is still here; not deployed. 

If I may bring another point: recently we posted Ambassador Dr Ebuk to Moscow in Russia. Dr Ebuk is currently here in Uganda; what is happening? These are the cases; the list is long; and I can bring more and more. We are only praying and it is our humble request that this country belongs to all of us. If we set a bad precedent, then we the young leaders – I do not know the kind of country that we shall inherit. Let us treat all citizens of Uganda as equal before the law, as equal before our top leaders and make sure that we treat them with the utmost discipline and respect that all of us deserve as citizens of Uganda. 

I am not trying to appeal to any tribal sentiments, but I want to send the signal of patriotism! That feeling where we can know that this is our country; we must love it, we must not be taught to love our country, we must love it naturally, it must come automatically. I want to submit that love for a country cannot be taught; you either have the love for your country or you don’t. The basis for that love is creating a conducive atmosphere for all of us to love our country and love the citizens of this country and move forward together as Ugandans. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Fungaroo, before you come in, I want to welcome Members of the Economic Finance Committee of the House of Representatives of Somaliland. They are here to observe various aspects of functioning of Parliament of Uganda, and they are: hon. Mohamed Arale – Vice-Chairman, hon. Ali Hassan Mohamed, hon. Nasir Hagi, hon. Suleiman Awad, hon. Ali Obsiye, hon. Mohamed Osman, hon. Mohamed Jama, hon. Mohamed Hassan Kahin, hon. Ahmed Suleiman Nur, and Mr Eric Landemalm of AWEPA. You are welcome! (Applause)

3.25
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want also to take this opportunity to thank the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for East African Community Affairs for this statement. In the spirit of the patriotism that everyone seems to be yarning for, and in the spirit of togetherness that we want as a nation, I would like to use the incidence of Onen and say as hon. Kassiano Wadri said that this is just a tip of an iceberg.  

I would like to break another tip from the bigger body of the iceberg. Somebody made mention here about the grievances of the peoples of Northern Uganda being marginalised. They feel it painfully in their hearts and their souls. They have expressed this in words like we are doing here, and in writing. 

When you look at the recent promotions in the Army, the issue of marginalisation of the North is still very clear. In 1996, we had people who joined NRA under UNLF I, under Gen. Moses Ali. Some of our best soldiers like Capt. Felix Eyabucha, Capt. Nazareth Bali – we know who the good soldiers are; we are soldiers naturally - and Lt Ben. These are people who joined in 1986 and up to now they have never been promoted. 

When it comes to deployment of people to juicy positions, our people are left behind. These are the things that make us feel like we are not wanted in Uganda. Therefore, we hold these truths to be self evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their creator with certain inalienable rights. Among these are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. We would like to be happy together with you, but it seems you do not want us to be happy when you are happy. 

Thus, to secure these rights, governments are instituted among men deriving their just power from the consent of the governed. As of now, we are part of the governed, and I can say that you received part of our consent to govern us. But whenever any form of government becomes destructive to this end, of the pursuit of happiness, the people have the right to institute a new form of government. Laying its foundation on such principles and organising its powers in such a form to them shall seem most likely to affect their safety and happiness -[Members: “According to who”]- this is me, I am not quoting anybody. If you do not want to continuously hear these complaints, then give us permission to find where we belong, where we shall be happy. 

And for those of you, my senior brothers who are serving in the government; do not fear when we discuss the way we are treated badly. We watch you, we derive happiness from the press men that you enjoy from the respect that you have when we are treated badly, we cry - and I say this with due respect to my senior minister, my Chairman of the West Nile Parliamentary Group hon. Omach. Do not get offended when somebody tells you that you are merely there to carry a brief case -(Laughter)- for us we are saying we want you because of your capacity. We know you are a man with knowledge; you are a man of power -(Member timed out)

3.31
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the hon. Minister for attempting to respond to the problem that is facing Uganda today. When I saw the minister on the Order Paper, I was very happy that I would have at least a word to say on this very subject.

Very many developing countries always do not learn from even the events that have just passed, that in most cases lead to conflicts in their countries because they do not focus on addressing problems that cause conflicts in their countries. Mr Speaker, I say this because I would rather this country instead of trying to defend something which is obvious - because every Ugandan thinks there is marginalisation of a certain category of Ugandans - we must try to address the problems that we are facing. Instead of trying to defend we must look for a way of making sure that Northern Uganda, Eastern Uganda and Central Uganda are brought on board.

When we talk of regional imbalance, it is even worse when I come down to talk about women issues. For example, when you look at the composition of women ministers, right from West Nile to Karamoja, we have just one woman state minister. Does it mean women of Northern Uganda are not qualified to be ministers? We just have hon. Jessica Eriyo who is a state minister. 

Some of these are issues, which must be addressed -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you for giving way. For example, we have one lady who was bought and she has managed to get through despite the Opposition strength in the North, hon. Beatrice Lagada. She has been there, dedicated to the Movement but you can see where she is. (Laughter)

MS AKELLO: Thank you for that information. Mr Speaker, I want Members to appreciate what I am trying to say because you cannot tell me honestly speaking right from West Nile to Karamoja that there is no woman on the other side of the House that can be a minister, that can represent women in Northern Uganda in this government and we have majority support for this government from women. This is really very disappointing!

Another issue I would like to illustrate is that Northern Uganda is losing identity. The people of Northern Uganda are losing identity because of marginalisation. When you go to most secondary and primary schools and other institutions of learning, people who hail from Northern Uganda do not always want to identify with their names. You notice that most people who come from Northern Uganda, if they are many, their names begin with “O” or “A”. But today the trend of events is that most of them, when they are looking for jobs, they do not always want to put these names because they know they will be denied jobs. So, if Ugandans are going to lose their identity because they want to get a job, it is not proper and it has to be addressed. 

I sit on the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and last week we had the Minister of Defence and his team coming to face the committee on some questions that had been put before them. And when a question was posed on why we have only people from one region in the big positions in the Army, the two answers we were given are the question of qualification and of historical happenings in Uganda.

Honestly speaking, does that mean that people of Northern Uganda are not educated? You mean people of Northern Uganda do not qualify to have these jobs? Don’t the people of Northern Uganda have opportunities to join the Army and secondly, I remember very well that in the struggle to liberate Uganda, Northern Uganda also participated very much. So the question of historicals must not arise when it comes to positions in key decisions in Uganda.

Finally, the minister concludes his statement by saying that he shares the feelings of Ambassador Onen -(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Time is up. I think hon. Betty Amongi will be the last contributor. 

3.38
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to start with the constitutional provision. I have heard many people indicate that most of us are involved in sectarian debate but according to the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, II Democratic Principle (iv): “The composition of government shall be broadly representative of the national character and social diversity of the country.” That is a constitutional provision.

If we look at the Front Bench, is the Front Bench composition representative of the national character? This matter is not an issue which should be swept under the carpet. I want to give you an example of the permanent secretaries. There are over forty permanent secretaries in this country but from the Nile, that is the East, West Nile and the North, there are only three permanent secretaries: the permanent secretary for Water, Judiciary and Internal Affairs. Does it address the constitutional provision of national character? 

If we talk about parastatals, hon. Okumu laid on Table the list of the people heading parastatals: Police, Prisons, URA, NSSF, Uganda Development Authority, Road Authority, Water -(Interjections)- cotton is now permanent irrespective of the legality or not. I hear some people saying, “It is not a political matter.” What is not political about the Constitution? What is not political about injustice? What is not political about unfair representation? What is not political? Tell me!

This debate will not be conclusive if we do not demand. It is out of the context of this statement. If you look at this statement, where there was an attempt of justifying the delegation -(Interjections)- let us count because we know how to count. There is a total of 14 people who went out of whom we had His Excellency, hon. Kategaya, hon. Sam Kutesa, hon. John Nasasira, hon. Hope Mwesigye, hon. Ruhindi, hon. Mwesige -(Interjections)- I have only spared the vice chair because he went by virtue of his position. Otherwise, out of the 14, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight are from one region! Eight out of 14 are from one region perhaps even one district. I do not know. What is not political about it?

I want to propose, in line with hon. Okot Ogong that constitutionally we established an Equal Opportunities Commission with the mandate of studying the extent of marginalisation and coming up with measures of redress. We want to demand that this matter be transferred to the Equal Opportunities Commission so that the Equal Opportunities Commission can study the extent of the marginalisation but also that the hon. Prime Minister, whom I see either resting or contemplating -(Laughter)- we want to have all the lists of civil servants from the level of director to permanent secretary -(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this ends the debate. We have taken 40 minutes instead of 30. 

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2008/09

(I)SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE
(II)RECURRENT SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 118,408,000,000 be provided for recurrent supplementary expenditure for the financial year 2008/09. 
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we had stood up and we were trying to make a comment before you put the question. 

THE CHAIRMAN: A comment?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Mr Chairman. In the supplementary we have, there are figures that we are not agreeing with.

THE CHAIRMAN: What?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I mean some figures.

THE CHAIRMAN: Unfortunately, you were not here when we dealt with it. Please get the information from others.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, I did get the information.

THE CHAIRMAN: Unless you want – please, sit down! We dealt with this subject last week. What we did not do was to go into the Committee of Supply and we are doing so now.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Mr Chairman, last time you said that this money had already been used. So what is the purpose of doing appropriation now? If it has already been used, what are we appropriating?

THE CHAIRMAN: It is a procedure – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, it is Parliament that appropriates money. If there is any appropriation that is illegal and not authorised by laws, I think we are right to put it to you. And as Chairman of the House, you should listen to us. This country is for all of us and not for a few people.

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, hon. Nandala, Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee, the subject we are dealing with is the supplementary. What the report said was that according to the law – because it was below three percent - it could be spent but it had to come here as a formality. And this is what we are doing.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have no objection because I know that it was below three percent, but the activities against which the said three percent was spent are what we are questioning. Are they the real activities?

THE CHAIRMAN: These are the details we dealt with the other time. Unfortunately, because of other causes, you were not here. 

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 6,879,000,000 be provided for as development supplementary expenditure for the financial year 2008/09. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Total Supplementary Expenditure

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 125,288,000,000 be provided for as total supplementary expenditure for the financial year 2008/09.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered Supplementary Schedule No. 1 and passed it without amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House adopts the report of the Committee of Supply on supplementary estimates for supplementary expenditure for the Financial Year 2008/09.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. However, I think I need to say that I was struck by the point that was raised by hon. Mathius Nsubuga that since the money had been spent there was no need for us to approve it. I would like to say that that money was spent without the approval of Parliament. Thereafter, a report was made to us by the Chairperson of the Budget Committee, we debated and adopted it. What we are doing now is to supply or authorise the money that was spent. 

3.53
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. A few minutes ago, many of us were surprised by what was happening in the House. This is the third session of the Eighth Parliament. The session will soon come to its end on the 21st of this month as per the programme that was released by your Office. When the Prime Minister made a statement, Members made contributions thereto. I would like to point out that in my opinion, after Members had debated the ministerial statement; it deserved some response from the honourable minister. 

I am aware that we have got a tight schedule in terms of time, but I do not know at what stage the Second Deputy Prime Minister will make responses to some of the –(Interjections)– I am sorry; my apologies, Second Deputy Prime Minister. Anyway, what I am saying is that I do not know at what stage we will be given the opportunity –

THE SPEAKER: Normally, there should be no response to this kind of debate that lasts 30 minutes. 

MR WADRI: So, what is the conclusion? Did we just come here for a show?

THE SPEAKER: Originally, there was no provision for debate but we agreed that some people be allowed to comment on the statement. It was a new development. However, let me say they have taken into account all that you have said and it has been registered by them and they have to somehow react to it, but not today.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I do agree with the explanation you have given, but the problem I am faced with is that as I walk out of this chamber, what do I have at the back of my mind? When will the minister, if at all he has taken note of the issues, respond?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Wadri, somebody said that among the permanent secretaries, there are only three out of forty. Do you think that he would be in position to answer that? He has now said that among those who went, there was this and the other. I think these are points, which are going to be taken up by government to examine the policy of recruitment in the civil service, in choosing a Cabinet and having Members of Parliament on this side from this area. These are things, which they are going to handle but normally we don’t expect a response.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I wouldn’t like to prolong my stay on this Floor but I would have been very happy if we wound up this debate with at least a sentence of commitment from government that, “We have appreciated the issues raised and we will look into it”, so that it remains on record and the future generations will come and pick it on the Hansard but as of now, why did we have to waste 30 minutes?

THE SPEAKER: Since we are now reviewing the Rules of Procedure, we may have to do that but I don’t mind if the Prime Minister thinks he wants to make that statement although it is not provided for.

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategaya): Mr Speaker, I don’t think that I intend to touch on the debate on marginalisation and the rest. All I want is to set the record straight on what happened in the case of Ambassador Onen and that is why I made my statement. I didn’t go into wider issues of how many PS we have and how many army officers. That is a different matter but I wanted to set the record straight and that is all.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, especially the Front Bench, you have heard the lamentations from the contributions made. You may have to go, examine and see how these can be addressed.

MR WACHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I don’t want us to end with lamentations. Could I suggest something if it is not too late: could I suggest that the Prime Minister brings before this House, within the next two weeks or so, lists of the following: 

1.	List of all civil servants in service now from the level of director to PS.
2.	List of all ambassadors posted and at headquarters.
3.	List of all Foreign Service officers serving at our embassies.
4.	List of all heads of parastatals.
5.	List of all senior army officers from the rank of colonel to lieutenant general.
6.	List of all serving RDCs and assistant RDCs.

I will provide the Prime Minister with this list and I expect that the House will have this within two weeks. That will give us time to move an appropriate motion. I thank you.

3.59
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker, I would like to add that if that kind of information is going to be brought, the government should also show us the list of women that are employed in these different positions. I am saying this in favour of Ambassador Onen but also because nobody seems to have thought about Kiraso as a woman. How many women are employed in such high positions in our foreign service? So gender can be a form of discrimination also. 

I am not trying to down play what the honourable members from the Northern region are bringing out. It could be a genuine concern but we as women also want to make sure that the women folk are not down trodden and when we have a woman in an important position like that one, it is not really brought down as if it is a shame to appoint a woman and leave a man. What about the women of this country? How many of us are in positions of responsibility? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.01
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek clarification on the supplementary. You seemed to be helping hon. Matiya with this dilemma and I thought you could also help me with mine as regards the exercise we have just undertaken on supplementary schedules.

I am aware that when we passed money last financial year, we didn’t, for instance, pass money for Phenix Logistics. That matter came up during the debate on the supplementary schedule the other day. It was also raised that the supplementary schedule should have focused on matters that are of an emergency nature rather than capitalising businesses, which are not of an emergency nature. 

When we go ahead and appropriate in the form of a supplementary, we okay that kind of transaction. Where does that leave our mandate as the authority that should appropriate money for this country when the appropriation seemingly has already been done by the Executive and we are just ratifying it? I need your help so that I know how to proceed on these matters.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, last week hon. Rose Akol, Chairperson of the Budget Committee came here and read the report about this very supplementary that we have passed and they gave details concerning the purpose for which that money was used. There was a lot of criticism on certain items and you remember the Leader of the Opposition came here and said that this should not be the end. 

We agreed that the respective committees dealing with the various items should go back and examine this and report to us. We had already adopted the report of the Committee on the Budget regarding these figures and if you can look at that report, these figures, which we have read here and the figures, which were included in the report. So, this was an item for just five minutes and not for debate because we had already dealt with the report. But I think some of you were not here and, therefore, saw it as something new. 
 
BILLS
 SECOND READING

THE ANTI-CORRUPTION BILL, 2008

4.04
THE MINISTER OF ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Corruption Bill, 2008” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, seconded. 

DR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Speaker, corruption is a crime which finds succour in the state of mind of individuals who are corrupt. The reality of our situation is that very many Ugandans are deeply, intricately and emotionally involved in corruption. And these two explain why corruption continues to prove to be a wily and resilient opponent to defeat. It is a mindset fuelled phenomenon we are facing. I have no illusion about how high a hill we have to climb in order to overcome corruption. 

This not withstanding, the main import of this Anti-Corruption Bill, 2008, which is now before the honourable members, is a view that a corrupt  human mind can be nudged to positively change  particularly when there is punitive or imposition of anti corruption measures we have put and agreed. 

When corruption is allowed to grow in an individual’s life or in the life of a nation such as ours, it may assume a life of its own at some point. And once this point is   reached, it may socially, economically and politically lead to devastating consequences upon Ugandans. And we soon reach that point if no drastic or extra ordinary measures are taken. 

As corruption is deepening in our society, it is consuming all those who are found in its path namely; the promoters, apologists, opponents and bystanders alike. We as a country now find ourselves at crossroads and faced with a choice to respond robustly against corruption. 

Corruption has given Uganda a bad image. It is also wasting away resources that would normally go to improve the standards -(Interruption)

MR ODUMAN:  Mr Speaker, some of us have been trying to listen attentively to the subject the minister is addressing. He seems to be reading a report but we do not have a copy of that report and the Order Paper on anti-corruption we have Bills second reading. 

THE SPEAKER: What is expected at this stage is the minister to just briefly tell us what the Bill is all about and then we shall get the chairperson of the committee to come and give us the report. 

DR NSABA BUTURO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What is before this august House are measures that government is seeking to introduce; that will address a lacuna that we have identified in the Prevention of Corruption Act, Cap 121. We want to bring this law to standards that are in line not only with the Constitution but the African Union Convention against Corruption and the United Nations Convention against Corruption. And also introduce best practices from other jurisdictions around the world. 

So, the result of this Anti-Corruption Bill, which is before the honourable members, is intended to address those issues through the measures that we have introduced; that are contained in the Bill. And one of those is the illicit enrichment as well as the opportunity for civil recovery of the proceeds of corruption. 

I want to appeal to, and to encourage honourable members to debate this matter very passionately and as comprehensively as possible. I commend the Anti-Corruption Bill, 2008 to the Members and I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Chairperson of the committee! 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have no report and beyond just having no report, you can appreciate how compounded our situation will be if we immediately finish reading the report now and get into a debate. I do not know what is going to happen; how we are expected to contribute. My thinking has been that we should be getting these reports at least a day earlier so that we are able to do a good job and represent Parliament, you know, impressively. But at this pace, there is no report up to this stage and then in the next five minutes we are going to be submitting. I think that does not help people. 	
THE SPEAKER: You know this Bill was supposed to come last week. It is only that we did not reach it and I thought that you had got your reports.

MR MENHYA:  Mr Speaker, I am aware that the report was forwarded for photocopying and circulated to Members. And right now – 

THE SPEAKER: It is rather unfortunate because reports should be given to Members for fairly good time for them to read and in fact as I have earlier on said, I do not expect you to read a 14 page report. Because I assume that Members have read it before, you just come here and give an executive summary and then we debate. But now that the Members don’t have the reports, it becomes a problem. 

MR MENHYA: Mr Speaker, I request that I present the report because I am aware they are bringing it and passing it round.

HON. MEMBERS: No!

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear other views.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I do appreciate the importance of this Bill, which is being tabled. But the one thing that I would like to say is that the weaknesses on the part of the leadership of the committee should not be transferred to cause -(Interjections)- yes, if it is a 14-page document and it has not been given to us as of now and we are receiving this report orally, how sure are we that we will be able to accommodate all the 14 pages in our minds and be able to debate effectively? All we are asking for are the copies. If the copies are there, we will move on and if not, we are not in a position to proceed. We cannot proceed without the report. That is all we are saying. 

THE SPEAKER: Are the copies available?

MR MENHYA: The copies were made last week.

THE SPEAKER: If they are available, let Members go with their copies, read through them overnight and tomorrow when you come, you will give an executive summary rather than reading it because they will have read the report. That is what we can do. However, we want to be sure the copies are available. We shall deal with the Anti-Corruption Bill tomorrow after you have read the report. 

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL - THE NATIONAL POLYETHYLENE MATERIALS AND PLASTIC BAGS MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL BILL, 2007

4.15
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill, under rules 43, 105 and 106 of our Rules of Procedure, entitled “National Polyethylene Materials and Plastic Bags Management and Control Bill, 2007.”

“WHEREAS the Constitution of Uganda requires the State to promote sustainable development and public awareness of the need to manage land, air, water resources in a balanced and sustainable manner for the present and future generations; 

AND WHEREAS the Government of Uganda has put in place a number of administrative and legislative measures to address the environmental challenges that Uganda is faced with; 

AND BEARING IN MIND that until recently, domestic production of polyethylene materials stood at about 700 tonnes with an additional 40,000 metric tonnes being imported annually; and this was up from about 500 tonnes domestic production and about 1,000 metric tonnes imported in the year 2004;

RECOGNISING THAT between 1 to 20 percent of the household waste is comprised of polyethylene material, harmful disposal of which is detrimental to the environment;

ACKNOWLEDGING THAT government imposed a 120 percent duty charge on polyethylene and plastic bags and a ban on importation, manufacture and use of polyethylene and plastic bag carriers of less than 30 microns;

AWARE THAT in spite of the measures mentioned above, continued manufacture, processing, smuggling, indiscriminate dumping of the polyethylene materials and bags in the country is causing a serious solid waste management problem leading to the failure to maintain a clean and healthy environment;

NOW, THEREFORE, this motion is moved that Parliament grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled “The National Polyethylene Materials and Plastic Bags Management and Control Bill, 2007” a draft of which is hereto attached, and to order the publication of the Bill in preparation for the first reading.”

This Bill is seconded by hon. Emmanuel Dombo and hon. Faridah Najjuma Kasasa.

I would like in a few minutes to give the justification. If you look at the history of this Bill, in 1992 Cabinet banned kaveera. The then Minister of Industry and Trade, hon. Kaijuka, came in with the intervention of the business community and the Cabinet put an administrative suspension to this decision.

On 26th March, Parliament passed a motion and resolution urging government to table a Bill banning the importation, manufacture and use of polyethylene bags in the country. The motion was moved by hon. Banyenzaki and seconded by hon. Ekanya. Government was given 60 days to act.

On 27 May 2007, the committee on Natural Resources gave notice to the Clerk to Parliament and the Minister of Water and Environment to move a Private Member’s Bill with this title, which aimed at banning carrier bags below 100 microns.

On 14 June during the Budget speech, hon. Suruma, the then Minister of Finance, announced a ban on the importation, use and production of plastic bags and containers of less than 30 microns. An excise duty of 120 percent was imposed on all plastic materials effective 1st July and they were given two months, which was a common decision reached by the regional ministers of finance of Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania at that time.    

On 29 June 2007, Uganda Manufacturers’ Association brought a petition to the Speaker and on 26 August, the Speaker requested the Chair of the Budget Committee then, hon. William Okecho, to handle the petition and report to the House. The other members of this committee were the Chair of Natural Resources Committee, the Chair of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Chair of Trade, Tourism and Industry, the Director of Library and Research as staff, and Mr Robert Tumukwasibwe as the secretary of the committee. The report of this committee has never been tabled -

THE SPEAKER: You mean you are going through all that as you ask for your leave?

MR KIGYAGI: I am just concluding. In August 2008, a question was put to the then Minister of Water and Environment on challenges she was facing on the ban of 30 microns and what she had done. In her reply on the way forward, she said: “A Cabinet paper was presented to ban up to 100 microns of polyethylene carrier bags and materials. Cabinet approved the proposal, subject to consultation with the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of East African Cooperation and the Ministry of Finance.” It was also accepted by Parliament. I will not go into the details of the justification but there is one thing which I would like to make clear. In August of this month -

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable, why do you want leave? That is what we want.

MR KIGYAGI: I am seeking leave of this House to be able to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled “The National Polyethylene Materials and Plastic Bags and Management Control Bill, 2007” a draft of which is attached, and to order for the publication of the Bill in preparation for the first reading. I attached the draft and I would request that I lay this on the Table.

4.23
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Like you have heard from the mover, I am the seconder of the motion seeking leave so that the honourable member is allowed to introduce a Private Member’s Bill.

Members are aware that when God created the world, He put man to subdue the world and take care of the natural environment. You know that when elected Members of Parliament we have a representative capacity to talk on behalf of the people. 

We had also an opportunity to be the leaders of the Natural Resources Committee and we created all opportunities and gave avenue so that a formal Bill could be presented by government in controlling polyethylene materials. However, all the promises that have been made have not yielded any fundamental results. 

It is, therefore, deemed necessary that if we must help the population for which we were elected to represent, we must seek leave of this House so that a member is allowed to present a Private Member’s Bill for something fundamental in the prevention of these polyethylene materials and the way they should be managed. For these reasons and others we shall give when finally the Bill comes, I wish to support the motion. I thank you.

4.25
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Mr Speaker, before this motion was brought to the Floor of the House, hon. John Kigyagi made an effort to consult me and many of my members who are in support of this motion that the House gives leave to hon. Kigyagi to introduce this Private Member’s Bill. Since we do not have any dissenting voices on this matter, I think we can put the question.

4.26
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to express my reservations on the motion. The consumers are suffering from the consequence of inefficiency. If government fails to manage, the consumer should not suffer. Government has not attempted to control or manage the use and disposal of polyethylene papers. As such, the consumer is going to suffer because of that failure. In my opinion, government should have tried its best to ensure that used polyethylene papers are properly disposed of. I do not think that government has made that attempt to –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I thought that because government has failed, a private member is coming in to plug the hole that is causing the problem and that is why he is seeking leave. So maybe you are supporting him to bring the Bill. 

MS MUGERWA: I am not supporting him because the background given and the references made were to ban the use of the polyethylene paper and I do not think that this is going to be different from that aspect. I do not agree with banning. I want to urge government to manage the disposal of used polyethylene paper. Since that idea of banning the polyethylene paper was introduced, government has never made an attempt to introduce something to use instead of those papers and people are suffering. You go and buy something and it is put in something very dirty –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you for giving way. I am seeking clarification from the Member on the Floor. You indeed said that government has failed to regulate and control the use of kaveera. Don’t you think it is because we do not have a clear legal framework that we need a law to help government do that kind of work?

MS MUGERWA: Mr Speaker, every law is based on history and circumstances. The reference made as far as this law that is being introduced is concerned is negating what is being proposed by hon. Baryomunsi. What I am saying is that the attempt to ban the use of polyethylene paper should not be made because there is no substitute to help the consumer.

THE SPEAKER: This is not the time to debate the contents of the Bill. The honourable member is just seeking leave. If you grant him leave, he will bring the Bill, we examine it and allow certain parts and cut out others. That will be the time to debate the contents of the Bill. Before then, we cannot debate it. Is there any objection? I put the question to the member’s motion seeking leave of the House to bring a Private Member’s Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.) 

THE SPEAKER: Leave is granted. 

Apparently because we do not have the report, we cannot proceed with the Anti-Corruption Bill. I am requesting you to avail yourselves with copies of the Dual Citizenship Bill because after this, we shall move to it. Let those concerned avail the members with copies of the report so that they can read it and we make things move fast.

With this we have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow and we start promptly at 2.30 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.31 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 13 May 2009 at 2.30 p.m.)

