Wednesday, 18 May 2005

Parliament met at 2.36 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, I would like you to join me in welcoming 35 citizens from Bunya County West in Mayuge District. They are here to witness our work. They were invited by Mzee William Kiwagama. You are very welcome, people of Mayuge. We also have students from the Department of Mass Communication, Makerere University. They are also here to witness proceedings of this House. You are very welcome.

I would like to alter the Order Paper to make provision for the Minister of Internal Affairs to give a statement concerning the recruitment of Ugandans to work in Iraq, which we had requested for earlier. So, we shall have the Minister for the Presidency, the Minister for Justice and then the Minister for Internal Affairs.

2.40
MR DANIEL OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Madam Speaker, you recall that on the 10th of March of this year I did present a notice of a motion for a resolution of Parliament on the peace and security situation in the North. This followed a statement by the Minister of Defence on the 24th of February this year a copy of which I have, which he made to this House. As far as Lira and Soroti were concerned, these were the words of the minister: “These regions are still peaceful except for some cattle rustling of the Karimojong warriors. The region is completely devoid of any LRA activity following the relentless efforts of the UPDF and thanks to the Arrow and Amuka Groups, which chased the LRA terrorists from this region.”

We challenged the statement of the minister and I did give notice of a motion so that we could statistically come out to prove to the minister that his statement was not only misleading to this House but was also creating a false lull in the country and sweeping under the carpet a very serious situation, which our people potentially still face from the rebels. Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that since the 10th of March - two months ago - this motion has not come back here. We are about to go for a recess. I am appealing to you that you appoint a day for this very important motion to be debated before we go for recess.

Secondly, to show you the seriousness of my remarks, the whole of this week the rebel activity has intensified in Lira District. In fact, hardly eight kilometers from Lira, the big institutions of Ngeta towards Ogul and so on, people are hardly sleeping at home now. Two days ago the rebels penetrated deep inside my brother’s constituency of Moroto County, abducted people, and there was a big fight in Olum, in my own constituency, near the IDP camp. The situation is worsening every day. I do not know whether hon. Ben Wacha is here but if he were he would be able to tell this House that his sub-county, Ngai, in which people have never slept in a camp before, the whole sub-county now has been forced to go into a camp for the first time since rebel activities began.  

It is important and as I see it the motion is moving higher and higher up on the list. It used to be No. 13 but now it is No. 6. We have consulted as a parliamentary group with our colleagues and in fact my friends from Karamoja are very anxious. I understand the situation in Karamoja is extremely bad. Of course there are certain areas in this country where even the press does not bother to pick news from either because they will not sell in Kampala I do not know, but a lot of information would be coming out. 

The purpose of my rising up is to say that you should continue pushing the number of my motion up so that we really debate it very seriously before we go for recess. I also rose to inform the House and the country at large that the security situation in Lira District, contrary to what the minister put in his remarks, is getting worse especially when it starts raining and the rebels enjoy free movement. The country needs to know about it, we are getting serious with elections, we are getting serious with the referendum, we are getting serious with politics but security may be swept under the carpet. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Omara Atubo, I do appreciate the problem and I will take it upon myself to create sufficient time for this matter to be thoroughly debated before we go for recess.

DR NABWISO: Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that the Minister of Education is not here and I would request for permission that I raise my question about Namasagali University tomorrow. Maybe they will be in the House then, if it is possible.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, if they are here we will give you the opportunity then.

DR NABWISO: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.44
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Madam Speaker, permit me, albeit belatedly, to commend you on the way you conducted proceedings at the time we were paying tribute to our colleague the late Patrick Musisi. (Applause).

Not that I wish any of us to pass away but it is my request that the Business Committee considers a standardized format for paying tribute to any member of the august House that might leave us unexpectedly. I note with great concern – well, we pray nobody leaves us before it is time and perhaps before the Tenth Parliament. My request is that we should have a standardized format for such a solemn occasion, different from the regular proceedings of Parliament, which can be inserted in our Rules of Procedure on how to handle it.

Madam Speaker, notwithstanding what I have said to commend you, if you had not handled it properly and well it could have gone out of hand. In other words I am requesting that we limit the number of people paying tribute say to ten, representing various interests of the House, and the friends whom he has left among us. In future I presume we shall have multi-party politics in this august House whereby I could say that a prominent member of the parliamentary group, one person from each political party, one person from each region and other personal friends and such people should be known to you, the Speaker, in advance and then we agree if there is a standard format of how to handle it. 

I am saying it very politely because there were cases when we were on the brink of breaking decorum of such a solemn occasion. I beg to move that you accept my request as for consideration for the next Business Committee meeting.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you for the advice, hon. Awori. Those are difficult occasions but we shall endeavor to work out something that is acceptable to everybody. I also really appeal to members that when I tell you that please use five minutes and you use 25, you make my life difficult. You take away the opportunity of other members to speak. However, we shall try and improve on it.

2.45
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I note that the Minister of Internal Affairs is present and I am sure my concern can be addressed.  

I am standing to raise a matter of public importance. On the 8th of September last year two terrorists, namely Sam Muwanguzi and Abdu Kairu, stormed into the office of the Minister for Water, hon. Mutagamba, in one of the most terrifying fashions ever witnessed in Kampala. They hijacked the personal secretary to the minister and the bodyguard. For a whole eight hours business in Kampala was at a stand still. Madam Speaker, you had to adjourn the day’s sitting in protection of the hon. Members in Parliament. 

According to the briefing of the hon. Minister of Defence, the hijackers demanded that Article 105(2) should not be amended but that President Museveni should be allowed to carry on for another four years. The same minister said that the two terrorists were under police custody and that investigations were going on. I would like to pose the following questions before the Leader of Government Business or the Ministers of Defence or Internal Affairs.

Can the Ministers of Internal Affairs and Defence tell us where the terrorists are right now? When is the hearing of their case commencing? How come we have never heard of anything about the case in mention in court? Assuming that the act was stage managed, is it not a shame that the whole President, and his son, were mentioned? I need an explanation on behalf of the people of Lubaga South whom I represent.

2.48
MR JOHN ODIT (Erute County South, Lira): Madam Speaker, I regret that this matter would need an immediate answer, but the appropriate minister seems to be lacking. It is my hope that an answer be found. This is a matter that affects the agricultural sector and you know that this sector continues to remain the sole employer for our nation. We live and rely on it for our food security and we also live to create employment out of it. We rely on it for our exports and as a main source of balance of payments; 95 percent of our exports definitely come from agriculture. 

However, of late we have been reporting cases of epidemic diseases within this sector. We have complained as a House on the diseases affecting our livestock and the crop sub-sector particularly coffee and banana. Even the Tsetse flies are affecting the livestock, bringing about Nagana. 

One major source of food security in the country is cassava. We have been assured that a solution was found to control the Cassava Mosaic disease but there is a new development affecting this crop. There is a new virus called the Brown Streak Virus. This virus has affected most of the cassava growing districts in both the North and Eastern part of this country. It rots all the tubers in the ground and there are suspicions that once you consume the affected tuber you can also get infected. So, we wanted to know from the Minister of Agriculture whether the ministry is aware of this outbreak. 

If the ministry is aware of it, what steps are being taken to control this virus? Can they assure the country that the crop and food security is not getting endangered as a result of the outbreak of this new strain of virus? I must inform the House that the original strain was identified in this country in 1920 but it was controlled and eradicated from Uganda in 1949. The question is, how has this new strain come about again in this country? We want a full explanation in that respect. Thank you.

THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF THE PRESIDENCY (Dr Beatrice Wabudeya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I note that hon. Odit is indeed the Chairperson of the Sessional Committee on Agriculture and the issues he has raised are very important. I am also aware that we have a provision for the raising of substantive questions to the ministers. Why has the honourable colleague not considered putting a question to the minister so that we get a written response? Issues to do with food security and disease are very paramount. I would like to be clarified.

MR ODIT: The clarification is simple, Madam Speaker. We raised a lot of questions for answer. One was on mangoes and other one was on Nagana and many others. They chose to keep quiet and this is a virus disease; it is an emergency and we need a response. If there is need for government to cause money to be available urgently, we need it. That is why I would not want to go through these long procedures of creating formal requests for an answer where somebody would come and say, “I want one week to get an answer”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, honourable members, who is in charge of Government Business today, is it the senior minister or the Minister for the Presidency? You have taken charge of the situation so can you please arrange for the Government to respond to this question of the virus and also the question for Namasagali University and to ask the Minister of Defence to get ready for debate on the Northern question?

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, there was a similar direction sometime back when I raised the issue of the banana wilt disease. The Speaker directed that the minister should come and give a statement but this statement has not yet been made. I do not know whether the intention is to keep quiet while the banana wilt continues to devastate the banana crop in the country? 

So, my colleague is right. You give such directions but quietly the ministers avoid coming with here answers and nothing happens and in the process things get worse. One day this country will have all the banana crop destroyed and what shall we tell the next generation; that we were in place, we were leaders and we watched as the banana crop was being destroyed and yet Uganda is rated as one of the major producers of banana in the world? We need serious answers to these questions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will take it upon myself to ensure that these ministers answer all these questions next week. Whatever is outstanding on these emergencies is for next week. 

I want to complete the last part of my communication. It is to inform the honourable members that they should get ready to discuss the Bill on the National Agricultural Research Organization. The report is ready and the Business Committee scheduled it as something urgent so get ready for it. We shall put on the Order Paper. 

The next business concerns hon. John Kigyagi, the Member for Mbarara Municipality who recently joined us. He has indicated a desire to serve on the Sessional Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. I have checked the composition of the committee and I am satisfied that there is a vacancy. So, it is up to this House to say whether you allow me him to go to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry or not. I now put the question to it.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you can serve on the Sessional Committee on Trade and Industry. 

Secondly, the hon. John Kigyagi has also offered to serve on the Standing Committee on Science and Technology and under rule 127(3) of our Rules of Procedure he has actually secured more than 20 signatures of members indicating that they will be happy for him to serve on that committee. So, I also put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.57
THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF THE PRESIDENCY (Mrs Beatrice Wabudeya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to apologise for the inconvenience I caused you and the House yesterday when I failed to turn up in time to give this statement. Please, accept my apologies. (Applause)

This statement is in response to a matter, which was raised by hon. Apuun Patrick, Member of Parliament for Bokora County, on the 14th of April 2005 concerning a New Vision article attributed to the RDC, Soroti.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a paper, which I realise is the one the minister is going to read. This paper does not indicate where this statement is from, it also does not state which ministry or minister is making this statement. I think that for purposes of the record of Hansard, it is prudent that we know where this statement is from and from which minister or ministry. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I called the Minister for the Presidency; that is where the document is coming from and the lady is the Minister for the Presidency.

MRS WABUDEYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have taken note of that. 

Allow me to respond to a matter raised by hon. Apuun complaining about remarks make by the RDC of Soroti, Mr Ecweru. This House is aware that there is a Karamoja disarmament programme managed by the Ministry of Defence. This House is also aware that cattle raids continue taking place even as this programme continues. 

I wish to note that the districts neighbouring Karamoja are in full support of the disarmament programme despite the continued incidents of raid and accompanying atrocities.

Madam Speaker, my colleague hon. Apuun complained on the Floor of this House on 14 April 2005, about the statement made by the RDC, Soroti, Mr Ecweru that the people of Teso would enter Karamoja and forcefully disarm them. I have since contacted Mr Ecweru and he has accepted that he made those remarks. He says that he made those remarks in expression of his disappointment and desperation as well as that of the people who continue to face the burden of the atrocities meted out upon them by the cattle rustlers. 

I would like to note that Mr Ecweru is not in charge of the disarmament programme and cannot be, therefore, the one to issue ultimatums. I have taken note of the complaint raised by my colleague and I have restrained Mr Ecweru from making such statements. 

I wish to state that it is the responsibility of all the leaders in the region to support the disarmament programme and I call upon Members of Parliament from Karamoja to continue playing a leading role. 

The leaders from the neighbouring districts are also encouraged to participate positively and minimize incidences of confrontation in order to create harmony in the region. 

However, I wish to decline the prescription by my colleague hon. Apuun that I transfer Mr Ecweru to Karamoja, because this is an administrative matter, which my office can ably handle. 

I thank the Uganda People’s Defence Forces and all the other people who have continued to work for a lasting solution to the problem of cattle rustling. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

3.06
MR APUUN PATRICK (Bokora County, Moroto): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the statement made by the Minister for the Presidency and I entirely agree with some of the issues that she has tried to respond to. However, this is not the first time we have heard about these statements from the leaders of the Teso region. 

The first statement was made by hon. Mukula when he moved a motion on the 9th of March 2000 calling for government to disarm the Karimojong. He had this to say: “If the Karimojong continue to remain on our soil, then we shall have no other option but to go back to the gun.” This is on page 9158 of that day’s Hansard. So these statements have continued to alienate us from being neighbours of Teso and this will bring about civil strife. 

It was also resolved by Katakwi District Council, unanimously - and they passed a resolution - to expel the Karimojong from their soil unconditionally. That was on the 15th of March 2000.

It was again reiterated by Ecweru and he said, “The Iteso may soon be forced to storm Karamoja. I want to make it clear that some of us may be compelled to enter Karamoja with or without permission.” With all these statements coming out without interruption from the neighbours, especially from my colleagues behind me, this is not really palatable to our nation. There is no need for us leaders to try and build up civil strife in our societies. It is better for us to refrain from these confrontations. If the matter is handled by government as it is right now - even the militia Iteso are already in Karamoja - what is the signal being given out by these statements if the Karimojong mishandle this situation of disarmament? We already own the disarmament in Karamoja; we are assisting the Government to disarm the Karimojong peacefully, without any problem. So, I call upon the leaders in Teso region not to raise matters, which may cause civil strife in our societies. With those few words I intend to concur with what the honorable minister has tried to raise. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to understand this. These people are saying they do not want people to rustle their property. Is there is there no rustling in the country? I do not understand it, hon. Eresu. 

3.09
MR JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity. For 17 years the people of Katakwi and Kumi Districts, who neighbour Karamoja, have been carrying the burden of transgressions of the Karamoja people. In the year 2002 in the month of April, 21 people were killed in a camp where people of Ngariamu have lived for 17 years. Twenty-one people: women, children and old people were massacred, and 200 head of cattle were carried off by the Karimojong with impunity. 

In September the year 2003, at the height of rebel activity, I was in Soroti myself. Brig. Guti, who is a Karimojong and who was the commander of the 3rd Division then as a colonel, together with the then Army Chief of Staff, Nakibus Lakara, we flew to Ngariamu again to bury another lot of 17 people who were massacred by the Karimojong. Up to now the people in Karamoja have been incusing into Teso, killing people and carrying property. The list is so long, Madam Speaker, and the Resident District Commissioner of Soroti –(Interruption)

MR APUUN: Madam Speaker, I was elected to this House as a Member of Parliament. I am not a cattle rustler. Can you restrain him from calling me a rustler, him the Masara? Otherwise, I will unleash my anger on him.

MS ALASO: Is the honorable member, Patrick Apuun, who has just been vehemently defending cattle rustling in the Teso region in order to come here and even continue to intimidate the Members of Parliament from the Teso region? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what we should be discussing here is how to end this cattle rustling. The whole country, including us - we have grown up knowing there is this cattle rustling and the people of Teso are saying, “We do not want cattle rustlers to take our property”. Why do you not find a way of helping end it? If it is from outside we should police the borders; if it is from inside, we should stop it.

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, I am not saying we like to enter Karamoja; I am not saying the people of Teso have a wish to ever enter Karamoja. But indeed our cousins from Karamoja keep on pricking us in a bad way and we feel very much provoked. The Resident District Commissioner, Ecweru – and I have worked with him – he was even my student as I taught him at one time. The fact of the matter is Ecweru is a responsible person, Ecweru sees the agony of the people, Ecweru is at the front line of the fire from the Karimojong rustlers. 

I have not seen, at any moment, despite the various meetings that we held in Soroti with the local leaders and Members of Parliament from Karamoja, any single effort to restrain the people of Karamoja from entering with impunity, robbing, killing, looting and doing all sorts of atrocities that they think they can do. Madam Speaker, at one time it was reported in the newspapers -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order! Members, please let us discuss the matter. Do not pinch one another. Please, wind up.

MR ERESU: With all the good will from Teso at one time it was even reported in the newspapers that the Karimojong rustlers do not only rustle the people of Teso, they even go as far as Mbale and Sironko Districts. At one time in Mbale a former Member of Parliament for Bulambuli County got into direct confrontation with the Minister in charge of Karamoja Affairs when they alleged that he was part of the rustling team.

We want rustling to end and we do not want people from Karamoja to enter Teso to provoke us. The statement the minister has made is clear. The statement says the leaders should encourage positive reactions to minimize the incidences of confrontation. It means, therefore -(Interruption)

MR PETER LOKERIS: Madam Speaker, I wish the honourable members could treat me as part of them - as an hon. Member of Parliament. These issues of cattle rustling have been there for a long time. We do not deny them and we would really like to say that we apologize to those who are suffering in this exercise, which is so unfortunate. 

However, I want to inform you at the same time that what hon. Patrick Apuun was saying is that we are trying to pacify the area. Even I have just come from Kotido to talk about the same thing because the thing has been there for a long time. During the times of instability in the country some people had taken advantage of that to cause problems to others because of certain issues, which are – it is a long story. The member was merely saying that we are Members of Parliament and people who are employed by government should just use good language to address our people. You may be angered all right but use very civilized language. 

When we are enumerating all, we know they have happened for long and even on the other side they have happened. We do not want to open a Pandora’s box and mention so many things. Madam Speaker, I wish we would say these things with reference. Someone was talking about a minister being mentioned some time ago. I know that when you are a leader for example of a country and something happens between your country and another, you are also quoted. Similarly with us Karimojong leaders, we are always damned. Whenever they mess they say “especially the one who is a minister”. 

I hear you call me a cheap cattle rustler. I wish you knew my background and also the time I went to school and got a job, which took me 30 years; you would definitely know that I hate cattle rustling and so do the Members of Parliament from Karamoja. We are working out a methodology to make sure that cattle rustling ceases, that is why there is disarmament. We would like you to approve money for disarmament and we go and disarm the Karimojong and live peacefully with them. They are very hospitable people, very nice to live with. I thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, the Penal Code is clear on the offence of trespass and there is no single exception that “unless it is done by the Karimojong”. The same Constitution is clear on the right to self defence. Hon. Eresu I do not know if your statement is in relation to self defence or to trespass. Thank you.

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, the statement is on both. The Karimojong trespass with impunity and out of that impunity the people of Teso have suffered long enough and they want to defend themselves. We have lost time, we have lost prosperity, we had our economic direction but we have lost our dignity and we have lost our future. The people of Teso are in the hands of the Karimojong. For how long, how much more and when shall this come to an end? When will it come to the end? 

Let me say this: at the end of it all Ecweru expresses the feelings of everybody in Teso because in 1986/87 the Karimojong entered every part of Teso and killed, raped, robbed, hunted everybody anywhere, burnt and destroyed our prosperity in Teso. And they walked away in the middle of the day feeling great after that big, humiliating activity. They did it, that is a fact, and it is recorded in history.

The leaders of Karamoja, I challenge you. It is high time you stood your ground. I am told in Karamoja the Members of Parliament from Karamoja do not have a voice because if they do not support rustling they will not be voted back.

MR IMUMET: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Apuun is my immediate neighbour and this suffering, which has been narrated by hon. Eresu has been part of me even since the early 60s. The position is that the outburst of Mr Ecweru is a consequence of the voices of the people. The Karimojong are now hampering our political jobs in Teso. Here is a situation where an incident has occurred, you are going to sympathise with the people, and the people begin shouting at you that you are doing nothing and you are not telling the Government anything. So in the process there is a tendency - like Mr Ecweru has done - to channel anger out through another way because when they throw fire at you, you also immediately throw it away. That is the situation. 

Mr Ecweru is not against the Karimojong per se but the activities, which are being done by the Karimojong have continued in such a way that there is no hope for redress. While I was in the district at times I had to cooperate with the army, risking my life. But when you tell the leaders that, “Please, these people have crossed over there with animals”, and so on, there is nothing that is recovered. The local leaders keep saying, “Ngao ngoa”, meaning, “We do not know where those people have passed”.

How is Karamoja situated? Is it another country so that when we have to follow something up it requires some permission? What Mr Ecweru said reflects the voices of the people. It is not a personal attack on the Karimojong as such. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.31
MR PAUL LOKERIS (Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you very  much, Madam Speaker. I could start with what I wanted to be clarified upon by –(Interruptions)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Madam Speaker, I think it is very useful and helpful to this House if we are to debate from an informed position. I would prefer a situation in which the minister making the statement would have quoted Mr Ecweru in full and after quoting Mr Ecweru in full, then an analysis of this statement and government’s response would have been made. But because the minister has not quoted Mr Ecweru in full, the way we are debating is actually out of context. I, therefore, ask you that if we are to debate what Mr Ecweru said, we need  to redirect the House based on the facts, which I have. And on the issue of procedure, I would love to read it to the House so that we really know what we are talking about.  

MRS WABUDEYA: Madam Speaker, I am wondering what document the honourable colleague is about to read from as all I have is a newspaper and I do not think we should take a newspaper report as the true statement of Ecweru.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I was not here when the matter was raised. So, I do not know how the honourable member prefaced it.

MR ATUBO: Hon. Patrick Apuun was actually complaining on the basis of a press report, which he had in the House except that he quoted that part, which was useful to him. Then the minister took what was in the Hansard and she replied to it. I am not blaming her but if you look at the press report, which I have, you will actually be surprised that Mr Ecweru was extremely balanced in what he was saying and never incited the people of Teso to invade Karamoja.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He did not incite the people?

MR ATUBO: Never. Can I read it to you, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, read it.

MR ATUBO: The New Vision Tuesday, 5 May 2005. “Ecweru warns on Karamoja - by a reporter called John Omoding – The Iteso may soon be forced to storm Karamoja if the cattle raids go on unabated, the Soroti Resident District Commissioner has warned. Mr Ecweru made the remarks recently at a Water Development Stakeholders’ meeting in Soroti Lukiiko Hall. ‘I want to make it clear that some of us may be compelled to enter Karamoja with or without permission’, said Ecweru, also the Arrow Group Chief Coordinator. ‘Why should the Karamoja persist as if nothing can be done about it?’ he asked. Ecweru said, ‘the persistence of the affected districts is running out. Given the persistent terror and raids that the Karimojong have meted out against their neighbours of Teso, Sebei and Lira for nearly a decade, anxiety is growing daily among the populace and I am worried their patience is running out’. 

He said, ‘the Karimojong warriors had started insulting the UPDF and on many occasions ambushed them. The Government must move immediately to disarm the warriors. He said, ‘this would only be successful if all guns in the hands of the Karimojong, including the vigilantes, were removed’. Ecweru ended like this: ‘Teso has observed the peaceful disarmament process, which to me has failed’.” 

So I really want you to - when you are making your remarks - bear this in mind and also bear in mind the response of the minister. The UPDF Spokesman, Maj. Shaban Bantariza said - the Monitor is here - “The UPDF has restarted disarmament of the Karimojong warriors to remove illegal guns from the region, almost four years after the plan was suspended.” Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We should limit this debate, honourable members. The facts are clear. What they are complaining about is that they are tired of cattle rustlers.

MR PAUL LOKERIS: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. From childhood I can remember in the 1980s when the militia were recruited to defend our neighbours and what transpired later is that these militia started raiding Karamoja and burning the towns of Karamoja. That took place in Matanyi - the militia went and burnt the town of Matanyi - they burnt the town of Iliri, they burnt the town of Kangole, they burnt the town of Lalachat and also killed a peaceful team of Balurivi and even the Minister of Karamoja. They killed people in Teso who had gone for peace so you can see that these statements the leaders from Teso make are the ones causing problems.

MR ETONU: I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me a chance, and I thank my colleague for giving way. What the honourable member holding the Floor is talking about, that the ministers were recruited and they raided Karamoja and killed people, is not true. At that time I was a minister and I was never recruited, I never joined the Army and I have never held a gun, neither have I ever killed a fly. 

What happened is this: there was a joint operation carried out by UNLA and the Kenyan Army. That was in 1983. This joint operation was a result of constant raids by the Karimojong into the neighbouring districts, including the Karimojong from Uganda raiding Kenya in Pokot. That is what caused that operation; it was a joint operation. It was not ministers recruited or militia of Teso going to Karamoja. 

I would like to inform the august House that the Karimojong are superior in using arms and the militia from Teso cannot match them. Therefore, they could not have even risked going there. It is only because there was a joint operation, which involved helicopter gunships and big tanks, that is what silenced the Karimojong then and they stopped raiding. By the way, we had a big break for a long time and I would like to ask our government to do the same. Get the joint operation again and it will end these raids. Thank you.

MR PETER LOKERIS: Thank you for giving way. Madam Speaker, at times we do not mention some of these historical facts. At the time he is mentioning I was an administrative secretary, Moroto in 1983, and he knows it. In that government the operations by the militia were different from a joint operation to disarm Kenyans and Ugandans. This one of incursions during those years into Karamoja were real and I used to visit those areas, at times meeting even the administrative secretaries from Teso and it was so pathetic. 

One day when we had gathered for a peace meeting, I was included as an administrative secretary and you were in your home, we were attacked in Wera, somebody stood on my head, this head is very tough –(Laughter)- with his all his feet, a militia, and the teeth went through here, I have a scar here. These are things we have decided not to mention because these were wars and apparently many were killed including the District Commissioner, Kotido plus others. These are things we should not mention, they are very hurting –(Interruption)

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Madam Speaker, we were all caught off guard. When I look at the Order Paper we have a lot of other business to cover and yet the honourable minister is basically carrying out a one-on-one dialogue. I think it is not orderly. Therefore, is it in order for the honourable minister to go ahead and open up a one-on-one dialogue when actually we have matters that really take up the whole country? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the matter may be local to Karamoja and its neighbors but it is important enough for us to discuss it because they also need support. From what I can see we are not going to be able to conclude the debate on this matter. Can we ask the Minister of Defence to update us on the disarmament? I do not want to believe what the minister has said that we have not given you money for disarmament. Has this House not given you money for disarmament? Could the Leader of Government Business cause the Minister of Defence to come and brief us on disarmament?

MR PAUL LOKERIS: Can I wind up? Madam Speaker, I was still holding the Floor.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we should get the minister’s statement and debate it fully.

MR PAUL LOKERIS: I had not yet finished.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The problem is that each of you is now accusing the other.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, you have ruled on the matter and your ruling still stands. If anybody wants to challenge your ruling on the matter let him or her come up with a substantive motion to challenge your ruling.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I agree with you entirely. Let us get the statement from the Minister of Defence; we want it next week so that we discuss this matter of disarmament –(Interjections)- no, part of her response includes disarmament and I think we need to hear from the other minister before we wind it up.

3.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Kezimbira Miyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to begin by clarifying that yesterday a question was raised on this matter but I had indicated to you that I would give my response to the question, which had been raised today and I am going to give my statement now.

On Wednesday the 11th of May 2005, hon. Odonga Otto, Member of Parliament representing Aruu County informed the House about press reports he had read suggesting that some Ugandans are being recruited by a private security company for guard duties at various installations the security company looks after, including those in Iraq. The honourable member wanted to know whether this was being done with the knowledge and consent of the Government. Parliament asked the Ministry of Internal Affairs and that of Foreign Affairs to shed light on this matter. We wish to report as follows:

It is true that there are many unemployed Ugandans both here and abroad. Because of this some Ugandans have in the past lost money to unscrupulous individuals who have taken advantage of the desperate and unfortunate position of the unemployed. 

Other reports suggest that some of those who manage to get jobs abroad get a raw deal, the remuneration is not commensurate with their qualifications, skills and experience. The call by hon. Otto to shade light on the current reports is, therefore, in order. It is government’s responsibility to ensure that there is no loss of money in fraudulent schemes and it is not government’s wish that Ugandans get a raw deal. With this in mind, Cabinet on the 4th of August 2004 directed the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to establish an institutional framework for the effective management of labour migration. 

Consequently the Minister of Labour established an external employment unit whose main mission is to reduce unemployment and under employment in Uganda by facilitating access and decent employment opportunities abroad. The rules and regulations that define the framework of externalization of labour were drafted and submitted to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs for that ministry to draft the necessary statutory instrument. It will be after the issuance of the instrument that legal and orderly migration of Ugandans for employment outside the country will begin. 

In the particular case of Ugandans being recruited for guard duties in Iraq, it is true that two international security firms, SOC-SMG and AKA Security recently visited Uganda to explore possibilities. Both the Uganda Government and US Government through its mission here were not involved in the planning and execution of the exploratory visit hence the remarks attributed to the US embassy official as reported in the press. 

Officials of the two firms visited the Ministry of Internal Affairs to inform us about their intentions. They were categorically told that the Government had no role to play in such an undertaking by the private sector and they were advised to follow the laws of Uganda. There was no clearance given by the Ministry of Internal Affairs for the recruitment since not even the Inspector-General of Police has authority to allow private security firms to recruit armed personnel for deployment outside the country. The Inspector-General of Police has written to the concerned company clearly stating the facts. 

In addition, Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has confirmed that they did not clear the company to export Ugandans to the said project. 

In conclusion, I wish to state that the Government is not involved in the reported recruitment of Ugandans to perform guard duties at installations outside the country, including those in Iraq. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.45
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I want to thank the minister for heeding the call of the Deputy Speaker to have a formal statement presented before Parliament on the massive recruitment of Ugandans to go to Iraq. The biggest hobby now in Iraq is dying - according to the available news on CNN. And being one of the concerned Ugandans, I raised the issue last week in Parliament. 

I have a lot of information because I was even taken to a talk show and I met one of the lawyers busy involved in recruiting Ugandans. I also met stiff resistance. I have to be honest, this is one of the few times I have gone to speak on radio and met stiff resistance from Ugandans who are not supporting my ideas to stop them from going to Iraq. About 80 percent of the callers were telling me to come back to Parliament and eat my money and leave them alone. But I read between the lines. Many Ugandans were complaining that the Government has failed to do anything for them to the extent that the forces of demand and supply of labour should rather be rationed by the international market. 

Madam Speaker, this statement is not clear about what is being done to the 800 people who have already been recruited. There is no single position here, in fact the statement is just telling us that the Inspector-General of Police and the Minister of Internal Affairs are moving a little slower than the recruiting agencies. They have not told us what has happened to those who have been recruited. And since they are doing something not okay by government, where are they and has the Police cordoned off the recruiting venues? 

It is illegal for any Ugandan to obtain military training beyond a certain level without the consent of government. It is criminal. If you ever go out and get rained like at Sundhusrt without government’s permission the penal code is clear that you will get seven years in Luzira and when you return the Government can immediately get hold of you. The Government wants to monopolise the legitimate force and knowledge as far as military science is concerned. 

Mr Minister, I have three questions. I am aware that the MD of SOC-SMG has visited several African countries. He even came to Uganda - I saw his convoy personally. I am glad and I want to thank the President because he personally told him, when he sought an appointment at State House, that the Uganda Government would not be involved and is not interested in that scheme. In many African countries and others like Bangladesh and Natal, government ministers have become commission agents for this powerful company -(Interjections)- specifically Bangladesh and Natal, but I have three questions still.

What is government doing about those who have been registered and recruited? 

Two, where is the recruiting venue and what has the Police done about these recruitment centers, which seem to be illegal if we read between the lines? 

Three, could the minister investigate –(Interjections)- yes, what is being done about the 800 Ugandans already recruited? I hear you have to go with a relative, you have to open an international bank account - any job where the first requirement is to come with your parents you must really know that kind of job is very dangerous. (Laughter). So, what are you doing about those 800 people already registered? 

What is the Government doing about those recruitment centers and the companies I know? The law firm is in town. What is government doing about that? 

Could government bring us the documents people are signing with those lawyers because after being drilled for three hours you sign several documents and I hear those documents are the terms and conditions of service. In those documents they want to see the terms of the contract, the gratuity, the warrants and whether they are going for combat or non-combat jobs. The lawyer of that firm stated to me clearly that the Ugandans are being employed in Iraq for non-combat jobs but the minister is here saying they are being taken for combat jobs. So, can this Parliament know what these people are actually going to do in Iraq? 

And I want to advise Ugandans because after talking here some might be flown away, I have seen this Parliament talking about certain things that are going ahead like the sale of UCB. I want to advise them that please, watch CNN. You know, desperation must not force you to go and harvest honey in the daytime. That kind of desperation is so dangerous and the way the recruitment for Iraq is, it is as if they are choosing those who can manage to die. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

3.51
MR DANIEL KIWALABYE (Kiboga County East, Kiboga): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here perplexed because government, or our economy, cannot absorb our people. They are here redundant; they have no jobs. Many people have found a way of going out and sell their labour without the assistance of the Government and we have acknowledged their contributions to this government but the government has not put in place guidelines for our sons and daughters to go abroad and sell their labour. Here is a firm or firms, which have come in, they have approached the authorities and the authorities, according to the statement of the minister, have just said, “Well, we do not have a law to allow you to take them out, we are in process of doing something”, and that is that. I am perplexed!

Is the minister telling us that this government does not want out people to go out, work and earn Uganda some foreign exchange?

MR ATUBO: I thank hon. Kiwalabye for giving way. It is true every citizen has a fundamental right of freedom to move wherever he wants, and to travel. However, also the Government has the fundamental responsibility to protect your life and property. And these fundamental responsibilities actually extend to what they call consular protection. This consular protection means that when you travel for example to India, even if the Government has not given you permission to travel, because it is your right to travel and you get a problem in India, our Embassy in India has the fundamental responsibility to immediately ensure that whether you are in prison or you have been arrested, they must protect you. 

So, I want to inform my honourable colleague that while Ugandans might be free to go and seek employment anywhere in the world, including Iraq, the responsibility of the Government is still there to ensure that where you travel and when you get problems while there, for example if you are abducted, your parents will go to the Uganda Government and say, “Please, help us, our son has been abducted in Iraq”. And it happened in Kenya when drivers were abducted. 

I want my honourable colleague to really bear this point in mind that it can really embarrass the Government. And if you go to all these embassies, including the American Embassy, there is a daily information chart: “If you want to travel to such and such a place, bear in mind that this is what is happening”. The information chart - you just go to any of these embassies, the information is for the nationals, even in our library. 

If you want to travel to Saudi Arabia, if you want to travel to Malysia; there are even restrictions. That is why at one time hon. Kiwalabye you could not travel, in the 60s, to South Africa. In Uganda in the 1960s if you travelled and your passport showed that you travelled to apartheid South Africa, when you came back you would be in trouble. So, that freedom is restricted because the Government has that fundamental responsibility. Thank you.

MR KIWALABYE: I thank you for that information, honourable member. All I am talking about is the irony surrounding this exercise. Government is welcoming whatever is coming out of these people who have made their way to foreign countries and worked there and we are praising their contribution here. However, the Government is now sitting idle and doing nothing about what you have just informed me about to ensure that our people travel safely, look for employment and increase the returns to the country.

I heard that somebody from the President’s Office was working on a scheme to export skilled and unskilled labour but I do not know what happened to it. From the information I got from the press recently, people had become desperate because they were not going out and they were demanding that whatever they had been charged should be refunded. So, I do not know whether that officer was working with the knowledge of government and government did not have any guidelines, or not. 

I think it is high time that we lived in a global village and allowed our people to go and work wherever they can find employment. This business of burying our people who are contributing immensely to our economy, is not fair. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.58
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not oppose or stop Ugandans from going outside for greener pastures. However, when these people are going out to look for employment they usually get Ugandan passports and the passport is an identity card to show that they are Ugandans. It has never happened and I do not think it can happen to any country for a certain firm to come and recruit en mass to carry people outside. You can imagine having your children at home, ten of them, then somebody comes to your home and he is training them to take them somewhere you do not know. 

Really I have a problem, Madam Speaker, with the minister. He says no clearance was given by Internal Affairs, which means the Government did not authorise it. Even the Police did not authorise it. Is he, as part of government, aware that really the recruitment took place? What has the Government done after knowing that these people are doing it illegally? Have they arrested those people? Are they charged? Are they in court?

Madam Speaker, how sure are we that these people who are being recruited are not being taken outside to do subversive things against this nation; how sure are we? They are not cleared; nobody gave authority and the minister comes here to give us statements? We have to be very serious especially in a country like Uganda where we have been involved in many wars and guerilla activities. How can some people come in here to recruit without government control? The minister should give us a substantive statement about what they have done to those companies that are recruiting Ugandans and taking them to Iraq.

4.00
MRS JUSTINE KASULE (Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank hon. Otto for raising this concern. My question is to the Minister of Internal Affairs together with the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. What is the employment policy in this country? If you are talking about people being desperate and people having no jobs, then does that really make Ugandans go for whatever they are offered outside this country even when it is not good for their health? 

I want to add on to what my colleagues have asked, after hearing all this going on, what has the Executive done about it? Being that it came in the press, that is a sign that people are scared about what could be going on.

And the minister says there was no clearance given by the Ministry of Internal Affairs for the recruitment, and not even the Inspector-General of Police has the authority to allow private security firms to recruit armed personnel for deployment outside the country. This one raises the question of international relations and diplomatic issues. You mean because Uganda has no control over its work, the Ministry of Internal Affairs has no control over this? 

Does this mean that other countries should suffer? Because if you say you did not give clearance, then that means you do not know why they are recruiting. Since you got this information, did you endeavour to stop them from recruiting? Assuming they are recruiting to go and form a rebel group against another government, diplomatically how is that to be handled?

Somebody may argue and say people have been going out for kyeyo, but they do not go in big numbers. They go one by one; and that is still a sign that the Government is not in control of its people. Why should the skilled manpower of this country leave yet you are not even training well those who are left behind? That is why Makerere is about to close –(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Madam Speaker, Makerere University is vibrant and I am not aware that it is about to close. Is the honourable member in order to make such a statement, which is not even substantiated? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lumumba, can you substantiate why you think the university is closing, if it is true that it is closing?

MRS KASULE: Madam Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to inform the Chancellor of Makerere University that I am a student at Makerere University in second year pursuing masters studies in International Relations and Diplomatic Studies. I want –(Mrs Bitamazire rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information from the Minister in charge of Education.

MRS KASULE: I am substantiating, Madam Speaker. About a month ago the support staff of Makerere University were on strike, even the time the recent graduation was held there was a strike. I am a member of the Social Services Committee, we had a workshop with the universities of Uganda and they were just explaining to us why they want to increase the tuition fees in all the universities. And one of the reasons they gave is that whenever they put their budget before the Government they always get less than 50 percent of it. Three days after that the Monitor wrote that Makerere University was about to close because they did not have money to run the remaining three months left to the end of this semester.

I think as a the chancellor, when such statements are said or when there are such statements from an hon. Member of Parliament like me Kasule Lumumba Justine from Bugiri, instead of putting me to order you would have instead asked me, “Where is the problem?” That way I can even give you more information, which I cannot even give here on the Floor of the House - this is a public place - so that it helps in your administration. (Laughter).  

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable member has told us that she is a student at Makerere University and that she read in the Monitor that Makerere is going to close. None of those two statements is a substantiation of the serious allegation she has made. Is she, therefore, in order to continue with the debate without substantiating the statements or otherwise withdrawing the statements she has made? 

Yes, the truth is that we are in charge; we are the Executive arm of government, we finance Makerere University and we know very well that Makerere University is financed. Therefore, is the honourable member in order to continue making allegations that are not substantiated?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lumumba, I expected you to say, “I have been told that tomorrow do not come for lectures”. That would mean that the university is closed but you say you are continuing to study. So, I think you are out of order –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I thank the member for giving way. I want to correct the impression given by my colleague that the university is about to close. I would like to invite my colleague to the Ministry of Education and we shall show her the vouchers against which cheques have been written throughout the financial year, to make sure that the university continues to operate. 

It is not correct that the university is about to close because as late as about a week or so ago cheques were flowing to the university. I would like to say that the fact that the university is trying to increase the fees does not mean that they are going to close. It just means that they want to enhance some of the programmes, which they are running. So it is not correct that the university is about to close. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honorable members, let us go back to Iraq. 

MRS KASULE: Madam Speaker, I was still substantiating when they put me to order but now that you say we should go back to Iraq, let me go back to Iraq, where I have never been. (Laughter). 

I was explaining the issue of international relations and diplomatic studies. The people are recruited in Uganda in big numbers to go and do work especially in the field where people are armed outside this country, and then the Government clearly states out that they did not give clearance and further insinuate that they seem not to be bothered about what is going on? It is so sad because in the statement the minister does not say what the ministry has done about it or what the ministry is going to do. It is leaving it in the hands of the private security firms. Does this mean that tomorrow if a private security firm begins recruiting people and says they are taking them to do work outside this country, then government would just look on? Is this something that can only be done by security firms outside this country? 

I beg the ministry and the minister in charge that please, if this statement is read by a Ugandan who really loves this country, it discourages him or her. The minister is saying there is nothing we can do so in my local language, Lusoga, you are not in control; you cannot do anything. Are you in control of this ministry, honorable minister? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.12
MR EDWARD NDAWULA KAWEESI (Kiboga County West, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. This statement is kind of disappointing to me because first of all it states that there is a very high unemployment level in the country. The Government has acknowledged that and at the same time the minister says they are preparing. We started recognising the kyeyo money here over seven years ago so it is surprising that the Government has not put in place a mechanism to enable migration of labour. 

It is further disappointing for the Minister of Internal Affairs to say on the third page that there was no clearance. This is absurd! We all know that those people carry passports, which are travel documents for Ugandans and which are issued by the Ministry of Internal Affairs. These people cannot leave this country without a passport. So if you issue anybody with a passport, in other words you have cleared his travel. In fact you even inform anybody who meets that person to allow them entry and assistance, so you cannot come here in this statement and say you have not given clearance.

MR OULANYAH: Madam Speaker, I wish to inform the honorable member holding the Floor that the words in the passports are, clearly, as follows:
“The Republic of Uganda: this is to request and require, in the name of the President of the Republic of Uganda, all those to whom it may concern, to allow the bearer to pass freely, without hindrance, and afford the bearer such assistance and protection as may be necessary. Authority; Passport Control Office.”

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Thank you so much my colleague. Madam Speaker, you can see that it is the President of the Republic of Uganda making a request and now the minister is here telling us that when these people are recruited and they carry the passport his department has issued he has not cleared them?

The other thing I want to find out from the minister is, how long is it going to take for his ministry, and government for that matter, to put in place laws allowing migration of labour. At least we need a time scale because we get so many opportunities for Ugandans. Now the world has become so small that many people who are technically skilled would want to be in other countries but whenever you are asked about the clearance the best you can do is to get police clearance, which itself is not really institutionalized. So I want to request the minister to speed up the process. 

On top of that, this issue of companies recruiting when members have expressed concerns and reservations, I really believe if the opportunity exists and these people have got the competences and the skills, the Government - instead of making this disclaimer that they do not know – should take the advice of the Inspector-General of Police. He has advised that the Government should facilitate this process. Let the Government, if it means setting up a consulate in Iraq, do it. If these people are going to Iraq, if these people are going to Afghanistan, set it up so that we facilitate the employment of our people because when they are employed properly with government’s support, they get a good pay for their services. Otherwise they go in as orphans of labour. 

The way this disclaimer has come out, this company will not stop recruiting them because our Constitution says that one is free to offer one’s labour so you cannot stop their recruitment. However, what will happen is that they are going to be recruited and paid peanuts because you the Government are not supporting them. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.17
MR BRUNO PAJOBO (Workers’ Representative): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to say something. On page 1 the minister is lamenting and also saying there is no employment in Uganda. I want to know from the minister, how many non-Ugandans are employed in Uganda so that we can know that really in Uganda we do not have enough jobs?

Secondly, how many non-Ugandans are working in Uganda? That is what I want to know from him. It seems our current situation is that non-Ugandans are favoured and they get good jobs with good payment more than Ugandans, thus leaving Ugandans to whom it may concern. 

The situation in Uganda, of employment, is bad. Recently we complained here; a committee was appointed to look into terms and conditions of service of Ugandans but up to now the report is nowhere. It seems that it was already put under the beds. I do not know where it is now.

A committee was appointed to look into terms and conditions of service of where Ugandans are working, up to now the report is nowhere; it seems it is already put under the bed. I do not know where they are now. We had also appointed a committee here to look into the issue of immigration department where you find so many of our friends from Asia are flocking into this country and even some of them being kept somewhere without the knowledge of this government. In fact, many of these people are here. I even fail to understand whether the report of those people will ever be brought to this House. I think it is high time that we stopped favouring non-Ugandans in respect of Ugandans. So this is serious and -(Interruption)

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Madam Speaker, knowing that a big number of Ugandans live as foreigners in other countries such as the United States, Scandinavia, London, Germany, they get employed and we can see the houses, which are constructed through their labour in those countries. And now here comes the representative for workers suggesting that we kick out non-Ugandans as far as employment is concerned knowing that there is a reciprocal action by any country affected. Is he in order to pursue something that will impede our friends working overseas by suggesting that we do not encourage foreigners to work in this country?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable member, what I understand from the workers’ representative is that no Ugandan has ever been given a work permit to make mandazi in other countries. Their complaint is that jobs, which should be done by Ugandans here ARE being done by foreigners.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: I object to that Madam Speaker.  Madam Speaker, -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nsambu, the workers’ representative is in order. Proceed.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Objection, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nsambu, I think you are not familiar with the rules of this House. Please, sit down.

MR PAJOBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. I think if there are Ugandans working abroad, they are doing jobs, which they qualify for. It is not like here where you find non-Ugandans selling mandazi, groundnuts, charcoal; they are not doing those jobs. 

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether I should take this thing very personal. But I remember when I even had no qualifications at all, I worked in three countries; in other words I was like a mandazi seller. I worked in England, and I have a work permit to that effect. I worked in Germany; I had no employment qualifications, I worked in the United States and many others are doing so. So when someone comes here and tries to convince the whole House that you cannot give employment permit to people who are going to sell mandazi or whatever, I do not find that in order. 

Is it in order for someone, Madam Speaker, to try to convince us that only those who have qualifications can get work permits when we actually know that Ugandans are working abroad without any qualifications at all? Is it really in order for this august House to accept such an argument, Madam Speaker? 

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Speaker, I have restrained myself a lot listening to hon. Nsambu. I beg to move under rule 59 that the Member no longer be heard since -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the Member has received the message and will conduct himself appropriately.

MR PAJOBO: Thank you very much. What I was just trying to say is that in Uganda we have got a law, which gives exactly what type of employment we get to be done by foreigners. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleague for giving way. 

Madam Speaker, I come from Tororo and it is sad, and the President of Uganda is aware of this.  Tororo Cement Factory, which is supposed to be employing the sons and daughters of Ugandans, is full of illegal workers especially from the Asian countries who are not paying taxes to this government, and who are not even registered with NSSF. We also have an Indian in Tororo who sells charcoal but that is not the point. 

The point I want to make on Iraq is that the American government took very, very serious consideration; most of the soldiers you see fighting in Iraq are from private firms -(Interjections)- I said most of them; some may be from government and from the US Army, but some of them are from private firms, some of them were retired officers who were re-called. 

What the government of Uganda needs to do is to ensure that we get the details of owners of these firms to find out whether they are registered, whether they are paying taxes, they meet conditions of protecting the Ugandans who will go to these areas. To ensure they have protective gears and that they are adequately trained, and they understand the local languages. So, that is what we need to do to ensure that the firm that is trying to do business meets international standards to ensure that Ugandans there are protected in terms of language, culture and other security. This is the information I wanted to give you.

MR PAJOBO: I am happy to receive that one but somehow I still want to say that they say the Ministry of Labour established a plan of employment unit, I am not aware of this unit. Was there any publication to inform the public about this? That is one thing, which I also want to let us be informed about because many people’s money has been swindled and some people have established illegal positions. You pay Shs 2 million to process -(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, the clarification I am seeking from my colleague, the representative of workers here IS, he is mindful of human beings alone. What about the dogs, which were also sent to Iraq, are they also under your jurisdiction, because also they are workers?

MR PAJOBO: I think dogs are also trained with our money; they are part of my jurisdiction and therefore, they should also be protected. I think those dogs should be insured. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR PAJOBO: Madam Speaker, the other issue, which I wanted to raise, is that we have got so many security organisations in Uganda. How are they regulated? How are they being licensed to operate in Uganda? How are they training? Is it that each person just recruits people, trains them, and then arms them? Is there any guideline, and under what circumstances are these people working? The conditions of work of private security personnel in Uganda, how are they working, and who knows? Tomorrow these people can also mutiny and cause bloodshed in this country. Is there any guideline? How are they working? How many hours are they working in a day? What is their salary?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member to speak so loud that our ears have to crack?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the microphones are working very, very well. You can be cool.

MR PAJOBO: I wanted to assure him that I am really emphasizing the point that he should also listen loud and clear. 

The other issue, Madam Speaker, is that, I asked the government to come out with an employment policy. This country has no employment policy. We have been asking the Ministry of Gender and Labour for an employment policy, but there is nothing so far. The labour laws in Uganda are really obsolete.  They need to be revised. We have been crying over and over, but the government has not come out to particularly to rectify this. Therefore, the issue of our people going to Iraq is because conditions have forced them. Whether you are here in Uganda, you are in a frying pan.

MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO: I want to tell you, hon. Member on the Floor, that the Minister of Labour has assured this House since we came here in 2001 that the employment policy was drafted and is before Cabinet. So do not worry, it is coming.

MR PAJOBO: My dear colleague, I am worried because I am soon being charged that I did nothing in this House because the laws have not come.

I want to wind up that I personally think that for Ugandans to go and work outside the country, the conditions should be explained; our government should know where our people are going. They should also know under which conditions they are going to work. Simply to leave our people to go without taking care of them is dangerous to us.  Since our foreign offices have no funds to help such people, if we just leave them to go, we are going to give more problems to our foreign offices, which are ill equipped and without funds to help their people.  Thank you.

4.32
MS ALASO ASIANUT (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have been looking at this statement and I get the impression that the unemployment level in this country has reached such embarrassing levels that we are ready to go in for anything even whether we understand it as a country or not, we are ready to let our people go in for that.  

Madam Speaker, the concern here this afternoon is not about people simply going to Iraq. I think that is the impression, which we must rub off. The impression being created is as though Members of Parliament simply do not want people to get jobs. We actually want people to get jobs, but the problem here is that if you look at the Minister’s statement, twice he has said, this firm was not cleared; the Ministry of Internal Affairs did not clear it; the IGP also has not cleared it. So what does the absence of clearance mean? That is where I need help. In the absence of clearance, is the exercise still legal or illegal?  

I want the Minister to know that he owes it to Ugandans; between you and those Ugandans who are being carried to Iraq, there is a social contract; that is why you are the executive and you are supposed to ensure that we Ugandans are secure.  When the Minister just does it laissez affair, and simply says, “it is not cleared”, so what? Who is responsible for us as ordinary Ugandans who do not even know what is happening?  

Madam Speaker, when the Executive does not take the responsibility over these matters, these people are bound to be seriously exploited. I will give you an example right here. Security firms in Uganda currently pay their workers only Shs 60,000 per month and yet the work they do, and the enterprises they guard at the cost of Shs 60,000, and then the temptation they are subjected to - that is the level of exploitation. So when the Minister comes here and says, well we did not clear them, so that means maybe it is legal or illegal. Who is going to guarantee that these people are not exploited? The onus is on government to ensure that these people have very good contract terms. The onus is on government to ensure that there is a provision for insurance.  

For instance, Madam Speaker, if these people die in Iraq because it is said Iraq is one of their destinations, will Ugandans have dead bodies brought back here? Who is going to insure, I see the Americans ferrying their dead bodies every other day, who is going to ensure that this firm brings back the dead bodies of these Ugandans they are going to take?

MR FRED RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I would like to give this information. Some of us may have heard of recruitment of horse trainers. Horses are trained in deserts and subject to any correction, which may come from hon. Prof. Kagonyera, a horse runs faster when there is noise at its back. They tie a person at the back of the horse; the horse is lashed. It runs faster, the person of course screams and dies, he is removed, thrown in the desert, and another one is put on. This information together with others, if I were to be given time to speak, but this is a multi-sectoral problem. 

The Ministry of Education for instance should also come in, because most of our youngsters go for scholarships. We do not understand where they are going. In this period of many hazards, lesbianism, homosexuality, what not; where do we think our youngsters are going? Are we doing some monitoring of some sort? I think this matter is multi-sectoral.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform my honourable colleague, in addition to what my other colleague has said, that for instance, United States of America (USA), you do not have to be a citizen of the USA to fight for it. As a result you are given a temporary permit, a green card, and you can be recruited into the Armed Forces of the USA to go and fight for that country.

Madam Speaker, we have eight Ugandans that I know who were among the “desert rats” that fought in Iraq and Kuwait. Not long ago a one 2nd Lieutenant Musisi was here and he was proudly introduced to His Excellency, the President, and the President commended him for having fought abroad in the USA. So, when I hear a statement such as this from my honourable colleague, I am inclined to believe that either he is hiding additional information or he is totally unaware of what is obtaining on the ground.  

PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, if you look at the minister’s statement, there are matters relating to economic policy, security and law. The economic one is that under liberalization anybody can sell his labour anywhere. But because this matter touches on security, that principle is compromised in the sense that the responsibility of the state is for the security of its citizens.  When that is evoked, the information, which is lacking in the statement of the Minister is whether the Government of the Republic of Uganda would allow its citizens, regardless of the economic policy of liberalization, to be recruited into fields, which are clearly hazardous to their lives. There is no statement of confirmation that the Government has stopped it; all that the statement says is that it is not involved in the recruitment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR OKUPA: The information I want to give hon. Alaso as a rejoinder to the concern she raised about in case these people died there. But we have been reading newspapers and watching CNN; you realize that these terrorists in Iraq have been taking people hostage and ask for a ransom. In case a Ugandan is taken hostage, who is going to pay this ransom, because they have been asking the governments of those countries, and some countries like Australia have given them eight hours to leave Iraq. Now we are only planning to go there when people are being given ultimatums of eight hours of leaving. In case, say, Mr Musisi is taken in this group and taken hostage, who is going to pay ransom if the Minister is denying responsibility of this company?

MS ALASO: Thank you colleagues for that information. The Minister has said the Inspector General of Police (IGP) has written to the concerned company clearly stating the facts.  What facts are those that you are stating because all you are doing in this statement is apparently denying responsibility? So what are the facts that you are stating to this company, that you are not responsible for their welfare or – what exactly are those facts, I would be happy to see that letter put on the Table so that we know what type of communication is transpiring between the IGP and this other company.

Madam Speaker, I am also worried, drawing from the experiences of the local security companies here where they not only underpay their staff but also take away their original certificates when they get involved with them. Won’t this other security company is not going to take away Ugandans, and then at the end of the day get hold of their passports such that even when they get disgruntled they cannot find a way back home?

Madam Speaker, for now we are grappling with the situation, we do not seem to know what exactly is happening. Is the Minister really prepared for a worst-case scenario where if some of these people might be taken by some organization, which is recruiting for terrorists, he will be held accountable? 

Finally, Madam Speaker, we have asked for the Employment Policy in this House for so long. I like the way my honourable sister, Member of Parliament for Workers, put it. She said it is sitting before Cabinet. I think it is gathering dust before Cabinet because it has taken four years. Now, things are getting off-hand every other day but the same promise keeps coming up from the Front Bench.  Now that we have things that are tending to emergency, is there a possibility where the Minister in charge would have at least created a mechanism for intervening, some ministerial instrument of sorts for intervening in order to look into the details of this while they sit on the employment policy?  I thank you.

4.44
DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I start analyzing the hon. Minister’s presentation, there is one thing I would like to correct.  It is not true that any of the Ugandan citizens can walk into any of the developed countries like United States of America, United Kingdom, Germany and have a job; priority in those countries are for their citizens. The citizens are employed first, and if there are those jobs either, which are extra or the citizens do not want to do, then a foreigner can do them. So I do not know what jobs my friend was doing in those countries, but it must be along those lines.  If there are jobs where the citizens are not qualified then outsiders can be given those jobs like scientists, but most of these kyeyo jobs are really jobs, which the citizens do not want –(Interruption)

MR KITYO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and my colleague for giving way. Governments normally have external workers policy. Like now the Government of Kenya and Ghana they are exporting their labour particularly nurses and paramedics on good arrangements between governments. 

For example, nurses in Kenya are going to the USA and earn a minimum of 30 dollars per hour because there is a government arrangement. In Lebanon the population is 7 million but the people who live there are only 4 million the 3 million are outside Lebanon working and sending millions of money back to Lebanon. In fact, if you looked at Lebanon’s economy money coming from outside Lebanon is more than the money they generate inside the country. 

The information I want to give to the Government is to quicken the external workers policy so that we legally export our labour and people get dignified jobs that those jobs the honourable members were talking about.  Actually, the jobs the citizens do not want to do want to do are very dirty jobs, which are subject to our Ugandans outside this country. That is the information I wanted to give.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much. I think that was really genuine information. I emphasized that the jobs, which citizens do not do either because they do not like them or they are not qualified for them, are the jobs the foreigners do in every country. There is a demand for nurses in the western countries so it is not exception. 

But to come back to the Minister’s presentation, Madam Speaker, when you look at this paper it is lacking in a lot of ways and I really wonder whether the Minister consulted technicians before he prepared this paper. There are a lot of loopholes here, which show that the person who prepared the paper was really not technically prepared to write something about labour going outside the country.  We know for example, that Iraq right now is the hottest spot in the world. A number of people die daily from explosions –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I thank honourable Mallinga for giving way. The information I want to give to my colleague is that, in the news broadcast of last night on the BBC it was reported that as many as 400 military raids are made every week in Iraq. What a danger for the Ugandans to go to work in Iraq!

DR MALLINGA: What I was trying to emphasize is that Iraq is a very dangerous place and our Minister is not really concerned. Yesterday there was a report on TV, which I watched; people were recruiting openly. University graduate from Makerere who dared to speak to the press was excluded from the recruitment. So, there is something sneaky about the recruitment of Ugandans we do not know whether they are being recruited as mercenaries to be trained outside this country to go and overthrow the government of another country. (Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, my honourable colleague. I am glad you have touched that element of mercenaries. Last year one African country was approached by a highly placed firm from England run by none other than the former Prime Minister Thatcher’s son Mark. He employed South Africans and some British fellow conspicuously to go and work as a private guard firm in Bugimayi, DRC. On their way from South Africa they stopped in Harare knowing very well they were going for guard duty in Bugimayi DRC.  When they picked up guns in Harare that is when they found out that actually they were not going to Bugimayi but to Equatorial Guinea to overthrow a government. They have been held in custody until yesterday they were released on the border with South Africa they went back.  

I also want to inform you that this is a danger zone. Not long ago an accredited Italian journalist was kidnapped. Italy sent top crack anti-terrorist commandoes to rescue her and they succeed. On their way back to the airport the top crack commando Italian was shot by the Americans at a so-called roadblock; that is another danger. I could give three more examples but I thought you could use that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up hon. Mallinga.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much my colleague for the information. I think as Ugandans we ought to be a little bit more concerned about our citizens.  You have heard that every country advises its citizens  whether they should visit certain areas or not.  As far as I know every country is advising its citizens not to go to Iraq or Afghanistan.  

I am amazed that our Minister is so leisurely speaks as if he is not concerned about the citizens of this country who are being recruited to go to Iraq supposedly and when they get there what jobs are they going to do? Some of the people I saw on TV are not trained in handling guns and they are going to do guard duties. How do you do a guard duty in a country like Iraq, which is in turmoil without knowing how to handle a gun?  The country which supposedly –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Just to show that the honourable Minister did not do his research he could have confirmed and come to this House with the following information.  That the principal director of that company in this country is a wife of a former commander of NRA now at Kimaka doing a further course - I do not want to disclose the details. But you can see the connections and the implications; high-powered people behind this company but you are hiding that information.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Finally.

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, let me wind up.  Finally, I would like to point out that I have been speaking to some of the opposition people in this House. They are saying that these people are being recruited by Kakoza Mutale to be trained outside the country so that they come for election violence I think that should be addressed. So, this exercise, honourable Minister, should be stopped. Either way it goes there is danger and suspicion of the lives of Ugandans. Please, stop the exercise; it is your responsibility; do not shy away from it. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE, COMMUNICATIONS (Maj. Tom Butime): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for giving this very useful statement, but also very well guarded statement. I think it has been well received. 

Madam Speaker, there are very many Ugandans who are hungry for employment. They would like to be employed in Uganda, in the neighbouring countries and outside. They only need assistance and protection. At the same time there are many private sector companies in Uganda, which are also impatient in recruiting and trying to find ways and means of sending people outside the country so that they can get employed. 

The Uganda Government did last year as the minister has mentioned, consider and discussed this particular problem. Cabinet did decide as the minister has put it that two ministries be tasked; the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Reason being, first of all, Ugandans need to go and work outside, but they must leave Uganda in an orderly fashion. Two, once they are outside there, they need protection, which must be worked out as I will mention later. Thirdly, those who go to work outside must return in an orderly manner; not dead, not arrested, not deported et cetera. 

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development was given the task to work out the modalities of externalising Uganda labour force outside the country. And I am glad that the minister has now mentioned that the Ministry of Labour did take up this directive by Cabinet and the minister is waiting for a statutory instrument from the Office of the Attorney General so that they can now begin to work towards externalisation of the Uganda employment force to go outside. 

The other directive which was given to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was that as soon as the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is ready, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs would meet the ambassadors of respective countries here in Kampala and work out bilateral agreements, memos of understanding between Uganda and that particular embassy or mission to guide how a Ugandan would leave Entebbe going to work in London and how he would be protected. Isn’t it? By the British Government. Following that memorandum of understanding between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the mission representing that country.   I think that is the next stage after the statutory instrument has been signed by the Attorney General.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, the way forward here should be to expedite the statutory instrument from the Attorney General so that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development can now take up and finalize with the directive which was given together with the Ministry of foreign Affairs. And then Ugandans can now legally and in an orderly manner begin to go outside the country as the Phillipinoes, Egyptians, Indians and others are doing. Those are actually protected by their countries. 

There is a quota system, how many Ugandans can go and work, how many must return after four years and how many must go after that particular number of Ugandans has returned. So, I think the government is right and on course. That is why I think the minister should not be blamed that his statement has loopholes. There is no loophole in the Minister of Internal Affair’s statement. He has given you the facts as they are and he could not have gone out of what Cabinet had decided. 

For me if I was still young, I would go to Iraq if I can go in an orderly and protected fashion. After all, if you tell the people of Uganda not to go and work, cowards die many times. Is it not? Yes, many forward their death and therefore you can work in Iraq but be protected and come back and make money. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Kezimbira Miyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable members who have contributed to this statement. 

Madam Speaker my statement was indeed very carefully prepared as has been stated by the Minister of Communications. It said exactly what took place between the companies and the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The Ministry of Internal Affairs stated, and this is very clear in the letter that was written by the Inspector General of Police to the companies, that while the Minister of Internal Affairs and indeed the Inspector General of Police had the authority to allow local security companies to recruit Ugandans for guard duties as it had been informed, he did not have a mandate or the power to grant the companies the authority to recruit Ugandans to go outside the country. 

Therefore, the activity of recruiting these people, as far as the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Police is concerned, forthwith will stop. Because they were told if you had to do anything, it had to be done according to the law and the law does not permit this. 

Madam Speaker, the issue of contracts that have been –(Interruption)

PROF KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, the clarification I am seeking from the minister is simple.  First, the Ministry of Labour does not allow people to go outside and be paid miserable payments. Secondly, the Inspector General of Police did not give or, at least according to his statement, has written that he did not clear the recruitment of Ugandans for guard duties. 

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has confirmed that they did not clear the company to export Ugandans for the same duties. And finally, the Government is not involved in the reported recruitment of Ugandans.  

The simple question we are asking from the minister is, are Ugandans being recruited and leaving this country for guard duties outside? It is just simple, just say, “They are not, we have stopped them”. Because all these ministries, of Labour, Inspector General of Police, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and indeed the Government are not involved.  By not being involved, have you stopped it, are they going? It is just simple; tell us, that is all.

MR AKISOFERI OGOLA: Thank you Madam Speaker.  The clarification I would like to seek from the Minister of Internal Affairs is not whether the Government has to go personal in picking individuals to go, but if you have not granted permission for these people to be recruited to go, who is doing it in fact?  Because, the shortage of the statement of the Minister is that, somehow it is a matter of shauri yako diplomacy, shauri yako activities, no. We want to understand, is the government responsible for the policy of taking these people outside? If they are not, who is doing it?  

For instance, the Minister who recently was in charge of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs said that one of the jobs that the government does for its people is to provide consular protection abroad.  Which ministry for instance, which embassy in that area? There used to be an embassy in Iraq I know, but which embassy will be responsible for providing these people with the consular protection in case they need it? That is the clarification I would like to know. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

DR KEZIMBIRA: Madam Speaker, to honourable Kamuntu I have stated that my ministry and therefore, Inspector General of Police in as far as people training and taking up employment as guard duty in security agencies, my ministry and the Inspector General of Police has only jurisdiction over internal matters, it cannot authorize external matters and has advised that according to his jurisdiction, he has not cleared these companies to carry out any recruitment that is going to take Ugandans outside the country. 

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs to whom you are referring giving consular protection has not permitted these companies to export Ugandans out of this country.  So, if there is any recruitment that is going on, it would be either for guard duties locally, but there would be no export of people outside the country according to Ministry of Internal Affairs.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, I think what the members want to know is; recruitment is taking place, Ugandans are about to go, are you saying that, that group can go without consular protection? Are you going to protect them or they are just going on their own, or are you going to say, wait for Foreign Affairs, Gender and internal Affairs to finish the agreements? I think that is what the members want to know.

DR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO: Madam Speaker, the information I have is that no recruitment is going on. If there are people who are clandestinely carrying out certain mobilisations, this is not recruitment.

MR PATRICK MWONDHA: Madam Speaker, the minister in his statement has clearly said; officials of the two firms visited the Ministry of Internal Affairs to inform us about their intentions, they were categorically told that the government has no role.  That is all. So, he cannot say they are not aware.  Is he in order to therefore go against his own statement to this House?

MS BEATRICE KIRASO:  Madam Speaker, the sector of the honourable minister is in charge of law and order in this country. Recruitment takes place by foreigners, we do not know where these people are going, they could even be recruited for rebel or subversive activities. Pictures are taken, the whole country is aware and the honourable minister stands here as if he is not in charge of his sector to say that there is no recruitment and trying to push responsibility to other sector. Is he in order Madam Speaker?

MR LUKYAMUZI KEN:  Further point of order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Mr Minister, please tell us, if these people go and something happens to them and their parents come to you as the minister of Internal Affairs, will you say I do not know how you went? Or are you in a position to expedite the processes so that they go when they are protected, because you are going to issue them with passports.

DR KEZIMBIRA:  Madam Speaker, I have said that as far as the information I have received from my officers, there is no recruitment that is going on. The companies were categorically told that they were not allowed to recruit Ugandans for guard services outside this country. That is the statement that was given to them. The Inspector General of Police put this in writing, it is on paper, in black and white and this is the statement I can standby.  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has confirmed that it has not accepted anybody to be exported for armed services anywhere in another country.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, in fairness to this House and to the country, the Minister should state whether saying that they have not cleared the recruitment in itself stops people from recruiting. It is not good for the Minister to say my Ministry has not cleared, the Inspector General of Police has not cleared them, as far as I am concerned my Minister of Foreign Affairs has not done any clearance yet the recruitment was shown on television and in the press, and everybody is aware that this recruitment took place and even the person who was in charge of recruitment gave press conferences. 

How can the Minister continue annoying this House by denying a fact, which everybody is aware of? If the Minister is not willing to tell us, is it necessary for us to continue listening to him.

5.13
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move under Rule 59 that we hear the Minister no more.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think if we silence the Minister we shall not have found a solution. We are looking for ways of protecting Ugandans who might be engaged in hazardous occupations. Can you Minister please provide us a solution? Do not just say, “I do not know”.

DR KEZIMBIRA: Madam Speaker, the information I have given to this House is the exact information that is prevailing. Madam Speaker it is very easy for people to stage-manage, take a newspaper picture and give interviews in order to make Ugandans –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You saved the honourable Minister a few minutes ago from execution by Rule 59. Madam Speaker, my honourable Colleague in charge of Internal Affairs continues to repeat the same stale, uncorroborated and probably misleading information and annoying. We have established from the contributions from my honourable colleagues that the Minister did not do sufficient homework on the matter. Madam Speaker, we can continue to give further information to confirm our conviction that the Minister is unable to satisfy the august House with information on the matter we are concerned about.  

Madam Speaker, we also know that before his Ministry vets any organization pertaining to security matters all the directors must be vetted by External Security Organization, the intelligence organization. You cannot set up a company in this country to go into security work, guard duty or otherwise unless that company has been cleared by his ministry. 

Now, Madam Speaker, is it in order for our honourable colleague to keep not only displaying total ignorance and dereliction of duty on his part, but also to say among other things, “I do not know much about this company, I do not know what they were doing, that these pictures we are seeing in the papers and on television are all fiction and made up”. Is he in order to be contemptuous of this august House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now honourable Minister, I would like you to appreciate that this matter has caused a lot of public concern. People have been ringing me to ask me whether they should go and be recruited, and I said I do not know those fellows. I am sure other people have also got the same inquiries; people want jobs, they think there are jobs there and it is a matter of public concern.  So I do not think it is satisfactory for you to say that as far as you know, they were not cleared, how did they get the passports to leave the country? Are you going to give them passports to leave? If you are, you should tell us and under what consular services they are going to.

5.18
THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Sam Kutesa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the honourable minister has stated what is in his information and knowledge but what seems to be coming out now is that these people could even have had passports without having to go through him, maybe there are being his recruitments. I would propose that you give us time so that we complete gathering these facts, which may have been happening outside the purview of the different ministries and we come back and make a statement to this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will come back jointly as Foreign Affairs and Internal Affairs?

MR KUTESA: Yes. What I am suggesting is that what the Minister is telling you is correct in as far as what he has done is concerned, but there maybe other things happening outside his purview and it is important that this House is informed and brought on board so that all the information is gathered. So if you can give us a week together we should be able to come back to this House and make a statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER, GENERAL DUTIES (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): I rise on a point of procedure, Madam Speaker and honourable members. Besides what the Minister of Foreign Affairs has said, I would like to urge members of the House, especially hon. Aggrey Awori and others who seem to have a lot of information about this matter, to come forward and give this information so that the House is well informed. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you for really giving us a way forward. So in a week’s time we expect a way forward on this matter.

MR ODONGA: Madam Speaker, I have information that the first group is leaving tomorrow for Iraq, so one week is too much time. I have that information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, I think we need to discuss from very informed positions. Let the ministers come back and tell us how the programme is working or not working - (Interjections) - But how will you stop them from going? You do not know their names.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think your guidance has been very helpful. However, Madam Speaker, procedurally, as my honourable colleague has put it, the first batch was actually supposed to leave tomorrow and now it has been postponed to Sunday. Could we authorize this august House that we put a stop on any departure until the Minister comes back to report on this matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know what the Minister says about that.

DR KEZIMBIRA: Madam Speaker, this information is coming to me now. Hon. Awori and hon. Otto will help me so that my machinery can work to ensure that we stop this exercise until Parliament has heard from the report that is going to come.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, hon. Nandala and I yesterday called one of the guys involved in this recruitment. This government has a security system; these guys have an office, an address and lawyers. All the names of the people who have been recruited are in their offices. Why can’t government raid their offices to get the details of the Ugandans who are being exported? The minister is lying to this Parliament. He is dodging his responsibility; he deserves to resign.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How he does it is his business; he has said he is going to make an effort to stop their departure.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Madam Speaker, further information on this - just one minute.

THE SPEAKER:  Give it to the minister.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION
 (AMENDMENT NO.2) BILL, 2005

(Debate continued.)

5.22
MR SULAIMAN MADADA (Bbale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to begin by reciting the vision of Uganda 2025 - “Prosperous people, harmonious nation, beautiful country”.  This is the Vision of Uganda 2025 that each of us should be informed about. This is a vision that talks about a beautiful Uganda that is harmonious with prosperous people. Therefore whoever is in this country as an actor, be it a politician, businessman, religious person, should be contributing to that vision. In that spirit the best way to create harmony in this country would be the best for any political leader. Therefore, I stand to support the issue of regional governments. Why? 

Regional governments that accommodate cultural diversity will give opportunity to create harmony in this country. I want to quote a minister who is in charge of regional governments in South Africa. When they were looking at the issue of creating regional governments in that country, the minister in the way forward to the White Paper said: 

“The institution of traditional leaders not only has a place in our democracy, but it has the potential to transform, to contribute enormously towards the restoration of the moral fibre of our society and play a significant role in reconstruction and development of this country especially in the rural areas. It is important that conditions for democratic governance and stability in areas are created by having traditional leaders considered in the era of regional governments.” 

This was brought out at Focus 31 September 2003 when they were talking about provisional governments in South Africa. 

For the case of Uganda, I also look at it bearing in mind our history. In 1960, the Colonial Government set up a commission to look at the features of administration, how Uganda would stand together and recommended the regional or federal system. Afterwards there was a bit of a problem because there were some extremists and those who opposed it. When you look at the regional arrangement, it is taking consideration the balance of federalism and those who look for the districts. Therefore, to create harmony in this country, that is the best way forward.  

Not only that, but the regional government can be a centre between the central government and the districts. We have been crying about corruption at the district level, and one of our concerns has been, how do we monitor the districts? I believe that regional governments, with the role of monitoring after getting the reports, we will reduce corruption at the district level. Therefore without killing the process of decentralisation, regional governments are a good entry to contribute to the development of this country. But I would also urge the Minister of Constitutional Affairs to look at the issue of creating what we call the national congress of traditional leaders. 

In the Constitution of the Republic of Ghana, Chapter 11 and Article 271 talk about the national congress of traditional leaders. What is the objective behind that? The traditional leaders from different regions can share information and therefore, create more harmony. Therefore, as we look at this arrangement, we could also consider and read about other states that have progressed with these regional governments.

A regional government that promotes democracy is a good centre. Particularly when we are talking about electing leaders to take management of the affairs at the region, it is going to improve our traditional settings. We have not been having regional representatives elected by the people.  Therefore, we are promoting democracy, but also maintaining our culture. Therefore, every Member of Parliament, without looking at it in terms of tribal or regional, to look at it as an advantage to this country, and I invite Members to read one of the most important documents that was supplied to us, and I believe that many of you have received it, which has a very strong point as we contribute in this transition period. 

The document is about political transitions and ethnic conflict in Africa. It is a journal of third world studies, presented by professor Egoso. This document has a lot to tell us. It says, “Let us not politicise ethnicity as we talk about transition,” and he has quoted a number of examples. Nigeria in 1999 had a lot of problems when the Southerners had to fought the Northerners because of independence thinking that with the transition we must fight the tribes to maintain superiority. This is a very important document. We should not tribalise the debate on the issue of regional tiers; we should look it at a level of creating more harmony in this country. Every Ugandan will enjoy the benefit of economies of more work brought at the centre particularly where we avoid duplication at the district level.

MR ATUBO: Well, I have been rather moved by the statement of the honourable member on the Floor about regional tier, ethnicity and traditional rulers. It appears to me that the proposed regional tiers as of now are all going to be led by traditional leaders. Buganda, Bunyoro, Busoga, Lango, Acholi, Toro - in every place except Kigezi possibly. So I am wondering whether he is not contradicting himself when he says in that beautiful article, which I have also read, that the regional tier should not promote ethnicity at the same time. 

Could he clarify to me; the very fact that I see all the regional tiers coming up in Uganda the leaders are going to be cultural leaders Isn’t this going to promote some form of high level of ethnicity?

MR MADADA: I want to put your heart at rest by saying that in circumstances where we have traditional leaders and where our cultures of different diversities can be accommodated in the regional tiers, it will be a good advantage. We cannot avoid this in some places of this country where we have those cultural diversities. I also said that where we don’t have those cultural diversities, we don’t have any problem. I even said that we have democratically elected leaders who will work where we have traditional leaders in harmony. I am not really saying that traditional leaders will be leaders of the regional tiers. I want to put that point clear.

When you look at our experience and at the interest of this country, and we also know that our Constitution says that we take what Ugandans would like to take as a system of governance, that is in Chapter 1, article 4 of the Constitution. You can look at what came out in the Odoki Commission, the 97 percent, on what people recommended. You can also look at what came out in the Sempebwa Commission, the willingness of the people of Uganda. 

As a compromise, the Sempebwa Commission did suggest that we have regional tiers. So by following what is in the Constitution, we are really satisfying the interest of these Ugandans. Therefore, when we look at the subject matter of the regional tiers, let us put creating harmony in this country as the most important. We should listen to each and everybody’s voice and harmonise situations and give people liberty to govern themselves.

I would also like to say that – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MR MADADA: When we have regional governments there will be collective bargaining and we can even influence national policy a lot. A simple district like Kayunga cannot do much to influence policies at national level but given an opportunity where you have a regional tier of over districts, it is possible for the people to influence national policies. I think this is the best that the country can benefit from regional tiers. Thank you very much.

5.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE, AGRICULTURE (Dr Sebunya Kibirige): Madam Speaker, it is 5.30 p.m. so I have no intention at all of taking up much of your time. My constituency is Kyadondo North, Kawempe, Nansana, Kawanda, Namulonge; and I want to inform you, Madam Speaker, that it might be one of the most cosmopolitan constituencies in this country. We have got Banyoro from Hoima, Banyoro from Masindi, Basoga, Alur, Banyarwanda, Langi, Acholi, Nubians, Bakiga, Lugbara, everybody. In fact when I am in my constituency sometimes I think I am in this House, because in this House literally everybody lives in my constituency.

Madam Speaker, I want to support regional tier and I am going to give seven reasons only:

One, where there are cultural leaders, these will be out of politics.  

Two, where there are cultural leaders, they will be safe from political tyranny because they are outside of politics.

Three, the regional tier this time round, unlike in 1962, is free for all; the Itesot can have it, the Acholi can have it, the Banyoro can have it, anybody can have it. Therefore, unlike in 1962, any particular region shall not feel isolated.  

Four; we are convinced that this time round regional tiers will ensure economies of scale.  Many times I visit Kalangala, Sembabule, Kayunga, and they are really the opposite of who we are in Wakiso District. We are a very rich district and we can actually stand independently. But it is my view that some of these places are too tiny to be economical, so the regional tiers may be very useful in achieving economies of scale. We are very delighted that the regional tiers will not collect taxes. The Central Government will collect taxes and pass whatever those tiers are entitled to, so there will be no double taxation.

We are also very happy, Madam Speaker, that these regional tiers will not tamper with land issues.  Land issues, for instance, in my constituency can be very touchy. I had a number of persons really shaking that when there is a regional tier in Buganda they are going to lose their land. We are very happy that the regional tiers will not tamper with land issues.

We are also very happy that the councils in the regional governments shall be elected through adult suffrage.

Madam Speaker, with those very few words, I support regional tier.  I thank you so much.

5.35
MRS LYDIA BALEMEZI (Woman Representative, Mukono): I thank you, Madam Speaker and the mover of the motion. I also stand to support the motion because I think if we allow Uganda to operate under the administration of the regional tier, we shall be harnessing harmony and mutual co-existence among the different ethnic tribes that we have in all the areas of Uganda.  

The regional tier will encourage socio-cultural values to be practiced in these areas, and since we know that most people in the various areas of this country have some commonalities, if particular areas are given that mandate of running a regional tier, they will be able to administer their activities and issues. For instance if we were to be taken nationally as we are now, some people feel that they are marginalized. This is why I feel that if we promote regional tier, the people who value their cultural values will be able to participate in the administration of their areas in a very harmonious way.  

The regional tiers will also help Government by desisting from fragmenting the districts because as we are now many people feel that they are marginalized, they are not getting equal share economically. So if we are to regionalize the administration, I feel that those regions will also see the beauty of managing big districts rather than fragmenting them into smaller units, which are just of one constituency or just about three to four sub-counties comprising of a district. This will also give our people greater control over their own political and socio-economic affairs as it will make them feel less exploited and they will be secure in their way of administration in their respective areas.

When we create regional tiers, political powers will be decentralized and distributed equally, especially among the local leaders. We shall be seeing many of these regional leaders coming up with developmental ideas for their areas because they will be feeling that they have the powers and can harness those values, which are paramount in their regions rather than waiting and having to abide by what is decided nationally.

This kind of administration will safeguard the local ethnic and cultural interests, especially in those regions that have strong cultural institutions and cultural leaders like Lango, Teso, Busoga, Ankole, Toro and Buganda. 

So, Madam Speaker, I strongly feel that the regional governments will ensure equitable sharing of resources within the regions, and regionalism will improve productive linkages between districts.  On this note, Madam Speaker, those districts, which feel that they would not like to be taken into the regional tier, they should be given the option to be left alone as they consider or watch what the other districts will be doing under the regional tier. With that Madam Speaker, I wish to support the motion and I thank you.

5.40
PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (Sheema County South, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much indeed for the opportunity you have given me to speak on this motion. I also thank the Minister for the Constitutional Amendment Bill 2005 and the chairman of the committee for the report. 

Madam Speaker, the amendment provided for in this Bill of establishing regional governments addresses a fundamental concern, which has been a source of division in the country. I support it largely because if you look at Article 5(1) of the Constitution it says, “Uganda is one sovereign state and a republic”. At the same time to establish the principle of unity in diversity the amendment seeks to allow cultural leaders to be recognized, protected and at the same time allows those who want to remain republicans to remain so as our Constitution requires. Frankly speaking, if you want harmony in this country you really must support this motion and this amendment.  

This is the point of harmony that will allow people to be different but the difference is a source of strength. For those who are religious, you will recall in the Bible they tell you the body is made of different parts and the parts are different but they unite to form one body. Similarly, kings and republicans can live together in a Uganda, which is a sovereign state, and which is a republic; we should support this motion. 

Only three concerns should be addressed –(Interjections)- Well, I can tell you Romans 12:6. If you read that verse you will find that indeed there is unity.  The different parts of the body unite and form one body; the leg is different from the head, the head is different from the arm, but all of them unite.  I am arguing in the same vein that you can have republic and kings in a sovereign state called Uganda, which allows republicans and kings to live together in harmony and this is what this regional assembly is all about. I am sure it addresses the concerns of those who have been advocating for federal and those opposed to federal, and together we can pull this country to greater heights.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much.  I would like to thank hon. Prof. Kamuntu for giving way; and I would like to give information. What he is articulating is, very, very, correct. One of the most successful economies in Asia has an arrangement related to what he is talking about. In Malaysia you have five kingdom areas states amicably working with nine republican states. They are successful in their economy of scales in fact one of the most successful economies is in Asia. Why don’t we emulate it, especially up to the federal level when time comes?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Ken Lukyamuzi. I also want to share with you Members of Parliament that I invited Ken to my constituency one time and of course, ken was advocating for federal and kingdoms. The people in my constituency received him warmly but at the same time politely told him that for us we are republicans but we welcome those who aspire to be kings without us being establishing kingdoms. The function went quite well I must say people always ask me how you are. 

But Madam Speaker, there are still other issues, which I think we can resolve in our debate. There was so much talk about the deeming of districts.  To deem districts to have become part of the regional government some times shows lack of conviction.  If we are convinced that the districts want to be in the regional assembly, why wouldn’t we allow them to pass a resolution in their council to become a regional assembly? 

To me it sounds like we are convinced the regional assembly is very good and for us not to be accused to have forced districts into something, we could allow the districts to pass a resolution within their districts to become part of the regional assembly or regional government. I am proposing we can resolve this without any further debate or conflict or anxiety. 

Finally, there is a question of resource allocation. In establishing a regional government requires the central government to contribute, what you are going to have are regional governments being established for no any cultural cohesion but simply to share resources from the central government. You are going to end up with regional governments formed to share the resources and they will become like a district and the district will become like a country and the whole merit of a regional assembly will be lost. So, I propose those who want to establish regional assemblies should not require those who do not want to form them to contribute for their sustenance. They should contribute to maintain their regional assembly without requiring the central government to contribute. If we do not address this one, you are going to have mushrooming regional assembly with no cultural ties but simply to share the resources of the centre. Yes, and also –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude.

PROF. KAMUNTU: My conclusion Madam Speaker, relates to special status. Establishing a regional assembly for a special status has a danger to those who form them. That for you to want to be special in a whole inadvertently invokes resentment in the rest of the body politic and the desire to want contain those who want to be special. Therefore, on the point of efficiency, I think regional assemblies might – There are only 24 hours in a day, Madam Speaker, you cannot subtract or expand them. The more you spend on one the less remains for the rest. Therefore, the more people spend time on regional assemblies the less time remains to spend on national programmes and we can lose talents bogged down in regional assemblies when the whole country is opened to them. With those cautions, Madam Speaker, I support the establishment of regional governments. Thank you very much.

5.55
MR OMACH MANDIR (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion on creating a regional tier system of governance in Uganda.  Permit me to start with Article 178(3), which indicates that districts of Buganda shall be deemed to have agreed to corporate. 

I would like to challenge the recommendation of the Committee. I would like to quote the verbatim, which says, “While the deeming of the districts of Buganda was already agreed to in the 1995 Constitution, the Committee finds no strong reasons for changing the status quo. The committee finds no compelling justification for accepting the proposal from hon. Moses Kizige on the deeming of districts of Busoga from the hon. Mao on the deeming of districts of Acholi and from Toro Kingdom on the deeming of districts of Toro”. 

I find this rather strange. We are now dealing with the amendment of the Constitution, the 1995 Constitution. Why should this be left to only one region and other regions are not allowed? If they feel that they should be deemed for districts that do not wish to be deemed, so be it. Madam Speaker -(Interjection)- I will take the information.

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much for accepting my information. The only information here is that there was no wide consultation over the regional tier. That is why they have not included other districts. The bill is only on Buganda and Buganda alone. That is my information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, yesterday the Minister of Defence stated - what he said is the present government position- is that other districts can also now apply to be deemed. That is what he said here yesterday. (Interjection)- no, I am trying to explain that the government appears to have not taken the position of the committee. That is what the Minister said here yesterday and you were here.

MR OMACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. So, it should be free for those who want to be deemed. So it said and so it shall be. 

The second issue, which makes me happy, is the fact that the traditional and cultural leaders will be given greater opportunities to be effectively recognized as far as the regional tier is concerned. 

In Nebbi District, we have Kings in Jonam, we have Kings in Pader and we have Kings in Okoro. We believe that through the regional tier system their recognition which is already embedded in the Constitution will be made more practical and more down to earth. 

In the proposed Constitutional Amendment No.2 (b) under Article 4 of the regional government, it is said that the Chairperson shall lead the regional government. As I talk now the districts are being led by chairpersons and most of the chairpersons feel so big that they would wish to be referred to as Presidents of those districts. I wish to mention that at the opportune time this particular reference to the heads of regional governance should be changed to that of governance so that they are given a better status and better recognition. 

Finally, the issue of regional governance does not take away anything from the decentralization that has gone to the districts. It is giving more powers to the regions, taking away from the center to the region. I appeal to members to support this motion. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.00
MR AMON KABAREEBE (Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I am standing here to support the motion and support the Committee and thank them for having done a good job. I therefore support the regional tier. I wanted to give it a very small historical background and then I give you the reasons as to why we should have this regional tier.

First of all, in the pre-colonial times and during the colonial times, power was with the native authority centered on a chief or maybe on the local royalty, however, these native authorities were not democratic. Later on democracy started coming in as we had the colonial leaders and thereafter at post independence; so, democracy started coming in. Even as I talk now, it has started infiltrating properly into these local institutions. 

During those times the King used to handpick the representatives either by clan or by whichever tribe living in Buganda. You remember here we had Mr Ocheng who was picked and was in that Parliament. So, people were being handpicked. But now as we proceed we are coming to elections of these officials. 

I was looking at the Ghana experience. The Ghana experience is that they have got the regional councils headed by a regional Minister who is chairman of that regional council. He has the deputy and the ministers, a, b, c, d. This is exactly what we are trying to make here and I believe it is a very good experience. 

In Ghana, I want to read you a small piece that regions through their regional councils and their respective regional planning can play a very important role in coordination and also ensure consistence, compatibility and coherence of district level development to facilitate joint ventures among districts and monitor the activities of district assemblies within the regions. There are so many others performing, but I wanted to read that one particularly to see how coordination can be done. 

In Uganda recently, decentralization started, but before, decentralization was here, except that it was at the level of either delegation of the concentration to the districts and then to the regions. We have regions in Uganda headed by governors although the governors were also handpicked. But now we are reaching a level of devolution at districts and now we are coming to devolution at the regions whereby the powers of the center are being devolved to the regions. 

I think it is easier at a regional level, for example, to look after secondary schools, the roads and the hospitals. It also very important that we decongest power and demystify the power at the center. You will find that definitely people might shift downwards for those who are eyeing these serious seats here in front, they will definitely be going to the regions. Those who are eyeing maybe the Presidency, do not be surprised to find them heading for elections at the regional level. 

So, during that period when decentralization was being introduced, you know that there was a kind of an error of omission. It was an intended error to go to where the organizations were well set like in the districts. But in the regions in Uganda it was not possible to do it at that time. So, now that there is a leading role, for example, I do not see any reason why people must blame Buganda for having led the way. Others could also benefit in the process.  

In the first place, historically, even when the colonialists came here, they found Buganda with a kind of administration with their king. So, if they are leading the way to say that we want our king, we want these powers a, b, c, d, nobody should blame them. Instead, we should emulate that example and also take advantage of the national resources that will be distributed at the regions other than blaming them.  

The Legal and Parliamentary Affairs put it very clearly on page 4 and 5.  On page 4, the regional governments, the committee says that the bill proposes to create regional governments to partially address various complaints from several areas, to the effect that the interests of certain communities that had not been adequately addressed such as federo and functions of traditional or cultural leaders.  

So, this one can be done through accommodation of both specific and general aspirations of the people of Uganda.  I think that is a very good remark. They continued to say that where it is not possible in one transaction they should be dealt with progressively and consistently.  

While our focus must remain forward, our decisions and actions must have the effect of correcting historical difficulties and avoiding them for the future.  If you look at the ten-point programme No. 9, it is very clear. It redresses errors that were committed during those historical times. I think this is now what this Government is trying to do and this is what the Legal Committee is looking at.  

I am very grateful that at least the historical errors can now be corrected.  If Ugandans can remember very well, when DP - if you look at their constitution - was saying that Uganda must become a Republic and these kingdoms should not exist; Kabaka Yekka was formed in order to protect this position.  But then because it was small, it had to seek refuge in UPC.  UPC took advantage and crashed the Buganda kingdom and others were crashed in the process- (Member timed out)- One second and then I sit down; one minute.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  

So, in that process, therefore, do not be surprised to find DP or UPC not supporting this, because DP harassed Kabaka Yekka and UPC crashed Kabaka Yekka.  So, you find that it is only this Government that can adequately introduce tiers, because the others of course crashed it.  I thank you, Madam Speaker, although I still had more.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, if you are brief, everybody will speak in the next 20 minutes.

6.05
MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. My argument will be based –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance. if some of the contributors like honourable Kalule Ssengo would want to declare their interest in this particular debate, because I see conflict of interest in some of the submissions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What interest does he have that you know about?

MR ODONGA OTTO:  Ebyaffe.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Is he a cultural leader?

MR KALULE SSENGO: I do not know why my colleague is worried. I think it is my right to declare my interest.  In fact I am standing in support of the motion. 

In contributing to this motion I am guided by what the framers of this Constitutional amendments put forward when they said that this arrangement would be free for those who want it and it will not be forced on anybody.  It is in this spirit that I want to appeal to the Attorney General if the question of deeming is going to bog us down, let everybody be allowed to deem.  

I do know whether we need time for other people to deem, but I think people should not take deeming as an excuse for delaying the process of the regional tier.  It is my belief that the regional tier will give us the stability we need in this country.  I stand to be corrected, but I have a feeling that perhaps if we had this arrangement even before, people would not be fighting in the North.  

I am convinced that Kony would not perhaps be fighting there, because I do not think he is fighting to come and rule the Baganda or rule the Bakiga, or rule the Basoga. I think he is fighting for some kind of power in Acholi land and if this kind of power is given to him, I can see this war ending very soon.  But as I said, I stand to be corrected, but that is my personal feeling.  

I am also convinced that the regional tier will give people a sense of belonging to this country. There are some regions in this country, which have all along felt that they were not part of Uganda just because they have not been allowed to share power with the center.  So, with this arrangement I am convinced that these people will have a sense of belonging. It will give them an impetus for hard work and indeed this kind of arrangement is going to give us a sense of competition.  

We live in an age of competition where people must compete.  Let us have the regions, let them be given the opportunity to compete amongst themselves so that we develop faster than the rate at which we have been developing.  

I have also got a feeling that this arrangement is going to give us permanent stability. It will enable us to have harmony amongst the different communities of Uganda. I have also learnt that the colleagues in this House should not be persuaded to accept this arrangement just because a certain region or a certain community appeared to negotiate more than other communities.  I think that is not an argument for denying this arrangement.  

I am also not convinced by what one of the honourable members was proposing that the whole arrangement be delayed until certain things are put in place.  I think there is no need for delaying. Let us all agree, let people take it up now and let it be an example to others.  If the arrangement can work very well, even those who do not want it now will be able to take it up at a later stage. I think the door is not closed, the door is open at anytime for others who want to come on board to do so.

Now, Madam Speaker, having pointed out that, I want to make a few comments on some of the provisions of this law.  Under Clause 9(e), there is a proposal that the central government will be responsible for forests.  I am of the view that the regions should be given responsibility to look after their forests because these are part of their natural heritage.  

In the same vein, I am also a bit uncomfortable about the proposal that there shall be a mechanism to resort to in case the central government deliberately fails to remit funds to the regional government.  

Now, this mechanism is not made clear. What is that mechanism that these people will have to resort to if it is not mentioned in the bill?  How shall we know the kind of mechanism that these people will resort to just in case the central government fails to remit funds to the regions? 

I am also concerned about the provision under another article. That the central gGovernment will be responsible for developing and upgrading roads, but if you are creating capacity for the regions, why don’t you allow regions to tarmac roads if they have the financial capacity to do it? Why should we always wait for the central government?  If individuals can tarmac certain roads, roads say to their own houses, we expect a regional government to tarmac a road if it has the money to do it?

MR WOPUWA: I just wanted to inform my honourable colleague that most of the money we use for tarmac roads is borrowed and regional governments will not have the capacity to borrow. In two small areas like us in the eastern, we will not have the advantages Kampala has got from us who pay taxes here. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR KALULE SSENGO: Madam Speaker, while concluding, I wanted to inform my honourable colleague that when we create these regions, we expect them to develop financial capacity. Because, as I told you, the regional tier will give impetus to these regions to work hard, to be more productive economically and if they can harness resources to tarmac the roads, let it be, what is wrong with it?  If an individual can tarmac a certain portion of a road to his House, why don’t you expect a region to do it if it can harness the resources because we are looking at these regions as centres of hard work.

Finally, I also wanted to request that this provision of a third of regional assemblies be given to the women to be re-examined. Because are you going to provide that in certain electoral constituencies women should only stand? Otherwise, how will you get that quarter of a third? When I look at the mathematics of it, I find there might be a problem. So, I am requesting the committee to re-examine it and see how practicable it could be.  With those remarks, Madam Speaker, I beg to support.

6.15
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Representative of People With Disability): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to talk about this report. I also thank the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for this well researched report.  I stand up to support the regional tier because of four basic reasons.

The regional tier has other element of citizen participation.  If we look at our history, Ugandans were subjected to governance that was imposed on them without being given the opportunity to participate on how they should be governed.  The regional tier is creating or will create and inherit a mechanism for internal controls in managing resources where it is going to be practiced; this has not been so.  

With the advent of the decentralization system in this country there was some semblance that people can participate in having services nearer to them, which are devolved from the centre. We have had a problem in this country that we had weak districts to fund for themselves. It is my conviction that the regional tier will bring on board the districts which are weak and those, which are stronger so that if they combine they can utilize the resources meaningfully.  

I am looking at the fast speed, at which Uganda and other countries in this region are moving towards integration. If we are really becoming serious as a region to benefit from the advantages of integration in a federation of East Africa, I believe that this fragmentation of our administrative units may not be in the interests of this federation. 

 I believe that our Government will find few opponents in bargaining for Uganda in the federation if we have bigger units in form of regional tiers. This is my conviction and I believe it will serve to bring Uganda on board with other states once we accept the regional tier. 

Ugandans in some areas cherish the contribution made by the cultural and traditional rulers.  The regional tier has indicated that there is flexibility in recognizing the contribution of our cultural leaders as a source of inspiration to mobilize our people for development.  

Therefore, if the regional tier has recognized our cultural leaders as one of the sources for inspiration to mobilize our population for development and giving them a befitting status in the regional tier, I think this is really a type of governance that this House I beg to support.

The regional tier is a unique type of governance introduced in this country.  It is emanating from bottom to top so that the population at the grassroots participates in form of giving ideas on how they should be governed.  This is different from what has been pertaining that we can impose a type of governance on our population without they appreciating it and therefore not owning it.  

I am convinced that once the population, through their regional councils, which will be democratically elected and therefore having the mandate of the population at the grassroots, it is going to strengthen the democratic governance not only in the regions but also in our country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.00
MS ROSE MUNYIRA (Woman Representative, Busia):  I thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the issue of deeming regions. I have this conviction because specifically looking at the region where I come from, there are so many small ethnic groups and right now they are in battles of coming up with fragmented districts- smaller districts.  If this inter-regional tier came up, it would really be good because it would help to minimize on the problems of each tribal group looking for a district. 

I am talking about this one specifically with reference to Tororo, which used to be one big district and at that time the issues that are confronting the small tribes there did not exist. The tribes looked at themselves as one and they had to lobby for issues in comparison with other regions.  But to date you find that the people in that area, each small group wants to become a district. So, if we had a front that is a embracing a bigger region, then I believe that the quest for small districts that are not economically viable would be put to rest.

When I look at the issue of regional tiers, I think it is also good because it would create good bargaining ground for these peoples.  It would create bargaining ground such that some tribes as much as they think - some districts that are small think that they would be marginalized- I think there is more advantage in coming up with tiers than just looking at the marginalization of these districts.

As the situation stands now, you find that some representatives of the people do not find good ground for consultation on matters that cut across the regions.  So, if we had these regional governments, these regional tiers, then it would be easy for a whole region to come up with a stand on certain matters and it would be very easy for the Members of Parliament to represent issues that are acceptable across the board in a region and this would bring about development. 

 I am looking at a situation where may be a region has to come up with a regional referral hospital or to lobby funds for it and it is handled across the board.  So, it is better to come up with regional tiers so that they would benefit these regions and some of the smaller districts that may not be able to lobby individually.  

Supposing the regional governments came up with the Service Commission or tender boards at their level. I am sure that this would also put to rest some wars that are in these districts because we know that some of the wars. (Interruption)

MR YERI: The information I want to give the member on the Floor is that we have stopped this business of district tender boards. There is a Contracts Committee, which is handling tender boards.  So, they will no longer award tenders using the district tender board.  They have changed the system. We have the contracting committees, which will be appointed by the CFOs and the town clerks. This is the information I wanted to give the member on the Floor. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you suggesting that you have amended the Local Government Act, you have?  No. 

MS MUNYIRA:  Thank you very much honourable colleague for that information, but I did not get it very clearly. What I know is that we have not amended the Local Government Act and the tender boards still stand. 

 But I am looking at a situation whereby at regional government level there is some kind of awarding of tenders or interviewing so that instead of looking at small tribes as an entity, people look at themselves as people from a district. I think that would help us to diffuse some of these ethnic problems that we are facing especially in the eastern region.

I would also like to express the advantage of regional tiers benefiting from resources within the region.  Regions will benefit from resources that right now are otherwise at central government level. For example, in Busia there is a custom that all the resources that come from the customs collection come to the central government.  I believe that a regional government would really look into the issue of benefiting from that kind of resource.

I look at a situation whereby bigger regions have gone into tiers and the smaller districts have remained at the center. I imagine that there will be the problem of accessing their resources. So, I would really support that all districts that want to go into regional tiers should be given the opportunity to do so. I would also appeal that the process be carried out at once for those that are clear about it now. I see a situation whereby when a region like Buganda has already gone into tier arrangement, then operationalizing the system of tiers for other regions may be slowed down.  I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.25
MR ASANASIO KAYIZZI (Kassanda County North, Mubende):  Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members.  I would also like to join my colleagues in supporting the regional governments as presented by our Chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. 

If I can quote properly from the Bible it is said, “Give Caesar what belongs to Caesar”. Therefore, this regional government will create what we can call unity in diversity if they are put in place.  

Secondly, these regional governments if they are put in place they will reduce the over concentration of power, authority and resources that is creating inequitable distribution of resources. (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO:  Would the honourable Member clarify to me who is Caesar, and what was taken from Caesar in this particular case.

MR KAYIZZI: What I am trying to emphasize is. We as Members of Parliament who come from Buganda, we had that institution in 1962 Constitution and it was abrogated and abolished by the Obote regime. So, we are saying, if you do not like it, you give it to us who like it. That is all.

Thirdly, it would encourage accountability and transparency of goods and services offered in these regions.  

Another point, it will reduce the rate of unemployment in the country. I have heard people saying, “Do not go to Iraq; we want employment in Iraq”.  So, if we create these regional governments, instead of those Ugandans of who would like to go to Iraq, they can get employed in these regional governments when they are put in place.  

Madam Speaker, the same –(Interruptions)

MR ERESU JOHN:  The honourable member holding the Floor has stated that in principle, creating the regional tiers, will create more jobs.  There will be more ministers, there will be more permanent secretaries, more civil servants, more drivers, whatever, and the jobs will be created.  I would like him to clarify to me, given that already the public administration costs in this country are very high, where will the resources for maintaining these new jobs come from?  

Secondly, can you also clarify to me whether by creation of the regional tier, perse, the national unity of this country will be safeguarded?  

MR KAYIZZI: May be you have misguided your clarification. It would have gone to the Minister of Finance to tell you how ably he can do it.  So may be allow me to continue with my points.  

I was trying to emphasize the issue and the importance of this regional tier so that our colleagues can also support it. 

I have here another one; the creation of these regional tiers will offer sustainable development, because of its participatory approach in policy formulation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation.  So in that case, it will offer sustainable development to these regions.  With those few points, I beg to support.

6.30
MR ANANG-ODUR (Kwania County, Apac): Madam Speaker, I wish to thank you for giving me an opportunity to speak on this important motion. I wish to thank the Minister and chairman for the job well done.  

In principle I have no problem with this proposal. (Applause) When we move to amend the Constitution, in my view, the primary objectives would include correcting any historical errors or difficulties which might have arisen, promoting constitutionalism and harmonizing laws which are in place, and improving service delivery. To me this is what I have been looking for in what we are discussing.  

We have talked about what happened to the 1962 Constitution and what we experienced as a result. I agree with my colleague before me that we need to build consensus.  It is very important for the future and for the stability of this country. 

But, Madam Speaker, I have a problem with the document as it appears.  When I went through it, I found that those principles I have in mind seem not to be in our Hansard.  This document does not properly breach the gaps which we are trying to breach. It does not correct the historical errors as far as I am concerned. What I have heard as far as certain sections of our country are concerned, it makes the harmonization of the Constitution in some parts rather difficult. I do not see how it improves service delivery.  

Therefore, if I had an option, I would have come with a different approach. I would have advocated for a federation. I note there is going to be a serious problem with these two.  We want to go to East African Federation; it is difficult now for us in Uganda to create another federation when we are going to one.  But, I think we have to be serious about what we want in this particular exercise. What do we really want to do as a country?  What do we want to achieve?  I think the regional tier is a necessary thing.  

I have seen the tendency in this country to create districts and we are going to have gombololas to become districts. I am very sure about this.  Because when we subject ourselves to a political process to some levels which I regard to be a little bit unreasonable, we are going to get to that, and therefore, this tier to me is a necessity.  What do we do now?  That is what I want to suggest because I think it is now; you give them.  Some districts are too small, we have cried here, in terms of population, in terms of resources, in terms of manpower and we need to correct that situation by bringing them together.  This why with a lot of pain, Madam Speaker, we have to move in that direction.  

I am going to request the Chairman of the Committee to help me a non-lawyer.  If it is possible to have clear defined constitutional relationships between the district and the regional level, where it is located, between that regional level governments and the centre.  I am very uncomfortable where the district is relating to both the regional centre and the central centre.  

In my view there is no need to create a regional government and deny it the opportunity to be responsible for the district where it is located.  For me, I will be very happy if we become- and we are going to ask that each district belong to Lango.  I will want Apac and Lira and whatever other districts we are going to create, like others are doing, Kyoga and so forth, to relate to the Lira government. The Lira government should be the one to be responsible for these districts and relate to the centre.  For me this is the best way we are going to have it.  

If they are not going to do that, then there is another reason why we are creating the regional tier.  It is not to send services or develop power to the regions; it will not be.  Why do you want to say you are going to give power to the regions and yet you insist you want to control the districts, for what reasons?   This must be division, why are we going for this?   If we do not do this, we are going to have a lot of confusion; allegiance to the district, to the regional tier and to the centre.  The centre is giving money to the districts and the region is supposed to supervise, and you know in that situation it will not be possible.  It is a recipe for confusion and I think that should be avoided.

I am going to propose that if this definition by the Chairman, if he can help me, we can then define what laws and put them in the Constitution, the regional government will handle.  We shall define the relationships as I have said between the districts and the regional governments, between the region and the central government very clearly to have harmony and consistency.  

While I am on that, I am not for the provision that those who want- I would want us to convince everybody in this Parliament that, that is the way we should go.  If there is any district, which does not want to be under any particular region, the relationship between that district and the centre will be the same as between the centre and the region.  I think that is quite clear because there should be very clear lines of communication between those governments at different levels.

As I conclude, in the same breath on the issue of taxation and on the issue of finances, which are provided for on pages 12 and 13, there should be very clear provisions on the methods of arriving at how much money should go to a district or to a region. I think Parliament should negotiate with Government and agree on this formula and put it in the Constitution.  I know there is a formula in the Constitution. I do not know how it is, but if we want to use that one there should be consistency.  

It is not good to say Government can have the option to give money or not to give money.  This should be in the Constitution so that you empower these regions and their governments to operate.  I think those are the most important issues because once you have done that, accountability processes and all these other matters can be handled. This will entail study - I think my colleagues, especially the Rt. hon. Prime Minister will know that we cannot just jump into these things and put them in writing without a study.  I do not know how long it will take, a short time or whatever; we have to study these.  

Lastly, people have made speeches here about the 1962 crisis and they have blamed UPC and all that.  I want to tell you, ladies and gentlemen, if you make a document like we want to make in this one, let everybody respect that document.  If you want peace for this country, we make a document, let us respect the document and carry out what it calls for.  

If the document says we are going to Nakasongola to carry out a referendum and ask whether the people of Nakasongola should belong to Buganda or not; if we agree, let us carry it out because if you do not and measures are taken to force you to follow what is in the law, you cannot turn around and cry and say we have mistreated you because you will be the principle character who has brought it upon yourself. 

This is the spirit upon which I see what happened in 1962/1964. Because if those people who were encumbered to ensure that they were to carry out the referendum in the lost counties, if they followed the law, the Constitution and what was left to be done without trying to cheat, without trying to pull muscles and so forth, I do not think we would have come to this.  

Let us recognize our own faults; I am not saying UPC was very correct in the way it handled the matter, but those who started it must also take responsibility.  We cannot just sit here and lament and condemn people as if we do not know history.  I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  

6.40
MR BASALIZA ARAALI (Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I stand to support the motion of the regional tier.  What we are debating here tonight is not new.  When we were making the Constitution, we embedded it in the Constitution in Article 178 and in Article 246.  Therefore, what we are debating is not new, but we are becoming more and more serious about this issue of a regional tier.  I would like, therefore, to thank the people or the leaders of Buganda for having revived this issue of a regional tier seriously.

I would like to say that the issue of a regional tiers will bring about economic development because now you find that there are very tiny districts, which cannot even operate Government plants like tractors.  But if we have big regions, if we have got districts, which have united, then it will be easy for them to run such Government programmes.  Some of these areas have been failing to run Government programmes because of being tiny.  

Furthermore, it is important that we have regional tier because of democracy.  It is going to encourage democracy because you find one candidate campaigning through a huge region like Buganda and that one will help people to learn about democracy and to know that one person can campaign, like the President in the whole of Uganda, but you will find somebody campaigning throughout Buganda and be more known and then the issues of democracy will be emphasized.

It is very important for planning reasons that we have a regional tier because you cannot plan these small areas very well, you cannot plan even for agricultural programmes like zoning.  If you zone a small district and say we are going to grow cotton in one district, then it is difficult to plan for that small district and to grow many crops in the same district.

I feel that those districts, which want to deem, should be allowed to deem, including Toro, because deeming is very good.  Buganda is deeming but that should not be the end, room should be left open so that in future if districts want to deem they should deem without a lot of conditions.  Even now, I understand some districts like Bunyoro want to deem; they should be allowed to deem, there is nothing wrong with that, why not? 

I would like to say that this regional tier will also encourage nationalism, the love of one’s area, and the love of one’s country, because now with this fragmentation people are thinking in terms of only their districts.  But when we have many districts uniting, people will think in terms of a larger district and will think in terms of Uganda.  We should follow suit to other countries in the world where there are large entities, where they are harvesting economic benefits, where they are harvesting social benefits as well as cultural benefits.  

So, I hope that this regional tier will bring in equitable distribution of resources, because under this arrangement in Buganda here, you could find Buganda receiving a large share where there are no proper arrangements.  But now if we have the regional tier districts uniting, Government will consider those districts accordingly and give them equitable distribution of resources.  I would like to thank you for this time you have given me to debate on this issue. Thank you.

6.50
MAJ. (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I support the motion subject to a few clarifications and amendments. When you are treating national problems you must look at a nation as a whole.  It is like treating your body. When you have a wound they give you an injection for the whole body. When you are taking the antibiotics its for the whole body. 

I want to start by looking at demerits of the tier.  We are making political decisions and political- (Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Araali, can you switch off that microphone?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Political decisions are economic decisions.  This decision we are taking today is to do with creation of a tier or a regional tier and therefore it involves money.  Now, there are gray areas which are not clarified simply because the decisions we are taking now are not study based. There is no study that has been carried out in Uganda on the shelves so that now we are debating the merits and demerits of this study. We have local governments, it is not very clear whether the regional tier is part of the Local Government or not. If it is part of the Local Government why are we not amending the Local Government Act to take care of the regional tier? 

Let me look at the historical perspective. When our colonial masters came they first came to Buganda.  The Kingdom of Buganda acquired firearms before other regions and they embarked on expansionism.  So, they took over most of the areas that belonged to some of the tribes today.  

During the reign of Kabaka Jjunju, the Baganda actually over-run almost half of the Kingdom of Ankole and the Kabaka ya Kaka then had to send an emissary to stop them in Lyantonde to say that, please, take what you have already covered and save my Kingdom. These areas from Kinoni, in the present day, there is no area, which has a Kiganda name, Kinoni, Kyabakuza, Mbirizi, Matete, Kibamba Ryabugondo, Mugungunu, Rwemiyaga, name it.  During that time there was a raid of all female creatures and I am pleased that I have cousins in Buganda here and some of them in this Parliament. 

Having said that background, you come to the position in the amendment bill, you deem these areas.  Yesterday Nakasongola was a test case; in fact I had reserved it. I did not want to talk, but yesterday people of Nakasongola came here and told you for them they want to have an option to choose.  People must have freedom of belonging. Madam Speaker, I need your protection –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not heckle the member. 

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: I can quote the debaters here. Honourable Mutuluuza debated and said the deeming was a result of districts having made resolutions. What we want to see now give them that time to make a resolution so that they have an exit and an entry.  

Having said that, we are moving into a new era of multipartism and constitutionally our cultural heads are not supposed to be partisan. Certainly, whether you like it or not they will have influence on the Katikkiro. How are they going to co-exist with the new arrangement? 

Finally, I want to talk about the efficiency. In this Parliament we have recommended to Government time and again to reduce the administrative costs. The cost of administration is so big. Now we are creating more administrative structures; this means more spending and if we are spending more, then we better spend evenly.  If there is a regional tier, I do not see why we have to legislate for a specific region. There should be a study. There is no way I, Rwamirama Kanyontole, Member of Parliament, Isingiro North, is going to legislate to pass a law where I am supposed to subsidize for other regions.  If it is a region, let it be a region for all. But the Banyakole also need jobs. (Applause)

DR NABWISO: The Busoga Region brought a Busoga Peoples Charter in the Parliament and the Parliament took note of what we wanted to do in the region.  So, why is somebody trying to say that we should not regard our districts as having deemed?  In short this report is contradictory as far as Busoga Region is concerned. I think it illustrates the point that we are trying to favour some regions at the expense of others. 

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you Madam Speaker and thank you honourable Rwamirama for giving way.  The honourable member went through some historical background as a preamble to his statement. But, he is falling short of appreciating the fact. What he looks at as different treatment - I would call it different treatment - is actually also embedded in our history.  He ought not to selectively choose that part of history that would suit his argument and leave out the rest of history because all we are doing has got to do with a different historical background of this country. 

The second thing I want to inform the honourable member about is that he said no study has been made. That is incorrect, because volumes and volumes of studies and submissions about this subject have actually been made. Therefore, I want to inform him that actually studies have been made.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, honourable member for your information. Let me answer my senior colleague. First of all, the historical factor was relevant to my argument to tell you that we have the Mutesa of Buganda and therefore you should give him a chance to enter and go up. As for what he is saying that there are studies, I have not found one. As far as I am concerned correcting views for Rwamirama is not a study. I have not seen a copy in my pigeonhole. I do not have it, it is not quoted and I am not bound. 

Having said that, I would like to end my remarks. (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you for giving way. I would like to give information to hon. Rwamirama. Political arrangements must begin somewhere. In the case of decentralization in 1989, we started with 13 districts on board. As we speak now all the 56 districts are on board, the decentralization arrangement. So, what is he talking about?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Let me conclude. When you decentralize and divide the district, that is where they came from. (Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you. There are many studies. First of all, Odoki is a study and Ssempebwa is a study. The document I laid here where I articulated the essentials of federalism is a study –(Applause)- and if you go to Makerere Institute of Social Research, you are going to find more studies there.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you Rt. Hon. Prime Minister. But as far as I am concerned there is no study that is covering Uganda on this subject matter. 

Lastly, I would like to inform hon. Ken Lukyamuzi that it is true there are 56 districts, but when we decentralized we also divided those decentralized units into districts and therefore the number is still growing. 

I would like to end my remarks on this note. Let us do it for all areas of Uganda. Let us do it consciously so that everybody is on board. I thank you very much.

7.00
MRS VICTORIA SEBAGEREKA (Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and I would like to urge members to please support this motion. I want to thank those who have supported it, we can maybe improve on it, but I think it is a good motion. 

I was born in a Kingdom. I was married in a Kingdom. I am heading a district, which has all the tribes of Uganda in Kayunga District. So, when I am talking you will see that I will be a little bit emotional but please accept it.

I want to say that this bill has social, political and economic implications. When we are talking about the regional tier’ it is about negotiation; it is about fairness; it is about equitable distribution of the country’s wealth, the power; and bringing districts together to enhance cohesion - cultural, social and political. 

So, I am supporting this motion and thanking the committee for this report because it is all inclusive. We want to look at the minority as well as the majority to be able to come out with a good position. 

The regional tier would strengthen our cultural ties and it is going to bring us closer. The kingdoms will have – somebody was asking about the kingdoms. I know that the kingdoms in the regional tier will have their place concretised. It will also bring job creation; there will be job creation and it will strengthen the decentralization gains. 

I would like to read an extract from the Committee’s report, which says - it is No.3, on page 5; it is faded. It says, “Our actions and decisions as a Parliament have to be sensitive to the fact that there are objective reasons for people to feel left out”. As a country we have benefits, we have burdens and as a Parliament we must be committed to devolve, recognize and adapt systems that will spread out, benefit us to shrink our burdens and close the gaps. The essence of this paragraph, why I like this paragraph, it really makes everything so inclusive. 

So, I would like to support this motion and say that as far as financial gains are concerned there is a framework that has to be addressed and there are countries that have these regional governances and they are doing well. South Africa, Sri-Lanka and Germany. 

I will take the example in Germany; I will take the example of Bavaria, which is a State, but it still subscribes to the federo government. Switzerland, it has a custom system and it is doing very well. So, I feel that if we support the regional tier, we will come out with a give and take situation. I thank you.

7.05
MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU (Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker. All along I have been singing the song of federo. I understand my bosses in Mengo have adopted the new system. Otherwise, I would be continuing to sing it even today for reasons, which have emanated from different speakers. But all the same as I said that probably I would have not accepted. If anything remains unsettled, I will still continue singing federo.  

I thank the people who attempted to prepare this report; it was a difficult report but they attempted to see that some matters could be solved by negotiations.  At the moment we are discussing a report which is tinted with some claims that it is not complete.  We do not know whether other things have been amended yet and I do not know whether we shall be called again to discuss such things, which Mengo has complained about.  In the circumstances, it is not very easy for me to say that everything is okay, but I think there is a step upon which we can write until we get our full federo. (Applause)

In Mengo they call it federo and in Kampala they call it regional tier.  It is important for the Chairman of the Committee to tell us exactly, what is it?  Because now, we are conflicting, there it is federo; here it is regional tier.  So, you find people are getting confused, which is which? Well, I wanted information from the chairman.

MR OULANYAH: I thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you honourable Nsambu for the questions you have raised.  The Committee reported on the Constitutional Amendment Bill, No 2, 2005 and another clause 4, of the bill which proposed replacement of Article 178 is entitled ‘Regional Governments’.  That is what the committee reported on.  Thank you.

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU:  I realize certain things were properly dealt with, but I take it that there are some important issues which were not considered.  I would have raised these things, but when they were reporting in Mengo they said that anything, which has not been covered, you Members of Parliament, go and see them covered. It is in the line of that permission that I would like to ask the Chairman what he thinks –(Interruption)- Well, I very much wanted to know what would be the role of the traditional rulers?  They say they will not be in politics, but how are they going to behave - only to go to football fields, or what will be their role? We want to know exactly.

Secondly, we think this is the time to know –(Interruption)

PROF NSIBAMBI: I thank you Madam Speaker and I thank honourable Nsubuga for giving way.  First, there will be titular heads of the regional tier.  Titular heads, it is there if you read carefully.  

Number two, they will open what normally – in Luganda they call it Olukikiiko, the regional councils and close them.  

Number three, they will nominate 15 percent of the cultural people, people who will deal with cultural matters.  Those will be 15 percent of the regional tiers.

Number four, under Article 246 of the Constitution, they will be entitled to facilitation and already Government has made the necessary arrangements, the bill is coming here.  So, what more do you want?

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU:  The question of facilitation, if what I have read in the newspapers is right that a traditional leader will be entitled monthly to five million like a Member of Parliament, considering all the visitors and the people who are dependant on him, I think that is really very small. I will pray – anyway small, this depends on the size of his responsibility.

The other matter I want to know, what amenities have you given to these traditional leaders?  I have also learnt that the so-called Mengo Municipality will be under the same rule of Local Government as they are working.  But this Mengo Municipality has been created in consideration of the cultural responsibilities it will be carrying out.  So, I beg that when considering this district special attention should be given to the duties and resources it is going to carry out.  

The question of electing a Katikiro is making the Baganda raise a lot of concern because a Katikiro in Buganda - we call him Kamala byona, Kabaka owe bweru.  In those circumstances, to say that any head of a political party, which has won, will be given the Ddamula as Katikiro is irritating the Baganda and they want to know –(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Information from the Minister.

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU:  Excuse me, let me finish this sentence, because he will be answering the whole of it.  Again, if it will be compulsory for the Kabaka to give away Ddamula to that man, will he have power to retract if misunderstandings arise?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You want information?

MR TIM LWANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you honourable Nsambu for giving way.  I would like to inform the member that people from Mengo negotiated with Government and as far as I know a Buganda Caucus went to Mengo and they told us exactly what they had actually agreed on and we are not about to change what was agreed because our constituency as people from Buganda, we are here and we are not going to change what was agreed between Mengo and Uganda Government and the Kabaka endorsed it.  Thank you.

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Well, it could be decided; I agree, but I am conveying a message that the Baganda outside are concerned about that fact. So, it is up to you either to reconsider to say, no, we are not going ahead with everything.  

Now, cultural leaders or the Ssaza chiefs. These are not mentioned anywhere. Some of them have some performances to the Kabaka which are casual, and their position is not explained. May be honourable Chairman you will let me know what you consider about these people. You have just returned their offices and we would like to know, because really, they are touched especially where there is a sort of coronation and so forth. These Ssaza chiefs have particular cultural duties they must carry out. 

Again, they are not quite clear about relationships between regional governments and districts. They also say that the provision of the section of the handling of land in Buganda is a bit confused. We find land in the hands of the districts and yet in the Constitution it was said it would be in the hands of the Kabaka as a trustee. The Baganda say as a result of this confusion, their land –(Interruption)

 MR Adolf Mwesige: May I know, Madam Speaker, which Constitution vests the land in Buganda in the Kabaka. I would like to be clear?

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: I do not like to be confused with these people, if they could give me time.  Anyway it is 1995 - you read Article 245 and 246- it is the chief lawyer; he knows all these things; I was referring to him.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Nsambu, I think if you are backing your argument you should read it for us. I think the Chair of the Committee is coming to our aid.

MR OULANYAH: I think honourable member, what you are referring to could be 246 (3) (a): “The following provision shall apply in relation to traditional leaders or cultural leaders-
a) The institution of traditional or cultural leaders shall be a corporation sole with perpetual succession and with capacity to sue or be sued and to hold assets or properties in trustee for it and the people concerned”.

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: So, in the circumstances, I think land is an asset. It should have been put to the person whom we decided in 1995 to give responsibility of looking after the land.  As a result, you will find that large pieces of land have been given away and people are suffering as a result of vesting land in the people who were not supposed to hold it.  

This Government pleads very much for the peasants but you find when it comes to land, it remains silent and one man chases away old women, men and their children, over 1,000 or 100,000 people from the land which did not exist before this system was created. For me, I cannot say that other people cannot have land or anything of the nature. But I am saying the law itself requires a lot of revision whereby the tenants can be properly protected.

Well, as I told you, I am only adopting something I never knew because always I have known federo and I think one day we shall get it.  Thank you very much.

7.25
MR BAKALUBA MUKASA (Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am glad to be following the President of the Conservative Party and those are their ideas.  I want to begin by thanking the Legal Committee and the Minister for the presentation and I am glad that at last they did their best to consult. At times they have been saying that consultations were not done but I think they did something and they deserve a pat on the back. 

I support a regional tier. The regional tier I am supporting is not only for Buganda; it goes beyond tribes, religion, and ethnicity. So it is not limited to Buganda, as many people have been saying that it is calling upon people to support federo, but it is for all of us.  It can be applied in Adjumani, in Nakasongola, in West Nile and elsewhere. So we need to support it. 

In the observations carried in the presentation of the Legal Committee on page 5, paragraph 3, it reads: “So our actions and decisions as Parliament have to be sensitive to the fact that the objective reasons for people to be concerned, for people to feel left out as a country we have benefits, we have burdens and as Parliament we must be committed to evolving and recognizing and adopting systems that will spread our benefits shrink our burdens and close the gaps”. I think this is our commitment as the 7th Parliament. We need to close the gaps; we need to look into the benefits and to look at those people who have been left out. 

Following the debates we were listening to yesterday and today, I think various members were expressing their concerns, Bunyoro, Nakasongola and the rest. They need those concerns to be addressed and that is why we are here today to call upon members to see how we can address these issues.  

If consultations were being done with Buganda, I think somehow Government made a mistake not to consult may be with Bunyoro and other Kingdoms. We need to repent, to forget the past and move forward. I believe my colleague from Bunyoro will be ready to forgive and look for a way forward to support the regional tier in the interest of our regions. We want to support development, we want to support unity and that is why we are supporting the regional tier.

Secondly, in paragraph four, it reads: “There are strong issues raised concerning the deeming of districts of Buganda as a regional government”.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the honourable member for giving way. Today, His Excellency has been consulting people from Bunyoro and Nakasongola.  Yesterday, we captured the feelings of those people, we requested His Excellency to meet them. He has additionally pointed out that he is willing to meet any other group any time.  If any group would like to meet His Excellency the President, come to me I shall take you to state house.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Now, you have now re-opened the debate.  

MR BAKALUBA MUKASA:  I want to thank the hon. Prime Minister –(Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA:  Thank you very much honourable member for giving way.  Yes, I have been at state house but we did agree that you cannot talk on behalf of our institutions and our going to the state house did not constitute consultations. Thank you very much. 

MR BAKALUBA MUKASA:  I want to thank the Prime Minister and the member from Bunyoro. Consultations are ongoing. How I wish His Excellency the President had met the people of Bunyoro and elsewhere to resolve these concerns. I think that is why my colleague from Bunyoro raised her concern.  But it does not mean that she is not going to support the regional tier. She is supporting the regional tier but she wanted to fill the missing gaps and their feelings to be covered. I think that is what they were trying to articulate. 

The paragraph reads:” There are strong issues raised concerning the deeming of the districts of Buganda as a regional government”.  I am glad I come from Buganda and my region is already deemed. But we are legislators of this country. I would propose that we also deem all other regions so that we overcome that problem. Why are we suggesting that they should go to the districts when actually we can do it and solve this problem?

MRS MUKIIBI: Thank you honourable member for giving way.  The information I want to give is that we have had instructions that if the District Councils of Bunyoro can give their resolution requesting to be deemed, Bunyoro will be deemed. As I talk now we have already got one resolution from Kibaale district and we are about to get others from Masindi and Hoima. (Applause)

MR BAKALUBA MUKASA:  Definitely that is what I expected, but my fears are the double standards. If Buganda is deemed, Bunyoro is saying why don’t you deem us, West Nile and the rest so that we solve this matter once and for all? That is what we want. In the event of marginalization of particular communities or districts in a region, there should be a clear provision or an improvement of the existing Article 78(4). 

This covers Nakasongola. We have received information from members from Nakasongola who are saying that they are not ready to deem with Buganda. My colleague from Adjumani is also saying the same.  I think we should also put a provision of how we are going to cater for such so that they do not bar our progress as we plan for this regional tier.  We need to talk to the people from Nakasongola and Adjumani and the rest so that we can have a smooth transition.  

Lastly, what are the benefits? I think the regional tier is there to ensure that both Republicans and Conservatives are satisfied. We have listened to hon. Nsambu, a conservative and we have also listened to debates from Republicans. I think we are all covered there is democracy in the regional tier. Cultural institutions and the rest are covered; even the conservatives are covered in this respect of a regional tier.  There will be unity and stability in regions that demand their lost glory. 

If Buganda instead of calling it a regional tier calls it federo it is up to them.  Bunyoro also we have a particular name, Toro and the rest.  There will be regional cooperation and cultural diversity. I am glad the central government will be committing financial assistance to these regions.  I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, honourable members, debate on this matter will continue tomorrow and we shall start promptly at 2.00 p.m. not 2.30 p.m.  On Friday we shall have question time, so the question will be reflected on tomorrow’s Order Paper.  We have been putting off questions this week, we shall do them on Friday, 1.00 O’clock in the morning. But tomorrow we sit at 2.00 p.m. and the major business is going to be this one. So, House adjourned to tomorrow 2.00 p.m. sharp.

(The House rose at 07.35 a.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 19 May 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)


