Tuesday, 12 May 2015

Parliament met at 2.11 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I do not have much to communicate but the issues I am going to say are important. 
First, the report of the hon. Member for Kawempe North is ready. So, at least your matter concerning the pipeline issue that has been disturbing your people will be resolved today. I received the copy of the report yesterday. It should be coming on the Order Paper very soon such that we can get that it out of the way.

Honourable members, as you are aware the United Nations Decade of Actions for Road Safety, 2011-2020 was launched worldwide on the 11 May, 2011. As the decade enters its fourth year, the United Nations General Assembly has declared May 4 to 11, 2015 as the Third Global Road Safety Week with the theme: “Children and Road Safety.”

Honourable members and members of the public are requested to support the objectives of the UN Decade and in particular encourage your constituents to observe traffic laws and regulations in order to save lives of not only the children but all other people in this country. Please let us observe this day, remember it and take our responsibilities easily so that we stop road carnage; we should use the road responsibly.

Secondly, honourable Members, the Member wanted to comment on road safety, it is now okay. On that issue of road safety, do you have something to say briefly?

2.15
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As we recognise this week of road safety, we have lost many children worldwide especially in this country due to road accidents. According to WHO reports, 180 children die every year in road accidents. 

As a Committee on Gender, since the Bill is before us, the Children (Amendment) Bill, we should include the issue of road safety. I also request the Government and Ministry of Education and Sports to include this issue on the curriculum for primary schools such that our children at an early age can get know the dangers on our roads.

You know very well that we lack professionals to deal with cases of accidents; the surgeons and orthopaedic. I think universities in Uganda need to –(Interjections)– hon. Member, do not mind about the words. I think we need to reduce on the cut off points for medical courses such that we can have enough doctors to deal with such cases. I thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is still part of communication from the Chair. I have not yet finished my communication. I was only alerted that the hon. Member for Workers had something small to say on this particular issue. But let us see if Members can say something immediately after my communication on this very issue. Okay? Can I finish my communication?


Honourable Members, you are aware that we are in the budget process and that we are also faced with the challenge of a transition from one law to another. The time frames have been completely mixed up and certain things have been lost in the process. The transition has certainly caused us some uneasy in the way we are doing business. 

Therefore, I would like to urge the committees to work very hard. They are already doing that, but I urge them to add more effort so that we can deliver this budget by the end of this month. Actually, it is not just the end of this month, but by the 29th May because the last Thursday of this month will be the 29th May and by that date we should be done with this process. 

I congratulate you for finishing the Budget Framework Paper. But now we have the committees that are working on the ministerial policy statements and alternative policy statement that have come from the shadow minsters. We expected that by today we would be handling a few of them. So, the committees are urged to expedite the processes so that we can handle this issue. 

This is an exceptional year; a year of transition. But I would like to say that, as you formulate your reports, the broad framework that we need to consider - because you recall we started this Parliament in 2011 and in that same year, we adopted the National Development Plan (NDA) for five years and we have been implementing it through the budgets annually. We have been looking through those processes through annual ministerial policy statements and policy statements from other departments. You have been raising questions as sectoral committees on some of these issues; some of them have been responded to but others have not been responded to. But this is the fourth year of implementation of the NDA.

Therefore, I would like, if possible, when the committees come to report, to guide the House. How far are we in four years in implementing this, for example? What have you been recommending, as committees, for the last four years? What has been picked up and what has been left out? 

Now we have the final lap and that is where the race is determined. To the finishing lane, we are heading now. This is the last one. This is the final battle if you like to call it. But how far have we gone in implementing this plan? What remains outstanding? And thereafter, pick out one, two or three important recommendations that you want the House to decide on. Too many will not help us but zero down to one, two or three. One would be very good, which is outstanding, urgent and must be implemented within the next 12 months that we are budgeting for, because this is only 12 months left for the next budget. 

How will that recommendation move that sector from point A to B and what resources would be required for it to do that? If you guided the House like that we would make firm decisions about what we must do so that certain things must happen, but if you come and give long speeches and general recommendations without guiding the House on the must do, then we will have a problem again. 

So, I am urging committees to come with specific strategic recommendations that are implementable in the next 12 months and ask us to decide on this so that we can move from point A to B. This is the amount of money we are recommending that should be done so that we can strategically move forward on this. 

If we do that, honourable members, I think we would cut even on the time of debate, which we do not even have, but we will have the debate structured so that the firm decisions are taken and communicated promptly to the government for implementation. That is the last part of my Communication from the Chair. 

I am urging members to do this so that we can help the Executive and our people and we move forward as we finish this last process of the budget for this term of Parliament. 

2.23
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Your guidance is appropriate and proper. That is how Parliaments worldwide behave. 

But the clarification I am seeking is that the Public Finance Management Act required Government to make submissions of several documents. Yes Government has made those submissions, but so many documents are missing, which makes the work of Parliament incomplete. Even the Budget Framework Paper, the report of the Committee on Budget, outlined key documents like the report on money supply projection but which is missing to. 

The issue on debts relating to this financial year’s budget was missing several - I wrote a letter to your office and Madam Speaker raised the matter, but to this date the Ministry of Finance has bluntly ignored our request. Therefore, it makes the work of Parliament incomplete and our output  - even tomorrow when we are being assessed - the public will assess us as Parliament, which is not relevant yet it is Government that is not giving us all the documents.

Mr Speaker, you remember this law was proposed here by Government, but we are disappointed that Government is not complying. What can we do?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, let us finish with this issue.  

2.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We laid, on the 1st April, the necessary documents according to the Public Finance Management Act. Any document, which has not be laid and was raised in debate last week on the Budget Framework Paper, we are preparing to bring them tomorrow. 

Mr Speaker as you recall, before the 1st  April, as a House, we debated the issue on transition and the weakness that we were in and we agreed, as a House, on how to move forward. We all agreed that we should work within the circumstances and make sure that the Budget is approved before the 30th May and we are working hard to ensure that the Ministry of Finance is committed to supporting any committee that needs any information from us and we will be able to avail it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us finish with the issue of the budget process - let us leave it and we see how we   move because I am expecting that today we have the Financial Bill here. By tomorrow we should be having the reports starting to come in and as I have guided – and the presentations will not take too long. We will give five to seven minutes that you concretise on guiding the House on what we need to do so that we can do it. Of Couse there will be time allocated to the shadow Ministers to make some interventions on some of those issues. But we just want to work within the time we have to do as much as possible. That is what I am urging the House to help the people of Uganda do, at this moment. It is a peculiar kind of situation. So, if you feel any other matters on these budgetary issues, somebody can raise them but if it is the matter on the road safety then we can rise on those ones now.

MR ANGELLINE OSEGGE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. The Minister has pledged that all the documents that are missing will be presented tomorrow. I am wondering whether it is possible for him to give us - if they are aware – a list of documents that are missing. Maybe the House could help on that so that we do not come back here tomorrow and still have others missing. Would that be procedurally correct so as to shorten our time in dealing with this matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I was advised that the documents were raised and captured and communicated to the Ministry. So they know what they are talking about. We can only hope that they will be ready with those documents tomorrow; we receive them and see how to process them. Can we deal with the road safety issues? Hon. Member for Kawempe North, now you should be happy that the petition is finished. (Laughter)

2.28
MR WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue of road safety is a very serious one in this country. We used to have one senior police officer who is now working with the UN called Dr Christopher Yiga doing a wonderful job on the TV once a week. He would sensitise Ugandans how to observe the road rules. 

It is absurd, Mr Speaker, that one time, the UN sent an officer to prove the capability of our drivers from the police who were going to serve in Darfur and many of the police officers failed to meet the requirements of the UN to work as drivers. 

It is still absurd because when you drive around this country, you do not see any signs limiting the speed, which should be universal. When you drive, for example, through residential areas and schools, you must observe the 30 kilometre per-hour speed limit; but it is absurd. 

We had a lot of outcries in this country on the roads – see black spots in Mpigi but the police and Ministry of works have not come to the help of this country by rectifying the problems causing road carnage. 

Some of us employ drivers. Whenever, I take on drivers and see the way they drive and look at their licenses, I keep wondering and questioning myself, how could these people get driving licenses? It is absurd! 
One time I went to Naguru to see how people are tested. Somebody is asked to enter a vehicle, engage the gear, start and reverse and is given a driving license. But for some of us - I had to sit in a class room and answer hundred questions   before I was allowed to go for a driving test and that test was for about one hour. I can trust myself while driving on the roads in Uganda. 

However, the way people get licenses; this is how we are losing many of our people. You see school children running across roads but with the drivers having no respect at all for them. This is indeed absurd. 

I would like to call upon the Police to revamp the exercises of teaching Ugandans how to drive on our roads the way Dr Christopher Yiga, who now works with the UN, used to do. This will go a long way in assisting our people and reducing accidents on the roads. There is no respect on our roads at all. You find people driving but not respecting each other. This is partly what is causing lot of accidents on our roads. I bed to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we hear from the Member for Ibanda? But please, let us keep it brief so that we can accommodate more contributors. We have a lot of work. 

3.31
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Indeed the issue of road safety is very important, more so, for the safety of the children. 

The issue of zebra crossings - the respect for zebra crossings is now non-existent. You find drivers cruising through zebra crossings as if they do not see them. The problem becomes complicated at peak hours, more so in towns and cities when children are crossing the roads from schools. There is no safety for these children because there is nobody to direct or help them cross the roads. Some of the children can even spend as much as half an hour trying to cross a particular road.

Therefore, we need to instil into this population, using the police and Ministry of Works’ officials, the respect for zebra crossings.

Secondly, the Ministry of Works and Transport need to work closely with educational institutions. When we were still in primary schools children, we used to have placards in each and every class that would read, “Before you cross the road, look right, look left, look left again and if it is safe, cross the road. Cross quickly, but do not run.” 

However, there is nothing of that kind to talk about these days. The speed limits have left to, “to whom it may concern.” As a result children are being knocked down every other minute that passes. It is really very absurd. Government needs to put into place- and work closely with the police and Ministry of Works’ officials and educational institutions to ensure sanity prevails on our roads. We should also go back to the drawing board and revive those placards in all the proper places, including educational institutions. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.34
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The designation of the day of the Child and Road Safety brings hope that our children will be safer on the roads. I hope that the minister responsible will come to this House with a statement to tell us how we should celebrate this day and what Government is doing to ensure our children are safe on the roads.

My colleagues have mentioned the issues of road safety, the speed limits and sensitisation of the masses. You find children walking on the roads alone and trying to cross without child minders or teachers to guide them. The roads are a menace, especially with the emergence of Bodabodas. 

Mr Speaker, the roads being constructed these days do not have walkways where these children can walk safely. The walkways have been taken over by the bodabodas and you all know that there is limit on these bodabodas. You find them crowding the roads and pushing the children into the bushes and sometimes pushing them onto the roads themselves, making it very dangerous for the children -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what are bodabodas? (Laughter)

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, we see these motorcycles and bicycles that have crowded our roads. This is what has come to be known as bodabodas. My position is that we need a firm policy on how to protect our children on our roads. Thank you.

3.36
MS RONAH NINSIIMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity and also for allowing me to comment on the issue of road safety.

Mr Speaker, we received a report from the District Health Officer of Masaka saying Masaka Hospital alone, registers not less than 40 deaths as a result of accidents every quarter. To them, of course, they were lobbying and seeing how we can increase their funding as a hospital on the highway. I am now looking at Masaka alone. But there could be other hospitals on highways that are also registering this. This is is extremely unfortunate. 

I also would like to add my voice to the voices of other members who suggested that we put emphasis on the issue of road signs. As we speak, the Mbarara-Kabale Road is under construction, but you will not find there any road signs to tell you of anything going on there. Cars keep getting stuck and sinking in the road, but you will not meet a single road sign to tell you what is happening. We have lost very many people as a result of, for instance, trucks getting stuck on the roads without signs to alert other road users. I think it is important for Government to think about this in order to save our people.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I would like to request hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi to find ways of taking advantage of this budget process to support referral hospitals and hospitals along the highways because, for instance, over the weekend PPDA lost a staff to a road accident. It was because when they went to Mbarara Hospital, yes the oxygen was there but the equipment used is manual. So, it was very hard for the health workers to keep pressing the oxygen to support that person who had had a terrible accident. As a result, they had to fly him back to Kampala, unfortunately they lost him. We think that if the equipment at Mbarara Hospital was adequate, possibly the health workers could have saved the life of the late, Mr Tumutegyereize and many others that have lost their lives due to road accidents. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.39
MR LATIF SSEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue of road safety especially for our children is very important. Yes as grown-ups or as mature people, at least we can afford to overcome challenges on our roads but when it comes to children, it is only people who really care about these children that can assist them while on the way.

Mr Speaker, we cannot talk about road safety when the roads themselves are not safe; see the quality of our roads. For example, we have had several accidents on Masaka-Mbarara Road and they keep telling us that there are some slippery spots, especially when it rains but every other day accidents happen, we don’t see anything being done to correct the situation. Therefore, much as we try our best to seriously consider the issue of road safety, the Ministry of Works should really do whatever it takes to ensure the quality of roads is good.

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Works have, on several occasions, had reports to show Masaka-Mbarara Road is slippery in some areas - (Interruption)

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much for giving way. Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give to the Member of Parliament for Kawempe North is that last weekend, we had a very nasty accident where one of our own, the hon. Michael Mawanda got involved in an accident at the very spot that one time featured in a matter of national importance raised by I in this House. The Minister of Finance had promised to do something about it - many lives have been lost at that spot.

Mr Speaker, I would like to give information that the Ministry of Works is reluctant to address issues relating to the lives of Ugandans on roads.

MR SSEBAGGALA: Thank you very much for that useful information and I am aware that it is not only on Masaka Road but even on other roads. The roads that have been constructed - the quality leaves a lot to be desired.

Mr Speaker, finally, as we try to ensure that our children are safe on the roads, we should ensure that we facilitate the Ministry of Health. When you go to Mulago Hospital’s Emergency Ward, especially for accidents, you realise that many people being admitted are road accidents victims especially caused by bodabodas – about 50 per cent of accident cases at Mulago Hospital are as a result of motorcycles. 

Mr Speaker, when someone is involved in an accident and they are taken to Mulago Hospital, they cannot be treated, especially those with some injuries on the heads, until they have been taken for the CT scan. But how many CT scan machines do we have in Mulago Hospital? I was there some three weeks ago. About four people were involved in accident, but they had only one CT scan and it was full. They were telling them to go to other health facilities like International Hospital where it costs Shs 250,000 for the CT scan to be performed yet in Mulago Hospital it is a mere Shs 120,000.

In that regard, I would request that – these emergencies cannot be avoided – we must struggle and ensure facilities, especially for handling emergencies as a result of accidents, are in place in all referral hospitals. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.44
PROF. GILBERT BUKENYA (NRM, Busiro County North, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Road safety begins with the discipline of the road users. Three months ago, I was in the United States. I got to realise that when one is driving and they reach a junction, all of you stop to see who is where and then you turn on. 

However, in Uganda where the road discipline is poorest, everyone struggles to go through and in the process you have mixed users of the road here. You have a bicyclist, motorcyclist, pedestrian and a lorry; everything is disentangled in a very narrow road. 

Therefore, if you like to have safety here, first of all, we must instil discipline on the road. If you are driving small children, you must have a children’s seat on belt. However, here you see children hanging through the screens of the cars. If you do an abrupt to stop, they are the biggest losers.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, unless the Government and all of us put a disciplined way of how motorcycles handle the road, we are going to continue having a lot of problems. Although he said 50 per cent of accidents are due to motorcycles, it is actually 75 per cent at Mulago. Motorcycles are the biggest group of transport that carries our children when they are going to school. Really, we must do something about disciplining them. Why have they disciplined them in Rwanda -(Interruption)

MS ABIA: Thank you very much, Mr former Vice-President. I wanted to inform you that one of my biggest worries is actually the drivers of the VIP, including my Speaker.  One day he was being driven to Entebbe but the speed at which they were moving worried me. 

When the Presidential motorcade is moving, I lose my breath. When these VIPs are moving on these roads with no opportunity for anyone to move and park aside; when the taxis and the bodabodas are in the mix, I always wonder, are we safe? I think the beginning of the discipline on roads should start with the drivers of the VIP, beginning with the Presidential motorcade then coming to us here. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now debating, hon. Member?

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, senior colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the information I want to give is simple. The purpose of these signposts on the roads is to act as a warning that there is something unusual ahead. Actually the best example is in my constituency. There is a school along the road, but the signpost for the school ahead is at the very school. You only get to know that there is a school ahead when you have reached the gate to that school because the signpost is at the school itself.

Secondly, there is some other indiscipline with police officers. There is when -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you rose on information. Not so?

MR KASIBANTE: This is some other good information, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. no more.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much; I oblige.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

PROF. BUKENYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My position is that discipline must be the first thing. The Police system must be disciplined to really get people who are indiscipline on the roads. I wonder, when I am driving and I see someone on a motorcycle just turning around me yet the policeman is there just looking on. The cyclist will ride into the middle of the road and no body stops them. Sometimes I feel like we need to re-train our policemen to ensure things are done the right way.

Mr Speaker, accidents are a big danger to everybody. Not only do bones get broken, if one hit their head on the tarmac, they get a brain concussion and the consequences are incredibly too many. Now, if our children get such a concussion and the brain bleeds a little, their capacity in the future may be completely deterred. Therefore, this safety week celebration is not enough. It must be a continuous awareness not only in regard to children, but also adults.

Let me tell you - if you break your leg, you are going to spend three to four months hanging on a bed, unable to move and everything will pass on that bed. The management of these is difficult. What we need to do is to make sure we do a preventive road safety mechanism.

A Chinese told me that Uganda is very good at writing so many beautiful reports claiming that everything is perfect yet when one goes on the ground, they find nothing there.

There was a time - Mr Speaker, if you were on the road without a safety belt, you would be in trouble. People were buying safety belts like boiling groundnuts. When the boiling ceased, the safety belts ceased to function. 

There was a time for enforcing regulations on speed governors; every vehicle had to have a speed governor. When the emphasis on speed governors ended, nobody cares and it has died. Therefore, if we are very serious about the safety on the roads, we must supply safety mechanisms to reduce accidents. 

This is the only country where one can drive for more than 40 kilometres without an emergency system around. For example, if you are driving today from Luwero to Gulu; you may have to go all the way to Masindi to find something which can help you if you got involved in an accident.

There should not even be a bigger hospital, there must be emergency system where you can take somebody somewhere, demobilise him so that the bones could remain together, give him some drip of blood and move on. But there is nothing of that sort in this country. Today, we are constructing new roads –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, could you conclude.

PROF BUKENYA: Okay, let me conclude, Mr Speaker. As I was saying, we are constructing new roads but which are still as narrow as those constructed in the 1960s –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What the hon. Prof Gilbert Bukenya is talking about are very serious and fundamental issues. 

However, he has been a Vice President for the last 20 years and he is a member of NRM. I wonder why he did not ensure all these things get addressed before the time he was asked to retire. This creates a concern. Did you really raise this matter? If they did not take it, why did you not resign? (Laughter) 

PROF BUKENYA: Thank you very much, hon. Geoffrey Ekanya. I am here as a Member of Parliament of Busiro North now. (Laughter) I have a justification to use my little knowledge to debate a very important subject area -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And on that, there is no collective responsibility.

PROF BUKENYA: Therefore, I would now want to summarise this way. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, we are here laughing at the road safety yet we are the most vulnerable. We should selfishly ensure we make things better not only for the people outside but also for ourselves. 

The other day, I was travelling somewhere and a car shot past mine and when I looked around, it was somebody at the front bench. I said this man is in for trouble.

Mr Speaker, now that the Minister of Works and Transport is here or maybe the Leader of Government Business - as we plan to construct more roads, why don’t we make the roads wider? Why don’t have a provision for cyclists so that they can also have where to ride while the cars move on different lanes for the time being? Why don’t we make sure the traffic lights - the road traffic signals are functional? But you will find in some places, for example, Wandegeya, when the traffic lights are showing red, the policeman would be waving you to go. Please, let us reduce this confusion and we move forward for the sake of our children. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Mr Prime Minister. Do you want to say something or we close it?

2.57
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my previous boss for his - (Interjection) - yes, my former boss. 

However, I want to inform Parliament that we actually started from where he left. (Laughter) Therefore, there was no plan of –

PROF. BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, in 1976, I went to Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Those days, the President then had given us Honda Civic cars and the person who signed my authorisation was the current Second Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business in Parliament - Gen Moses Ali. He was actually the Minister of Finance and my boss too. 
I was a young man who had just finished internship at Mulago Hospital and went to his office. So, is he in order to say that where I left is where he started or that where I was is where we started? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Rt hon. Gen. Moses Ali, you have been properly reminded.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker once again. I thank my colleague for reminding me of what happened in 1976. 

However, we are talking about immediate occasions. He has just been the Vice President not long ago. I am talking about the immediate issue that we did not find all these elaborate plans he was talking about, for example, opening roads and so forth. Therefore, we are just continuing with what he left. But perhaps, we will now translate his ideas into a new plan. As the population increases, we need to think about opening the roads. Already, in busy places, four lanes roads are being opened; for example, we are doing it for the road from Entebbe to Kampala, the one from Mukono to Jinja - (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much the Deputy Prime Minister for giving way. The clarification I am seeking is: What plan does Government have to screen these bodabodas that are licensed to go on roads? This is because many of them, after buying motorcycles, just jump on them to ride on the roads. What plans does the government have in place to screen them to ensure they are worthy riders on the roads?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, was that a matter that the member was talking about, for you to raise a clarification? This is completely a new matter.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the ruling. I will answer this at an appropriate time in the future, if it comes. 
Recently, if we follow what is happening, the Executive Director of KCCA said that these bodabodas are going to be stopped from entering Kampala City. A lot of measures are being taken and when such decisions are taken, they will be made public.

Perhaps, my honourable sister was in Kitgum at the time and may be that is why she missed this information. However, through the Speaker, I am now informing her that action is being taken. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of road safety is certainly a critical matter and it needs to be handled properly because of all us are potential victims of what goes on road. Sometimes there are - honourable members, it is the responsibility of the Members to protect the Speaker’s Chair. I was hoping that there was going to be a point of order raised because the Speaker is defenceless. A reference was made and I thought somebody was going to move that that part of the record be expunged. However, nothing was done. Honourable members, you need to protect the image of the Speaker. Honourable members, I thank you for this particular debate because this matter is of a big concern. 

The last part of my communication is that two weeks ago, when I was in this Chair and the Constitutional (Amendment) Bill was tabled. Issues were raised from the Opposition side that they had matters they wanted to raise, which had not been accommodated in the amendments that had come. That time, I said I would be giving guidance on how we would proceed on handling outstanding matters that could be remaining out there, but which could be relevant to the process we are going into.

I just want to say that I will give the guidance on how we will handle this Constitutional Amendment process tomorrow at 2 O’clock in my Communication from the Chair. It is because we need to finish them quickly to pave way for handling the Electoral Laws themselves so that they can be implemented on time.  Can we now go to the next item On the Order Paper?

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 2015

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Finance Bill, 2015,” be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion for the second reading of this Bill seconded? It is seconded by the Minister for Security and Minister of State for Health. Honourable minister, would you like to speak to your motion?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the objectives of this Bill is: amend the Finance Act, 2009; vary the environmental levy; amend the Finance Act 2013; review the application fees for passport; and amend the Finance Act, 2014; provide for non-refundable fees in respect of application for work permit; amend the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Regulations, 2013; revise a single entry visa; and to impose an annual operating license fee in respect of vehicles and vessels in order to be able to raise funds to finance the Shs 18.3 trillion budget.

In coming up with these, Mr Speaker, we have assessed and made sure that these tax measures will stand the test of a sound tax policy namely: fair and equitable but also focussing on ensuring that our development objective, which is to lift up the 67 per cent of Ugandans who live in subsistence economy is realised. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that when the Bill came, it was referred to our Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I am sure they have handled it and they are ready to report.

3.07
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Anthony Okello): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Finance Bill, 2015.

Mr Speaker, the honourable minister has stated the objects of the Bill and I am not going to repeat that. With your permission, allow me to go straight to the committee’s observations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The observations are as follows:
Increased Environmental Levy on all Motor Vehicles.

Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to increase the environmental levy charged on motor vehicles excluding good vehicles, which are between five to ten years old, from 20 to 25 per cent of the CIF value. 

Mr Speaker, CIF is a short form for Cost Insurance and Freight. This is a trade term requiring the seller to arrange for the carriage of goods, by sea, to a port of destination like from Japan to Mombasa. It provides the buyer with documents necessary to obtain the goods from the carrier.

Two, it is also to do with motor vehicles excluding good vehicles which are ten years old or more, from 20 to 35 per cent of the CIF value. The minister submitted that this measure is to protect the environment and generate revenue. He informed the committee that the measure shall generate Shs 7 billion.

Observations

That the rationale to impose the environmental tax on old vehicles had not prohibited the importation of old vehicles and that Government in future should consider a total ban on importation of motor vehicles of more than ten years old in order to protect the environment.

The committee recommends that in order to protect the environment and control dumping of old vehicles, and to prepare the country for the total ban on cars that are ten years old and beyond, the rate of levy applicable to motor vehicles, excluding good vehicles, which are between 5 to ten years, should be 35 per cent of the CIF value instead of 25 per cent; and two, that motor vehicles, excluding good vehicles which are ten years old and more, should be 50 per cent of the CIF value instead of 35 per cent

Revised Application for passport

Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to revise the application fees for passport by an increment of Shs 30,000 on diplomatic, official and ordinary passports as follows: Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Act, Cap 66. Part One: Passport – 32 (a) diplomatic passport - Shs 150,000; official passport Shs - 150,000; ordinary passport - Shs 150,000; East African passports – Shs 80,000; Conventional Travel Document - Shs 120,000 and Passport processed within two working days - Shs 300,000.

The minister submitted that measures proposed will enhance the budget of Citizen and Immigration Control and is expected to raise additional Shs 3.2 billion through the enforcement measures and automation of visa/work permit collections to generate more revenue in the medium term. The committee welcomes the input in as far as it seeks to increase the tax base and generate more revenue. 

However, the committee notes that the proposed charges should not be uniform. The fees chargeable on diplomatic and official passports should reflect the diplomatic and official stature of such persons. 

The committee therefore, recommends that the fees for diplomatic and official passports be revised as follows: diplomatic passports - Shs 300,000 and official passports - Shs 250,000.

Increased visa fees 

Clause 4 seeks to increase the fees charged on a single entry visa from $ 50 to $ 80. The committee welcomes the increment and recommends that in order to reduce on the gap between the visa fees charged by other countries for Ugandans travelling abroad, the fees charged on a Single Entry Visa should be increased to $ 100.

Introduction of a Non-refundable Prepayment Fee on Application for a Work Permit

Clause 5 seeks to introduce a non-refundable prepayment fee of $ 500 on application for a work permit. The minister submitted that the introduction of a non-refundable fee of $ 500 on application of work permits would deter some people from applying for work permits and fail to pick them. 

The committee welcomes the initiative for it seeks to increase the tax base. The committee recommends that in order to discourage dumping of cheap labour in Uganda, the fees should be increased to $ 1500.

Operator Licence Fees

Clause 6 seeks to revise annual operator licence in respect of: vehicles, cargo vessels (inland water vessels), passenger vehicles, research and leisure vessels.

In examining the proposal, the committee makes the following observations: The levies already exist and are being collected by the Transport Licencing Board of the Ministry of Works and Transport as non-tax revenue; and two that the measures seek to streamline and widen the spectrum of revenue collection in the transport sector. 

Therefore, the committee recommends that in order to raise more revenue, licence fees for mechanical propelled leisure vehicles, up to 5 metres in length, should be increased from Shs 100,000 to Shs 400,000; and two that leisure vehicles propelled by cars or other means, up to 5 metres in length, should be increased from Shs 70,000 to Shs 270,000.

Conclusion

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee recommends that the Finance Bill, 2015 be passed subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to report. 

Before I take my sit, there is a minority report authored by the hon. Geoffrey Ekanya and it is attached to this report. With your permission, Mr I Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, the original copy of the Report of the Committee on Finance, Planning, and Economic Development on the Finance Bill, 2015. 

I also beg to lay the minutes of the committee meeting that took place on 27 April 2015. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Hon. Ekanya, you have the Floor to present the minority report.

3.25
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING, AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Geoffrey Ekanya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the work done. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, in accordance with Rule 118 of our Rules of Procedure, I beg to present a minority report to the Finance Bill. Generally, I agree with the committee position, but the report differs on the following: 
Clause seeks to introduce a levy on used vehicles between 5 to 10 years, from 20 to 25 per cent; motor vehicles, excluding good ones, from 20 to 35 per cent – I beg your pardon.

Pursuant to Rule 194 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, I hereby present a dissenting opinion from the majority of the Committee on Finance, Planning, and Economic Development. 

Mr Speaker, whereas the Finance Bill, 2015 was laid before Parliament and referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning, and Economic Development for thorough scrutiny and analysis, as a member of the committee I dissent from the main report in the following terms: 

Increase in Environmental Levy

Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to increase the environmental levy from 20 of CIF value to 25 and 35 for motor vehicles (excluding good vehicles) which are between 10 to 20 years and 10 years and more respectively. 

The committee recommends that in order to protect the environment, control dumping, and prepare the country for total ban of cars in the next 10 years, the rate of levy should be adjusted. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the environmental levy directly addresses the failure of the market to take environmental impact in account by incorporating the price. But this leaves the consumers and business without flexibility and no cost solution. 

Noting that the government is and has been the major importer of new vehicles, the public has been buying old vehicles. Increasing levy will leave the public with no alternative totally, including Members of Parliament. 

I wonder how many Members of Parliament are driving brand new vehicles. Even the amount of money that was given to the Members of Parliament here cannot buy a brand new vehicle. A brand new vehicle costs between Shs 400,000,000 to Shs 800,000,000. The Secretary General of NRM is now driving a vehicle of Shs 800,000,000. 

Therefore, while we totally agree that there is need to introduce environmental levy, but it should go in line with Government policy. 

Our recommendation is to reduce the tax on brand new vehicles and ban old vehicles. We shall have no problem with that. The tax makes buying brand new vehicles totally prohibitive and Uganda becomes a dumping place.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, we recommend that Government reduces the tax of brand new vehicles which is 100 per cent to 20 per cent and ban old vehicles and we go with you.  

I therefore recommend that the tax for motor vehicles purported on environmental levy, which should be regulation – because this is a responsibility of regulation - be discarded for now until Government harmonises its policy position. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members that is the matter now before us. I now propose the question for your debate. The motion for your debate is that the Finance Bill, 2015 be read the second time. I propose it for your debate. The debate on the general principles of the Bill starts now. Each member contributing will take three minutes and then we conclude. 

If there are issues that require actual amendment, we will reserve them for committee stage. We shall deal with them at that level. If you have general discussion on the general principles of the Bill, this would be the time. 

3.20
MR YONA MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and the committee for the good recommendations on the Bill. 

I would like to thank the committee mostly on trying to forge a way for us to get money from visas. 
Whenever I go to apply for a visa in other embassies, I find myself crying because I knew very well that people have been coming to Uganda at no cost, because the fee was so small compared to the cost we have been paying to go to the UK and elsewhere. So, I would like to appreciate that today we have seen Uganda as not a free destination area. There is some small application fee, which we have been paying to other embassies. 

However, I would like to distance myself from the levy on old vehicles. We are saying that cars whose manufacturing date is 10 years ago should have an increased tax. I know countries which have done that successfully to protect their environment. But if we are tagging a price on our environment, then we are in danger. 
Also, Mr Speaker, I know that most of those countries have done that because they have factories. In Uganda we do not have any factory, which makes cars. We have maintained the tax for new vehicles but that tax is so high. If the tax for new vehicles was small compared to the old vehicle, it would have been a very good idea. Otherwise, how will I be attracted to import a new vehicle when its tax is high? 

If we are tagging a tax on old vehicles, like the hon. Geoffery Ekanya has said, most of us here have got old cars of 10 years and above. If the levy is to help the environment, then we should even first talk about the old vehicles, which are here before we put a tax on the new ones. We should first think of the vehicles we have here, which are in dangerous mechanical conditions. They should all be grounded; we sell as scrap and plan.  I think it would be a good Government policy - if we see that we should go there, then let us plan to go there - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we go on, I think there is a procedural matter that I need to handle. This is to help us process the minority report which has been presented.

If you look at this minority report, it is actually not a minority report. It is not disagreeing with what the committee has said. It is introducing - I am looking at your recommendation, honourable member.  It is recommending that taxes for motor vehicles less than five years be reduced in order to enable the public afford them other than increasing the environmental levy. That is not what is in the Bill. That is not what the committee reported on. 

Therefore, it is not a dissenting opinion. Technically speaking, it is a new opinion. I think the member should just be kind to the House and ask the House to consider this opinion. Otherwise, it is not a minority opinion. He is proposing an amendment. This was not talked about at all. Vehicles that are less than five years; the taxes should be reduced, which was never considered in the Bill. 

Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, I would like us to agree on this so that we see how to process what you are recommending properly. If we put it in better perspective, Members will understand it and you could easily be supported. If you put it this way, it might face some challenges.  It is not a minority opinion because there is no majority opinion on it. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, these are environmental levies, which we are talking about. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am looking at your recommendation. 

MR EKANYA: Yes, I recommend that the taxes for motor vehicles less than five years be reduced in order to enable the public afford them other than increasing the environmental levy. This is because the key principle in this Bill is to increase the environmental levy from 20 to 25 and then 30 to 35. Thus the last word is, “other than increasing the environmental levy.” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, what are you recommending now? How do we handle the new aspect he is introducing? There is the one rejecting any increase on the levy on the old cars.  I would like you to help us so that we can process it quickly. 

MR EKANYA: Yes, Mr Speaker, as we speak, there is already a levy of CFI of 20 per cent. Government wants to increase the levy without harmonising the policy. I am objecting to increasing the levy. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, should we disregard the issue of reducing taxes on cars less than five years? 

MR EKANYA: You are right. Yes we should. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, it is only the issue of increasing the levy. We are now okay. That forms a minority opinion, which now we should process up to the discussions on that issue. 

3.28
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (FDC, West Budama North, Tororo): I beseech you, Mr Speaker - we have to make very critical decisions for the Republic of Uganda. The reason you tax your population is simple. It is in order for you to find resources to invest in the development of your country. 

I have stated on the Floor of this House before that there are probably only two ways of raising revenue for a Government; you tax or you borrow. 

I listened to the minister when he moved the motion for the Bill’s Second Reading. He made a very compelling case. We have programs to implement in the next financial year. As Members of Parliament, we expect Government to implement many programs in the next financial year. That expectation must be matched with a duty on our part to empower them to collect resources. The resources will help to implement the so many programmes that we expect them to implement. 

If we sit here and tie their hands as well as deny them the possibility to implement these so many revenue measures, we shall only be suggesting one thing. We shall be suggesting that in the next financial year they should not do anything. We cannot ask them to do something that we cannot fund either by borrowing or by collecting taxes. 

This is the critical decision that we have to make as Parliament. We cannot sit here and argue that they should not collect an environmental levy on vehicles 10 years old. It is common sense that they destroy our environment, and they are a burden on our health. We need to tax them so that we invest that money, and they need the money. 

I am not in the habit of disagreeing with my wonderful brother from Tororo, but for today I decided to emphatically disagree with the hon. Geoffrey Ekanya on this matter. Mr Speaker, who are the people in Uganda who buy second hand vehicles? (Member timed out_)

3.31
MS ALUM SANTA (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for coming up with this report. I have an issue to do with the levy on the environment. I am not so clear with what the committee or the Bill would like to address exactly. If we are dealing with the issue of the environment, we have to be very clear - it is taxes and we still have to be very clear without mixing the two.

When you look at this proposal, you realise we are all saying that we do not want old cars because they are environmental threats to our own people. However, at the same time, we are saying that we need revenue that accrues from these old cars. Who are the people or why are we importing these old vehicles?

The answer that is very much straight forward is that we are poor. It is poverty that is pushing us to import old cars. If we are really serious to address the issue of the environment, we have to ban the importation of old cars and also reduce the taxes on the new cars. This will reflect our intention and the objective of the Bill will be pretty clear. 
Another issue I would like to comment on is the work permit where the Bill is proposing that we levy $ 1,500 on people who would like to acquire work permits.

I would like to submit that this is very timely because we should learn from what has just happened in South Africa and Tanzania. If we do not do it now, our local people will get an opportunity at an appropriate time to withdraw this work permit the way it is happening in South Africa.

I would like to propose that we have to categorise the jobs that we have and be very clear and say that these categories of jobs, even if you come with your money, we are not entitled to accessing them. This will protect our people from the foreigners who sometimes come under the pretext of investors but end up taking the jobs, which would belong to our local people. Mr Speaker, I already see the signs in Uganda here –(Member timed out_)

3.34
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the report. I am one of the people who support Government to collect taxes. I have no problem with collecting taxes though they should be genuine ones.

Whereas I know that I am paid from the taxes collected, the most important issue is that I represent the people of Bukooli Island who basically use water as a means of transport. The committee is saying that a charge be levied on these cargo vessels operating on land waters. Mr Speaker, my people use a lot of fuel and are charged fees on every litre of fuel they buy. Imposing another charge or tax on fuel is going to be very unfair to my people; I will not support that.

On the question of increasing or raising money on the diplomatic, official and ordinary passports, I would like to support the committee’s position because by the time one reaches a level of carrying an official passport, like the one I have; I think they can afford that charge.

However, it would be very unfair for the ordinary passport to be charged the same amount. I will support this because of the conditions under which the Directorate of Immigration operates. I wish some of this money can be retained as NTR by the Directorate of Immigration; it would be helpful.

When you go to these passport offices, it is so disappointing and worrying - people are operating under very unhealthy conditions. I pray that part of the money raised be retained by the directorate to better their offices. I thank you.

3.37
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of environmental levy - I am the shadow Minister for Water and Environment and I have been to this committee on Natural Resource talking about the environmental levy. 
As my colleague from Oyam has stated, what is the objective of the Bill? If the objective is to protect the environment, this levy, since its inception has never been given to the implementing institution, which is NEMA, which is supposed to implement the protection of our environment.

Funds have been collected by Government and spent elsewhere while continuously, NEMA is incapacitated to regulate and monitor degraders of our environment. Probably at this point in time, it is important to note that this environment levy is much needed to be sent to NEMA to help with the environmental protection.

The issue of increasing the levy is contradictory because you are looking at raising funds for Government and not at protecting the environment. If it is about protecting the environment, we would actually ensure that old vehicles are banned from being brought in this country; we would reduce taxes on new vehicles.

In the long run, you will ensure that the effect of a polluted environment which cause so many diseases and increase on the National Budget, is being cut and that is where the government would come in. I will pray with this House that taxes are not raised on these but also that we put the environmental levy collected to NEMA to help us clean up the pollution of the environment. Indeed we need to ban those old vehicles.

I would also equally call upon Government to quickly look at the e-waste management; the old dumped vehicles and other electronics are part of those things that are increasing the cost of our budget – the unspecified diseases as a result need to be curbed –(Interruption)

MS ABIA: Thank you very much, hon. Beatrice Atim Anywar. The information I would like to give you is that the cars that we import in to this country are a result of a total disorganisation in – first of all, the settlement pattern and then the transport system.  Why would every Ugandan want to own a car? It is because we are not living in an organised environment. If it were organised with efficient bus and train systems, not every person would want to drive a car here.

Secondly, if you look at this immoral tax that they want to introduce, the question at the time to answer is, if this is arising as a result of pollution -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, is that information? You see, if you start using words like ‘if’ and ‘but,’ it is already a debate. (Laughter)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Your point is noted. I was still impressing it on Members that it is necessary for us as legislators to look at this issue squarely. If we clean our environment, we reduce the cost of this budget for our Government. We are spending so much on health as a result of a polluted environment and therefore, this stand to ban old vehicles needs to be taken. We need to put in place e-waste management for old vehicles and the rest so that they are cleaned out of the environment.

On the issue of the passport, I would like to propose that it is high time the Government looked at these people who get - (Member timed out.)

3.42
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to agree with the committee on the main report. However, like the other colleagues have said, the problem is that when you talk of the environment levy, it has actually lost its meaning. It is more like a source for enhancing revenue raised; it does not focus on protecting the environment. 

That is the reason I would not agree that we should be talking about vehicles of 10 years and above. If we want to have another category, we could say 10 to 15 years. If you talk of 10 years and above, meaning 16, 20, or even 50 years, and you still want to tax those vehicles and yet it is obvious that they are environmental hazards, you are then losing the meaning of an environment levy.

It is unfortunate that earlier submissions tried to insinuate that the Members of Parliament have old cars. It is true we may have them but we are talking about Uganda, not Parliament of Uganda. Therefore, when are talking about legislation, we should look at something that goes beyond the Parliament of Uganda.

I was a little excited when I read the minority report and the recommendation to reduce taxes on vehicles less than five years. I thought that the author of that report was going to stand by it. The issue is that these vehicles are too expensive for the ordinary person to afford. As we increase taxes on used vehicles, can we also reduce taxes on the brand new vehicles so that people have a fairly affordable option?

When we talk about these vehicles – We have just been talking about road safety here and some of these vehicles are the problem; they are not roadworthy. What is the Ministry of Finance doing in terms of convincing us and assuring us that they use their value guidelines properly? You find that the rate for a used vehicle of less than five years is exaggerated just to increase the amount collected, and you end up paying tax that is similar to that of a brand new vehicle. So, the Minister of Finance has to guide URA in coming up with realistic prices of these vehicles. 

Otherwise, I fully support increasing the environment levy up to only vehicles of 15 years and then thereafter, some vehicles should be banned. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have Mr Charles Kizito Nsubuga, a road safety and workplace analyst. He has come here with a team to follow the debate. He was here before but I am just recognising him now. He was here to listen to our statement on the UN road safety issues and also part of this debate touches on that subject. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.46
MS CHRISTINE ACAYO (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I support the position of the committee. 

In the short run, as Parliament, we have no option. I, therefore, support the fact that we have to allow this tax to be levied. In the short run, when you look at the budget cycles, we have a very short time left to pass the budget and we cannot pass the budget without revenue. We need to raise the Shs 7 billion in order to spend. I, therefore, support that this tax be levied so that we can have this budget passed. 

However, in the long run, the Ministry of Finance must think about this seriously. They should think of an alternative source of revenue other than the environment levy. I am raising this because just this week, I read in the print media that instances of asthma in this country have gone very high. The technical explanation was that this is as a result of air pollution. That is the reason many Ugandans are now contracting asthma.

If that is the trend, then Government has to shift and think of how to protect the people. We should think of alternative revenue sources. As for this financial year, 2015/2016, our hands are tied due to the time factor. We have no way out but pass this revenue.

Mr Speaker, look at the traffic jam; almost everybody is driving. In the long run, all old vehicles must be banned and the taxes on new vehicles reduced. In some countries, not everybody drives but in Uganda, almost all are driving. This could be the cause of traffic jam. 

On this Floor, Members were complaining that while travelling from here to Seeta, movement is slow because there are very many vehicles. So, I think that in the long run we must have a total ban on old vehicles and a reduction in taxes for new vehicles. I beg to submit.

4.49
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion and the amendment made by the committee members. 

On the issue of passports, I have seen that it has been easy to get a diplomatic passport. As a member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, I discovered that there are so many people who own diplomatic passports. I would like to call upon Government that as we increase the levy, can we identify who qualifies to get a diplomatic passport? I am aware that it is in the record but in practice, it is not the case. 

With Shs 150,000, anybody walks to Immigration and is able to acquire a diplomatic passport. A case in point is hon. Kipoi, the former MP, who had a diplomatic passport and did whatever he wanted to do. We, therefore, need to look at this critically. Whereas we need to raise money, let us not put in place mechanisms that will allow people to come in and take other passports.

I support the issue of single entry, the visa. There are countries where we are paying US$ 150 for entry and as a committee, we have been wondering why Uganda is still at US$ 50. Is it because we are poor? I think US$ 100 is something that I support and I would like to encourage the House to pass this.

On vehicles, I would like to support the people who are giving suggestions on removing old vehicles from the road. As long as we still have vehicles of 20 years in the bond, we shall get them on the road and they are like a moving kitchen. We are going to have our children and even adults getting asthma, and cancer is on the rise. We just need to move these vehicles out of Uganda because there are people who feel that even if you remove about five per cent of tax levy, they will still bring in the cars. So, let us move the cars out and save the health of Ugandans. Many people are now dying. You just hear somebody is in Mulago and he has died as a result of air pollution. Therefore, there is need for Government to look at this as a kind of a future mechanism - the market of cars should be regulated.

I am also aware that in some of the countries I have travelled to, when the cars are expensive then there is a class for those cars. The other people will have to use public means, which is also regulated by Government. We had started very well when KCCA talked of bringing public transport where you would have your card and be able to get into the bus. (Member timed out.)

4.52
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like honourable members to take the issue of old vehicles seriously. If you go to Mulago Hospital and visit the Cancer Institute, the situation is pathetic simply because of old vehicles. The gas emission to this environment is terrible. So, do not think that Government levying taxes on environment is going to help this country. The importers of these vehicles are going to pass over the taxes to the consumers 100 per cent and the problem is still going to remain.

The solution, Mr Speaker, is to look at what our neighbours have done - stop importing old vehicles to protect the environment. I can tell you that these old vehicles using red fuel were banned many years ago in some countries. In Europe, in the 1990s when I was serving in Rome, old vehicles had been banned. Now, this country has become a dumping ground where old vehicles are all over; they are everywhere and Government has no sympathy to our environment and for our people. The only solution is to ban the importation of vehicles that are older than five years. In Kenya here, you cannot bring in any vehicle which is more than five years old and in Uganda, you are talking of 10 to 15 years. Stop the importation of old vehicles!

Mr Speaker, on the issue of work permits I would like Government, if they want to raise money, to raise it to about US$ 5000. All the same, these Karims and Sudhirs, who are bringing in Indians to come and work here, are going to pay this money and Government can raise taxes from that. There is no compromise on that. So, for us to protect our jobs, we must increase charges on work permits. That is quite important. 

On passports, of course Ugandans are entitled to travel and they need passports, but when you consider an ordinary person trying to apply for a passport and you are raising the charges, it means you are denying the Ugandan the right to travel. Also, with passports, you are not going to make a lot of money. Therefore, my advice is that you increase the charges on work permits. 

You can see what is happening in most of these places. Even for simple jobs like working in hotels, Karim brings in Ethiopians and Sudhir brings in Indians and they do not care; they are going to pay. So, for us to protect our jobs, we must increase charges on work permits, reduce on passports, ban old vehicles and reduce taxes on new vehicles to protect our environment. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.55
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Briefly, the minister said that they are running a very sound tax policy but sometimes, I find the way in which Government wants to collect taxes rather immoral. Why do I say that? Look at the contradiction here; you want to have a levy on what you do not want and yet you are not willing to reduce levies on what you want. So, what do you actually want? It means you almost want nothing and yet you want something.

Before we even talk about the percentage levy, the committee has not informed this House what the unit cost on the environment is when you are importing a car older than 10 years or five years plus? There is no such information. So, where is the assumption coming from? Taxes are supposed to be based on evidence. Where is the evidence of the environmental damage per unit of an imported item that is ten years old? That is basic economics.

Secondly, you are talking about the levy on work permits. Mr Speaker, I believe the cost of these work permits should be earning based. If a manager is going to work in Crane Bank or if a Kenyan manager is coming to work in Serena, will this person still pay the same amount like somebody who is going to work at City Tyres as a mechanic? 

Therefore, I would want to implore the Ministry of Finance and the architects of taxation in that ministry to do detailed research and suggest tax based on information; they should not just assume and say, “let us levy such an amount and we shall collect such an amount.”

We also need to align these taxes based on the East Africa protocols. What do they say? If we are in the community and if we do this, what is the implication for us as a labour market? This is because what we do here impacts on our employability elsewhere. (Interruption)

MR MOSES KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information that I would like to give is: One, it is already expensive for Ugandans to move in Uganda. It is only in Uganda that railway transport is sick, water transport is half dead and air transport is unavailable for the common Ugandan to move within. 

I must also tell you that it is already expensive to drive an old vehicle. It breaks down every other day, consumes a lot of fuel, which Government again taxes. I must also say that it is good to protect our environment but old vehicles never destroyed the former Kyengera wetland. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you rose on a point of information.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much. (Laughter)

MS BAKO: Thank you very much for that lengthy information. Finally, Mr Speaker, I totally agree that we should rather ban the old vehicles and have a reduction on the taxation of the new ones. This would mean that first of all, we shall be cost effective in terms of managing accidents, respect for our environment and sustainable tax provision for Government. (Member timed out.)

4.00
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity to debate this matter. I only have two points to raise. 

My first point is on work permits. I strongly believe and also concur with the committee that we should increase the levy on work permits in this country. Today, if you walked on the streets of Kampala, you will realise that the quality of foreigners doing business in Uganda has greatly depreciated. You find a Chinese selling Kabalagala on the streets of Kampala; you find an Indian in Lira selling plastic sandals - bonna bagagawale, nigina.   An investor -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what were those things you said? (Laughter)

MS NYAKECHO: In English, if I translated, it is these plastic sandals not even shoes, and the local people have given them the name “prosperity for all”, that all should wear. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, this is very unfortunate. We need quality. The people we are going to give jobs in this country or those who apply to come and work in our country should add value. They should be able to add value to this economy and not to compete with the local people who are struggling out there to make ends meet.

Secondly, I also support the suggestion that we need to, not immediately but progressively, ban the use of old motor vehicles in this country. Therefore, I support the proposal that we should increase the tax on old vehicles and reduce tax on the new ones. Of course, I would not want to go into the same debate my colleagues have gone into because our reasons are almost the same. 

I just want to add my voice to those who have already submitted that it is important that we progress. I was privileged to travel to China sometime back. To be able to buy a car in China, you have to play lottery. If you win, that is when you get the chance of owning a new car. It is not a privilege for everybody to get cars because the level of pollution there has dramatically increased. (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have already picked members to speak but going by the spirit from the honourable Member of Otuke that the issues are now similar, don’t you think that could move this motion to the next level so that we can process these matters from there?  However, I will allow Agago, Namutumba - We can work on all those details at the committee stage. There is still room there.

4.03
MR JOHN OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the idea of increasing the work permit charges not only to US$ 1500 but more. One time I went to City Oil on Bombo Road and when I interrogated the people who are working there, I found out that they all had identity cards for refugees. When I asked them who gave them the permission to work in that place, I was perturbed by the answers they gave me. That means you have to put some sense in the people who are checking on those foreigners who work in this country, so that they follow those people and we get the money out of them.

On the idea of increasing taxation on old vehicles, look at the majority of people in this country and the poverty that we normally sing about, and look at the alternative means of transport - public transport, rail or whatever kind of transport - and yet you need the people to move from one place to another,   you see how difficult it is for those people and then we increase. I was looking at the arrears where we put and get taxation from imported vehicles and there are almost about four to five different arrears. If we compute all those, it is going to be almost equivalent to the amount of money you are going to use to buy a new vehicle. It is going to be close to 100 per cent. That means somebody may not afford, including even some of us who are here. 

So, to be realistic, I look at the arrears of collecting that money, the method of collecting the money, which is very important. People are going to evade tax; they will bring vehicles as if they are coming to Uganda and instead go to DRC or South Sudan then from there they will bring them back here. That way, taxation will be low. 

Therefore, unless we change the method of collecting that revenue - We need to raise about Shs 18 trillion to finance our budget but we have to be mindful. We are going to accept this 35 per cent and then at the end we shall also fail to realise that money. This is my observation because I know. I import some goods and these clearing agents will tell you good stories of how you can avoid - (Member timed out.)

4.06
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I want to specifically contribute to clause 3, revision of the application fees for passports. I know the committee has categorised these passports but I would like to go further and categorise especially the ordinary passport. I would like us to look at the children. If the adult is paying Shs 150,000, a child should pay less. 

Students have the task of looking for school fees, accommodation and so on and the purpose of their going abroad is to go for further studies; they do not intend to travel often like us, the MPs and other people. We need to have a reduction in the fees for passports for the students. 

How about the sick who are just going once to get treatment out of the country? We should also have a reduction in the application fees for their passports. Maybe when we come to the committee stage, I would propose an amendment on the application fees. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable member, is Shs 150,000 in ten years too much? Please, let us get real. (Laughter)

4.08
MR FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the committee’s report. We need to widen the tax base. I know that in Uganda, sometimes we suffer from tax apathy but we really need to love to pay taxes because we need roads, railways and other services. 

I now come to the environment levy. The Constitution is very clear in Article 245. The Constitution provides that this Parliament is mandated to make laws to protect and preserve the environment from abuse, pollution and degradation. In Kenya, a similar law exists, which prohibits vehicles older than eight years and the taxes on the old vehicles are really prohibitive. Therefore, if we are to benchmark as East Africans, I think we should adopt similar laws to protect our environment and to increase our tax base.

As my colleagues have said, there is an increase in asthma and cancer cases, and from the studies that are available, the prominent cause of this is carbon monoxide emission from exhaust pipes of these old vehicles. Old vehicles are not as cheap as most colleagues have said. When you buy an old vehicle, you end up spending on spare parts, oils and many other items. It is not true that they are cheap. Therefore, we should support this idea of - (Interruption)

MR LWANGA: Thank you, hon. Mwesigye, for giving way. I would like to inform you and the House that the taxes we pay are exactly the same. The import duty is zero per cent, ten per cent or 25 per cent. In case of vehicles, it is 25 per cent but then the amount you pay depends on the value of the vehicle that you are buying. If you buy a second hand car, you pay less tax but as you heard everybody arguing, and I am informing you, the environmental costs are far higher than the taxes that you pay. (Applause)

MR MWESIGYE: Thank you, my senior colleague, for that information. Mr Speaker, I would not like to take a lot of your time. I believe that if we supported this, definitely, we shall protect ourselves from these unnecessary diseases. We shall protect our children; we have been talking about safety of children and this is part and parcel of the package that can protect our future generation. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.12
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have no problem with the report of the committee. Taxation will serve two purposes: One, to raise revenue and two, as an enforcement strategy - enforcing policy. My only issue is the dishonesty by Uganda Revenue Authority. This is something that touches the object of the Bill. When you are talking about the need to vary environmental levy and we say 25 per cent for the five to 10-year-old vehicles and then 35 per cent for the 10-year-old vehicles and above, the question will be: 25 per cent of what and 35 per cent of what? The dishonesty is here.

I have been importing vehicles sometimes. We are going to say 25 per cent of CIF value but this CIF value is not the actual one. Uganda Revenue Authority has another CIF indicative value. That is where they rob Ugandans. I will give an example. A vehicle which on FOB terms will be about US$ 2000, when you bring it here, including transport and other costs, you add about US$ 2,500 totalling to US$ 4,500. By the time you are going to be taxed, the vehicle, which actually on the CIF terms - bringing it up to dock at the port - would be about US$ 4000, you will find URA taxing it at US$ 8000. That is the indicative CIF value.
 
The Minister of Finance needs to be very honest here. Even if we are saying the principle is to discourage old cars, we have no problem absolutely. Even for a new car, when you have an actual CIF value, by the time you bring it here it has another value. That is why you do not find some of those excellent environmentally friendly cars like the German cars here. The indicative value within the system of URA is too much, more than any other thing, therefore, you resort to those old Japanese vehicles. 

I would like to agree with the honourable member from Arua; what would we want to achieve? Is it just a matter of taxing old vehicles so that we raise money or we want old vehicles out? We should also be honest with the CIF value we are talking about. The indicative value now is in the URA system and Parliament has no powers over it. If we are going to accept this, later, when we go to the committee stage, we need to ask the minister to be honest with the CIF value because you are robbing Ugandans.  Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker.

5.15
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I do support the motion. 

It is true, we need these taxes for development but there are areas that we feel we cannot accept. The committee has proposed the operational licences on passenger vessels, for example. It is very difficult to milk a cow that you do not feed. Little attention has been given to water transport, so allowing taxes on vessels will be very unfair for us. Those of us who travel on water cannot access any services that our Government renders on water.

Apart from a few areas, how many ferries do we have in this country? I represent a constituency where it is very hard to connect from one island to another; for example, if you would like to travel from Namayingo through Mayuge to Buvuma and then to Kalangala, you cannot use public transport. Levying a tax on vessels means that a patient who has been referred to Mulago Hospital will have a hard time to reach the hospital because there are no ambulances on water. Therefore, I do not support the idea of levying taxes on passenger vessels. 

I would like to support the committee on all other taxes. Levying taxes on old vehicles is right. We need taxes to get revenue to work on our roads but what about in the islands; what services are we putting there?

Mr Speaker, I support the motion but I disagree with the committee on the idea of proposing levies on operator vessels. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, now is the time for me to put the question for the second reading of this Bill. I now put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Finance Bill, 2015” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE FINANCE BILL, 2015

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 1 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2
MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, in clause 2, environmental levy, replace paragraph (a) as follows: “(a) (i) motor vehicles, excluding goods vehicles, which are between five to 10 years, 35 per cent of the CIF value. (ii) motor vehicles, excluding goods vehicles, which are 10 years old or more, 50 per cent of the CIF value.” 

The justification is: to protect the environment and control dumping of old vehicles.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the amendment is to change the figures as proposed in (a) (i) from 25 per cent and increase to 35 per cent, and in (a) (ii) from 35 per cent to 50 per cent. That is the substance of the amendment.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I stand to oppose this because it would not protect the environment. If the Government wants to protect the environment, you ban and not increase. It is like collecting taxes from a thief. Instead of taking a thief to prison, you say a thief can do some business. I do not support increasing the levy because it will make it unaffordable, and I stated it clearly - (Mr Kasule rose_) Mr Chairman, I respect you.

MR SSEBUNYA: Thank you, hon. Ekanya, for accepting to yield the Floor. As a country, we cannot afford an outright ban but progressively, we would like our people to buy newer cars. We are not even saying new cars. There is no country, which can ban old vehicles. However, they reduce the number of years of the imported vehicles like from five to 10 to 15. That must be the maximum. We cannot outrightly ban. We beg that maybe you propose the tariff and then we go forward.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I would like to thank the chairperson for that information. Hon. Amos Okot just sent me a note that he wanted to buy a brand new Land Cruiser and they asked him to pay Shs 200 million without taxes. If you put taxes, that will come to about Shs 400 million and yet he was given Shs 100 million by Government. 

MR ANHTONY OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to give hon. Ekanya information. As it is at the moment, Government is charging 25 per cent import duty on a brand new vehicle and 18 per cent VAT. It can never be 100 per cent. If you total these two taxes, it comes to about 43 per cent and there is no CIF levy imposed on brand new cars, hon. Ekanya. For old vehicles, we have import duty of 25 per cent and VAT of 18 per cent and as it is, currently, we have 20 per cent environmental levy.

Like hon. Tim Lwanga had said earlier, these new vehicles can sometimes be expensive because the tax is calculated based on the value of the vehicle. The import duty that we have as Uganda is a harmonised percentage throughout the East African countries; it can never be 100 per cent, hon. Ekanya. 

MR EKANYA: I passed mathematics and statistics very well - (Laughter) - and I am grounded. When I did my calculations - Hon. Anywarach gave you the facts and I wish you were paying attention; URA keeps on alternating the indicative figures of the cost of these vehicles. However, back to business, hon. Lwanga I respect you as one of my senior elders but the chairperson is uncomfortable -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Very much so.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, my position is that we do not increase the levy until next year to allow us harmonise Government policy on this matter. I beg to rest my case.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Anybody traveling on our roads will know that most of these goods vehicles, which consume diesel, are polluting the environment. Just move on any road, the emission and pollution from those vehicles carrying cattle from Nyabushozi or matooke from somewhere is too much. What is the logic of excluding goods vehicles?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, why are you excluding goods vehicles?

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am happy that this afternoon the House is fully involved in the economics of the green economy. Our view was that vehicles that are involved in commercial operations pay tax in different ways. We thought that increasing tax on goods vehicles vis-à-vis other vehicles would hurt the operators. 

People who are involved in transporting matooke are in business and they pay other taxes. We thought it would be fair to balance it out but we do not have any strong reason to hold on to it if the House thinks that we can include them. 

MR KATUNTU: Can I follow up my clarification, Mr Chairman? I think this is the point hon. Ekanya was raising - is this an environmental levy or not? If it is, then the explanation the minister is giving makes a little bit of little sense. (Laughter) I am trying to be as polite. 

Honourable minister, you have to make a decision whether you just want to raise money or you are trying to discourage people from importing vehicles that will pollute our environment. Just move on any of our roads and see the pollution and the emission that goes up from these overloaded goods vehicles. The answer you are giving is about raising money and not environmental protection.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What about those ones that transport people like buses; they are also commercial vehicles and they are not included and the ones carrying goods are. What is the distinction between carrying people and – 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Chairman, if we are going to have an environmental levy and we forget about our environment - What about vehicles going to Sudan, DRC, Rwanda or Burundi; what are you going to do about that? 

Honourable minister, what we talked about here is the need to have sympathy for our people and our environment and ban these vehicles completely like our neighbours have done. I do not know whether when you were working on this issue, you consulted and checked with our neighbours. The Kenyans do not allow vehicles that are older than five years and we are in the East African Community. We cannot be different here when our friends are doing other things across.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, we used to have one elder here in the House, hon. Okullo Epak, and he always advised us that when you hit your colleague below the belt, you should move out so that you do not see the response. I do not know if that is the reason hon. Katuntu has moved out. 

About these taxes, I think we should be uniform because the purpose of this levy is to balance the objectives of our development and at the same time protect the environment. An idea that suggests that all vehicles beyond a certain age should pay a certain levy is an idea that I buy. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there are two proposals. The first one is the increment from 25 to 35 per cent and the other from 35 to 50 per cent. That is the amendment proposed by the committee. Can I deal with that amendment first, then we come to the second issue of whether to delete “excluding goods vehicles” that is provided for in these clauses. 

[Ms Cecilia Ogwal: “Procedure”] Wait, let me just process this and see where we are. Those are the two proposals. We needed to take a decision on the proposed amendment by the committee to increase the proposed levy from what the Government had proposed to a new level. That is what we need to decide on first.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Chairman, I would like the minister to clarify to us because he said the objective of this levy is to blend, to mix, raising funds and also protecting the environment. Does he, therefore, mean that we should change the title? 

If you look at the report of the committee, paragraph 2.1 of the report of the committee says, “Increased environmental levy on old motor vehicles.” Can you, therefore, change it to “increased environmental levy and raised taxes”? Can we do that? Otherwise, we would be contradicting ourselves.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is already a tax Bill - the Finance Act. So, can we decide on whether we want to increase? 

MR LWANGA: The minister has stated that we increase for all and I am just wondering whether it is now relevant that we also increase to 50 per cent. If we are going to increase for all, why don’t we stick with the 35 per cent and we just do away with this? – (Interjections) – No, what I am saying is that the Treasury will not suffer because they have more candidates to give them money. So, we raise funds in that respect and at the same time, we will be able to make sure that our environment is protected so that everybody is in the basket.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, the suggestion, which was made by hon. Katuntu, was in regard to goods vehicles. We are not suggesting that we put a levy on every vehicle including the new ones; no. We are suggesting for the 10 years and above. I look forward to having a decision by the House on the amendments of the committee. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let us take decision. Let us decide on whether we want to increase from what the Government had proposed, from 25 per cent to 35 per cent and then from 35 per cent to 50 per cent. Let us take that decision and then we come to whether we now make it apply to all vehicles, as a second level of our decision. So, can we do that now?

I now put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee of increasing the levy from 25 to 35 per cent and from 35 per cent to 50 per cent. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do I have to ask the question twice; I thought I combined both of them - [Mr Ekanya: “Does the committee also support 35?”] - No, I said on both of them, from 25 to 35 per cent and then from 35 to 50 per cent. That is the decision we have taken. 

So, that is done. Now the next amendment is to delete the phrase “excluding goods vehicles”. The minister had conceded on that. So, can I put a question to that?

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I really would like to ask the minister to reconsider because this matter did not even come to the committee and the minister –(Interjections)- Mr Chairman, I am aware that this is a committee of the whole House. Hon. Tim Lwanga, whom I have been with, by God’s grace, for some time, is trying to educate me. I am raising this because there are issues of government policy. 

The purpose of excluding goods vehicles was because if you increase CIF on trailers and pickups which are used for moving agricultural produce to the market, the farmers will be paid lower prices because the middlemen would need to recover the costs. That is why Government decided to leave goods vehicles out, to enable movement of agricultural products to the market. 

If you excluded goods vehicles, you would be hitting farmers who are dealing in agricultural produce including those operating milk coolers, transporting beef to the market, matooke –(Interjections)– Just excuse me. You would be hitting farmers dealing in maize, sorghum, millet, beef and all those goods.  Therefore, I would like to beg colleagues; this cost is transferred because the business people must recover their costs and so they will pay the farmers less. If you want to impose tax on vehicles used for moving agricultural produce, you are now hitting the farmers below the belt. So, take a decision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that the phrase “excluding goods vehicles” be deleted?

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, clause 3 is on the amendment of the Citizenship and Immigration Control Act, Cap 66. Under item 32, substitute paragraphs (a) and (b) as follows: 
“(a) Diplomatic	  	Shs 300,000 
(b) Official passport 	Shs 250,000.”

The justification is: to generate more revenue. Persons in that category are clearly able to pay the suggested amount.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have been doing some calculations using an electronic calculator here for only one reason - I failed mathematics in S.4. It is on the basis of these calculations that I propose the following amendment. I propose that we substitute the figures proposed by the chairman of the committee, which is Shs 300,000 in paragraph (a), and (b) with Shs 500,000. This would ordinarily mean that every year for the lifespan of the passport, which is 10 years, you will be making a contribution of only Shs 40,000 per year and it is a very small contribution to make to the economy of Uganda.

Mr Chairman, a good tax policy should impose a higher burden on those that can afford and a lower burden on those that that cannot afford. As Members of Parliament, we get official passports but we can certainly afford to pay Shs 500,000 in 10 years to our coffers.  (Interruption)

MR LWANGA: Thank you, hon. Odoi, for allowing me to give you information. I would like to give information in particular with diplomatic passports for our diplomats, the people who work in foreign affairs. Do you think people who are earning say Shs 400,000 a month should be able to get Shs 500,000 and buy a passport because they are going to serve us overseas?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, I had made the argument in respect to Members of Parliament who hold official passports and I was going to the civil servants. There are civil servants who are mainly foreign service officers and they are known and they hold diplomatic passports. There are also senior government officials like ministers, for example, who hold diplomatic passports. You cannot convince me that a minister in the Government of the Republic of Uganda cannot afford to pay Shs 500,000 for a diplomatic passport.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do our diplomats pay for their passports? That is the question you should be asking.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Chairman and honourable members, the foreign service officers serving this country do not pay for their passports. It is Government that pays for those passports. So, they do not pay.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The underlying objective of debating these tax Bills is to raise revenue to finance our budget. Actually, the initial proposal that came to the committee was not Shs 300,000; it was Shs 200,000, which we raised to Shs 300,000. Our fear was that the House would object to our proposal but since it is in the spirit of the House that we raise more revenue, I would like to support the proposal by hon. Fox Odoi that we raise the fee from Shs 300,000 to Shs 500,000.

How much did you say for official passports? (Interjections) Yes, the same, because official passports are for us, Members of Parliament. There is no difference in earnings between a Member of Parliament and a minister. We can also afford to pay this and raise revenue for Government. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, hon. Fox Odoi is proposing an amendment from Shs 150,000 to Shs 500,000 and the committee had proposed an amendment from Shs 150,000 to Shs 300,000. Therefore, what we want to do – Please, let us finish. Honourable members, can we decide on the committee position or does the chairman have something to say about this? Chairman, what do you say about this? 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, the House has been informed about the committee position. (Interjections) Mr Chairman, I need to be protected. Indeed, the committee position is that we increase this from Shs 150,000 to Shs 300,000. However, like hon. Musasizi, a member of my committee, has stated, we had actually in the committee wanted to raise this higher but we had fears about what the mood in the House would be.

Mr Chairman, given that the House is very positive –(Interjections)– about the need – (Interjections) - Yes

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let us not move this matter out of –  

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, earlier on you made a point that actually this fee is for 10 years. We are talking about Shs 500,000 for 10 years and in the spirit of supporting enhancement of tax revenue measures, I agree with the proposed amendment.  (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I am going to put the question. –(Members rose_) Honourable members, please, let me guide. There are two amendments and the rule of processing amendments is that we start with the one furthest from the initial proposal. The one that is furthest is the one of Shs 500,000. 

In order for us to be able to handle this properly, honourable members, we know that there are two propositions now. There is  Shs 150,000 to Shs 300,000, which is in the Bill, and then there is now the proposal of Shs 300,000 to Shs 500,000. So, the question I am going to put relates to the amendment on the position of the committee. Let us be together on this. Hon. Odoi has proposed to amend the committee position from Shs 300,000 to Shs 500,000. That is how we are going to process it.

MR RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like clarification from the chairperson of the committee and from those who are proposing to raise it to Shs 500,000 as to whether they are considering the numbers that will be attracted to have passports. You may leave it at Shs 300,000 and have as many passports as possible, which would ease travel arrangements and unlock the problem of people having no passports, or you may raise it high and you do not have many people and eventually, you do not raise revenue. Have they looked at those options?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the discussion is about diplomatic and official passports –[Hon. Member: “Even then”]- You see, it is not a question of “even then” but that is what is being discussed. 

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to take this opportunity to inform hon. Fox Odoi that you cannot hold a passport for 10 years before it is renewed. By that time, it will be full and you will have got another one. So, he should not calculate based on 10 years; it is a wrong basis. That is why I support the committee’s amendment from Shs 150,000 to Shs 300,000. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But honourable member, the person who fills up a passport in less than 10 years must be really travelling. (Laughter) Honourable members, I will be the question.

MR KATURAMU: Mr Chairman, I would like to raise an issue in relation to what hon. Byandala was raising. Whether it is a new passport or a renewal, the amount of money paid is the same. The visa sheets that are contained in our passports are very few –(Interjection)– yes, we must be analytical on this matter - that Members of Parliament who have spent 10 years in this Parliament, which is proposed as the period, find that we have renewed our passports about three times. Therefore, if you are raising it to Shs 300,000, which I agree with, then in actual fact, you may be parting with Shs 900,000 but not the Shs 300,000 as proposed. That is the observation I am raising, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. Honourable Member for West Budama North, do you have a statement to make on your amendments or should I put the question?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I thank you, Mr Chairman. I definitely have a statement to make. I am surprised that hon. Byandala is very reluctant to contribute to the development of Uganda. (Laughter) (Interruption)

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, I am here representing the 34 plus million Ugandans. I am not here for myself. That statement that I do not want to contribute - I would like to inform hon. Fox Odoi that every month, I contribute about Shs 10 million; I would not be doing it if I am not interested, and I pay it very willingly. Is hon. Fox Odoi in order to make a blatant mistake by saying that I do not want to contribute in the payment of taxes, Mr Chairman?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, I appreciate your concerns and I would like to address this as the Chair, otherwise, you have not raised the order. (Laughter) The matter that you wanted to raise is: was it proper for the member to impute improper motive on you? That would have been a properly entertainable point of order which the Chair would have gladly ruled on. Now that this is not the matter before me, I will not rule on it. (Laughter)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Guessing the mood in the House, I think it is only prudent that I withdraw my proposed amendment. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal of Shs 500,000 has been withdrawn. I now put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, clause 4, amendment of the Citizenship and Immigration Control, Act Cap 66. Replace (i) to read as follows:  “(i) Single entry visa US$ 100”. The justification is that this will reduce the gap between the visa fees charged by other countries for Ugandans travelling abroad.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, clause 5 is on amendment of the Finance Act, 2014. We propose to replace US$ 500 with US$ 1,500. The justification is that this will generate more revenue and ensure that persons who apply for work permits are credible.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to this amendment - 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, I think these amendments should be married with the principle of the East African Protocol as was proposed by the MP from Arua. When we are amending this, the question of work permits should not affect those who are within the Community in the spirit of free mobility of goods, services and human beings. So, I think we should insert “with the exception of members of the East African Community.”

MR SSEBUNYA: We would like to reciprocate or do what the Kenyans or Tanzanians would have wished us to do, but the practice is that it is not as easy as going to Tanzania and getting work permits; it is very difficult. Just like we find it very hard to get work permits in Tanzania, I think the amount we have proposed is enough and if we want to do real work in Kenya, you can be able to afford that amount.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Chairman, we know that the issue of jobs for Ugandans has become a very critical one. We know that even people who are working in hotels as waiters are brought into this country from somewhere else. As a country, we must put restrictive measures so that Ugandans can get these jobs.

Mr Chairman, I propose a non-refundable prepayment of application for work permits of US$ 2,500. This will ensure that Ugandans get these jobs. Other countries are even charging more. To get a work permit in China, you must pay US$ 5,000 and very few people get those work permits. What is happening in our neighbouring countries? It is almost impossible to get a work permit! If we want to raise funds for the Ministry of Finance and protect jobs for Ugandans, we must increase the fees for foreigners applying for work permits. We shall get money for this country and protect jobs for Ugandans. My proposal is US$ 2,500. (Applause)

MR KATUNTU: I do not know whether I am outdated but sometime back, I used to practise law and one of the areas I dealt with was helping clients to get work permits. There are three types of payments: One was the application fee, then there was a security bond, which was returnable at the end of your stay in Uganda, and the third one was the actual fee for the work permit. What is this we are talking about? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Application. 

MR KATUNTU: That becomes a little bit difficult. First of all, I agree that we need to have a reasonable figure for one reason - work permits are for foreigners who have come to seek employment here basically, because we do not have that resource. (Interjections) I do not understand why colleagues are making noise. (Mr Lwanga rose_)I will get the information.

MR LWANGA: Thank you, hon. Katuntu, for allowing me to give you information. People who come to work here are of various categories. There are those we need like specialised doctors and engineers. However, do we need drivers, gatekeepers, askaris and cooks? Go to Munyonyo and see what is happening there.

MR KATUNTU: You need to be a little bit patient and hear me out. You see, the problem is not even about payment of money but the Immigration Control Board, which goes ahead to grant work permits even to non-deserving cases. That is not about money. Even if you raise it to US$ 2,000 or US$ 2,500, they will pay. As the lawyers say, the mischief to be cured is to control, and how do you control it? By having regulations in place to make sure that a non-deserving case is not given a work permit. That is the mischief. 

There is no way you can convince me that because somebody has paid US$ 2,000, he should come here and work as a driver and yet we have got many drivers here without jobs. I think we could have diagnosed the problem but the medicine is not necessarily this.

I suggest that we should be informed now about the actual figure for the work permit - (Interjections)- That is the application fee but we are talking about a work permit. If you have been granted a work permit, how much do you pay? What we call a security bond is the cost of the air ticket back to your country. In case you say, “well, I do not have money to transport me back”, they take it from the – (Interruption)

MR SSEBUNYA: I have been informed that the actual cost for a work permit is US$ 2,500.

MR KATUNTU: To me, that is where we should have focused, Mr Chairman - the people who have been granted work permits. We can even increase it to US$ 5,000 and I do not think there is any problem with that - 

MR KATURAMU: You said there are many categories of –

MR KATUNTU: I am still holding the Floor.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, he has not given you the permission to do that and you are continuing to speak. He is the one holding the Floor and he has not allowed you. He has sat down because the Chairman is speaking.

MR KATUNTU: The only reason I was seated is because the Chairman should be heard in silence and all of you should be seated when the Chairman is speaking.

Honourable colleagues, we are not doing the correct thing. My view is that we retain the proposal of the committee but address the figure of the actual work permit. We can increase that one. I do not know by how we can increase it but if we do it, it will address some of these problems.

MR KATURAMU: Mr Chairman, I beg your indulgence. It has been mentioned that foreign workers are in categories. There are foreign workers who come here and work for a profit and they need to get work permits. However, there are those who are volunteers in that category and they are here serving in humanitarian organisations as volunteers. Will the work permits for such a category be the same with those foreign workers who are working for profit?  That is the clarification I wanted to seek.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, honourable member, that is not the issue before us at the moment. Let us deal with what is before us.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Chairman, if I were Sudhir or Karim in this country and I wanted to import a worker as a waiter in a hotel here and the application fee is US$ 2,500, I would think twice before paying US$ 2,500 and I would give this job to a Ugandan. That is why I am saying if we make it restrictive, we shall be protecting jobs and this is practised in all these countries. (Applause) Go to Ghana and Tanzania; why are we being so difficult to Ugandans who want to get these jobs?

I would like to agree with hon. Lwanga; we want to protect jobs for our people and they must get jobs. Therefore, we must increase and be tough; if they want to bring in these workers, they must pay US$ 2,500 to make an application.

DR BAYIGGA LULUME: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would have wanted to buy into the argument given by my colleague but Uganda is not living in isolation; we are in the East African Community – (Interjections) – Yes! This is very important because the application fee is a barrier to entry of natural persons into a foreign country to do work.

We want to interrogate this further. The chairman maybe could have interrogated this and we want the answers to this.  What is the fee for a Ugandan seeking to work in Kenya and Tanzania? The converse must be true. You cannot raise the fee here when you have got the Common Market Protocol signed where free movement of natural persons and seeking employment in foreign countries within the region must be observed. The principle of reciprocity must work. You cannot debate this in isolation; this is what I am saying, Mr Chairman, and I am seeking that clarification. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Chair, the committee had already proposed the increase from US$ 500 to US$ 1,500. The question that is now being raised is: how does it fit within the framework of the protocols we have signed within the region? That is the issue. If you answer that, we will finish. 

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am also not comfortable with the reasons given by the committee. If you want to raise more money, yes, but if you also say that you want to check that those who are coming are credible, I do not think it is true. Even crooks can bring a lot of money. So, the second part of their justification is not justifiable.

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The information I have is that within the East African Community Common Market Protocol, - the encouragement of free movement - Kenya and Rwanda started the free movement of people and labour and they scrapped the requirement for visa and work permit fees between the two. Early this year, Uganda followed suit for Rwanda and Kenya. I think those remaining are the two brotherly countries, Tanzania and Burundi. So, for the northern corridor, the free movement in terms of work permits and visas - For other foreigners, I think this will apply for those outside the community.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, maybe I will clarify a small issue. While in the committee we asked whether this amount of money proposed here would include members of the East African Community. The information we were given was that it does not affect them.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Minister, would you like to confirm this?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I do confirm that this does not affect members of the East African Community. The intention of this was to do two things. The first one is that we have a problem of people who come here, apply and then they disappear in the community. When you meet them somewhere, they say, “I applied but my application is still being processed.”

The second was what the hon. Wamanga-Wamai raised; this was proposed as a disincentive for those skills that are in our markets and therefore, promote our own skills. However, this is a non-refundable fee for application and there is also a fee for the work permit; I do not know whether as a middle ground, we can maintain the proposal of the committee. I think that will be a fair view of this. I beg to move.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I would like to seek clarification from the minister. When an investor pays this non-refundable fee, when he or she is filing the income tax returns, do they include this as expenditure which is recoverable? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But it is non-refundable.

MR BAHATI: To the Minister of Finance in the shadow, this does not.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, hon. Ekanya, whether it does or not is not relevant to this debate at the moment.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, it is relevant. Let me tell you why.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is not. Either they are claiming it back or not; that is another procedure. What we are deciding on is the application fee. Whatever happens to it is another matter under another law and process. So, it is not a relevant debate at the moment. Please, let us focus on what is here. The issue is that the minister in the Bill proposed US$ 500, the committee has proposed US$ 1500 and Member for Mbale Municipality has proposed US$ 2500. That is where we are.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, it is relevant because people think it is revenue. However, according to the information and practice, it is not revenue. This is because when the company is filing its tax returns, these are investment expenditures, which are recoverable. So, even if you raise it to US$ 5000, you are only disorganising the investor. Do you get me? The concept, which Members want, is some kind of revenue but when the investor is filing tax returns - I have been dealing with these investors - they keep their books - (Mr Musasizi rose_)- You are an accountant, yes.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you my brother, hon. Ekanya, for giving way. Mr Chairman, whereas hon. Ekanya’s argument is right, I do not see its relevance to this debate. If you are basing your argument on filing tax returns, there are returns for individuals and there are returns for companies. In this case, if we are talking about work permits, these work permits are being issued to individuals. I wonder how they get to companies and they again fit in their tax returns. So, hon. Ekanya, you need to clarify to the House what you are talking about. If you have another intention, maybe you can bring it up and the House understands you. Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, hon. Musasizi understands this issue. Companies that come here must be registered companies –(Interjections)– Yes, as a person but a company. When you want to bring workers, you apply, you get a licence and so forth and you attach the names of the people you are bringing in and therefore, you are asked to make this deposit. When you are filing your books, which hon. Musasizi does very well, these are investment expenses. Have I given you the right information?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I think it would be very proper and right for hon. Ekanya to quote the relevant schedule of any law where we are including a work permit as a non-taxable item and the House can make a decision. However, as far as we are concerned, we do not remember passing a law like that. Can you quote the provision so that we are helped?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I have been trying to be polite to the honourable Member for Tororo County. (Laughter) That issue is not relevant to this debate. It will be handled somewhere else under another framework of another law. It is not a relevant debate on how much we put in this application fee. Whether it is revenue or not is not a material matter for now. The issue is that a figure has been proposed and we are proposing changes to it. That is more relevant to me than over enlarging the scope of what we must consider.

Can I put the question? I need to know whether the US$ 2500 is still holding or are we going down to US$ 1500. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Chairman, I still feel we should put punitive measures to protect jobs for Ugandans. I feel very sad when I find a gatekeeper and a waiter in these hotels are foreigners. How are we going to get jobs for our people? If we put punitive measures, these companies are going to think twice before they bring somebody to come and work as a gatekeeper. If we make it serious that when you apply you pay US$ 2500, you will think twice before bringing somebody from India.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The information I would like to give to hon. Wamanga-Wamai is that that is a mere application fee. Once the application has been granted, then maybe we could talk about the other fees needed to work in Uganda. As country, we should even encourage the applications and then we determine if somebody deserves a permit or not. I urge you to go with the position of the committee since this is a mere application fee and not the work permit fee.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Chairman, is it deserving to bring in waiters?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, honourable members, let me put the question. I will put the question to the proposal of US$ 2500 as an application fee. The position in the Bill is US$ 500. The proposal by the committee is US$ 1500. The Member for Mbale Municipality proposes to amend that position of the committee to US$ 2500. I will put the question to the US$ 2500.

I now put the question to the amendment proposed by the Member for Mbale Municipality that the application fee should be US$ 2500.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I will now put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6
MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, clause 6 - operator licensing fee under Traffic and Road Safety Act. In part (d) operator licensing fees for research and leisure vessels.

In item 3, mechanically propelled leisure vessels up to five meters in length substitute for 100,000 the figure 400,000.

In item 4, leisure vessels propelled by or other means up to five metres in length, substitute for Shs 70,000 the figure Shs 270,000.

Justification

These are luxurious goods and their demand is inelastic. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is the proposal from the committee in part (d) of the table under clause 6. The committee proposes to change in item 3 - the figure that appears is 100,000. They are proposing 400,000 and in item 4 in the place of 70,000, they are proposing 270,000. If you look at clause 6, there is a table and in part (d) of that table there are four items. The amendments are proposed in items 3 and 4.

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Chairman, it seems the committee has no amendments in (a), (b) and (c) and only has amendments in (d) –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes.

DR BAYIGGA: I beg your indulgence and I would like the committee to explain to me what “class O” licenses are because I have been asking my neighbour what class O and class C mean and so on. I have issues which I want to raise depending on - class O for instance -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Which class?

DR BAYIGGA: I can see in (a) operators licenses; they say class O license: 8-19 passengers, a certain fee; 20-39 a fee and 40 passengers and above.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, can we deal with the amendments then we come to this clarification.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is the amendment as proposed by the committee. Can I put the question on that after listening to -

MR OKEYOH: Mr Chairman, when I was going through - I see the committee agrees with the minister on (a), (b) and (c) and our concern and the concern of our people is with (b) -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, let us finish (d) then we come back and you propose your amendments. In the meantime, work it out so that when we come there, you are ready.

Do you have an issue with (d)? The committee has proposed an amendment. Speak on the amendments. If you have no matter with the amendments, I can take the member’s decision on the amendments then we can go to the extra issues that you would like to raise.

MR MULONGO: On the clustering of leisure -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can I first process the decision on the amendment by the committee?
Honourable members, the committee has proposed those amendments in (d) items 3 and 4 and the figure that is in 3 is 100,000 but the committee is proposing 400,000.

Under item 4, the figure was 70,000 and the committee is proposing 270,000. Those are the amendments. Can I put the question?

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, the issue of research is disturbing us because you know very well that for a country to develop, research is a very important element. So, hon. Minister, can you explain this research that you do not want to tackle so that you discourage it?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can I now put the question to this proposed amendment. I put the question to the amendment from the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OKEYOH: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We have a problem with (d): operator license for cargo vessels, inland water vessels. My proposal is for (i), it should be at 50 per cent -30,000 and for (ii) between 250,000 to 5000,000 because already our people are incurring a lot in procuring fuel and you find that this will have an impact even on (c). This (c) will be eventually passed on to the final person, the passenger, and it is going to very difficult and it is going to affect our people.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I also come from an area that is affected by this. However, the purpose for this was to raise revenue and as you have seen, the fee here was minimal compared to other categories and I think in the interest of this, we suggest that we can maintain this figure because it is a bit reasonable.

MR ISABIRYE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to support my colleague, hon. Peter Okeyoh, from Bukooli Island because this is being done to allow our people who use water transport because there is no public means of transport on water. So, by allowing this, the private owners are going to transfer the levy to the passengers. I would like to agree with the hon. Okeyoh that let this one be reduced by at least 50 per cent.

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. It is very hard to understand what it means to travel on water until you travel on it. When you realise that where it would cost you two litres of fuel when driving, when you get on water, it is about 10 to 20 litres and think of the tax contribution done by these people - therefore, I would like to support my colleague but as far as the four-metre in length is concerned and up to 10 metres because those are the ones that are affordable by our people. The people who can afford the 30 tonnes plus are businessmen and they can afford it. However, no. 1 should be 30,000 and the one up to 10 tonnes should be 100,000. I beg to report.

MR EKANYA: I thought this revenue would help Government to put the necessary infrastructure on water for purposes of safety and so forth and hon. Tim Lwanga has been supporting Government to raise revenue for purposes of putting infrastructure –(Laughter). I thought we really need this so that we have light, protection and so forth. I am seeking clarification from the minister that if Government wants to put the necessary infrastructure, where are we going to get the revenue, honourable Minister of Finance? Hon. Tim Lwanga has been asking for money.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there is a proposal from the member for Bukooli Island and member for Bunya and I think it has been supported by hon. Tim Lwanga also. Can the minister respond to this issue then we see how to move?

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The mood in the House and indeed in the country especially in those affected areas, needs to be supported. However, I would like to suggest that for four metres, we can agree that it becomes 50,000 -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is not what they proposed.

MR BAHATI: That is what they proposed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No. They proposed 30,000 not 50,000 - half of what is in the Bill.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, in the interest of progress, I concede that we move forward. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Therefore, hon. Minister, propose the reduction. Propose the reduction yourself. In (b) in item 1 – up to four metres – you now propose that it be reduced to 30,000.

MR BAHATI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Under two – up to 10 tonnes – they reduce to 100,000 so that you are the one moving it.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I propose that in 6(b(i) up to four metres in length, we propose a fee of Shs 30,000 and up to 10 tonnes, Shs 100,000.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is now the proposal that has been made by the minister for reduction in item 1 from Shs 60,000 to Shs 30,000 and for matters of up to 10 tonnes, a reduction from Shs 200,000 to Shs 100,000. That is a proposal from the minister. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Any more amendments on these tables apart from the clarification, which is a matter of research?

DR BAYIGA: Mr Chairman, before I bring my issue, I would like to understand what they meant by “Class O”, “Class C” and “Class R” - (Interjection) - yes, I want to make my proposal on the basis of this information.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What is this classification?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, these are classes as they are in the road safety regulations. However, if you can give me a minute, I could get the details of it now.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What is “Class O” licences? Do you have the volume?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, can you allow me one minute I get the right volume?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: For matters of the law, you must look at the law; you cannot answer from memory and that is the provision of the law. Is there any other amendment on these tables proposed apart from the clarification that is being sought?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, as you can imagine, an accountant getting the right volume can be problematic. However, we have got examples that can help a medical doctor understand that for example, “Class O” licences refer to the minibuses that we use around - [Mr Katuntu: “The kamunyes”] - I do not want to use the word “kamunye” because the Hansard will find problems. Then the country taxis are these small taxis that you find in different towns. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: They are actually in the Bill, honourable members. The guidance is in the Bill: eight to 10 passengers; 20 to 39 passengers; 40 passengers and above. The guidance is there.

DR BAYIGGA: I thank him very much for this clarification. However, when you go to Class O, for instance, for a vehicle carrying 40 passengers and above, the fee is Shs 1.5 million.  Mr Chairman, I propose a lower fee for this because we would seek to encourage bigger vehicles which are carrying more passengers as compared to smaller ones which are congesting the cities and the roads. I therefore would like to propose that for eight to 19 passengers should attract Shs 1,000,000; for 20 to 39 passengers should attract Shs 750,000 and for 40 passengers and above, Shs 500,000.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister?

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, this Bill is not about encouraging people to have bigger or smaller vehicles but about collecting money and you can only collect money if it has been generated. You cannot collect a lot of money when you have generated very little. If a vehicle capacity is 10-seater and the other one is a 50-seater, the money you generate to be taxed is very little from a 10-seater. However, if is a 50-seater, you are making a lot of money and, therefore, Government - because Government does not have a machine for printing money but through taxes only is why we would like to tax them. When you generate more, you pay more and that is the normal thing everywhere.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Taxes are largely paid by those who are able to pay. I do not buy the argument that vehicles with many seaters should be charged less because when you look at it critically, it is not only tax that determines who buys which vehicle. There are other underlying factors. 

Like the minister has said, all we want is revenue and like I said earlier, the objective of this debate is to raise revenue for Government. Mr Chairman, I would like to support the proposal by honourable minister that we charge the taxes as they are in the Bill. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, as I said in the beginning, the measures proposed in this Bill are based on a sound and solid tax policy which really takes into account the fundamentals of taxation that should be fair, equitable and should balance the development objectives. It is important that you tax those that are earning and obviously, as all of us can tell, an owner of a big bus earns more than the person who has a kamunye.

The other issue of what the doctor is raising is – as hon. Katuntu said, some of these issues really are a matter of policy and how to correct a mischief. If there is congestion of minibuses in Kampala, the solution is not to put more tax on them per se. We can have other measures to regulate that. However, if you are talking about raising revenue – having a tax measure on these owners – then you must put into consideration the fundamentals of taxation.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, if you move to other countries, if you are driving a car and you are alone you are taxed differently if you are on a lane which moves slowly. If you are driving a car and you are three and you are on a fast lane - it is our poor people who go into these types of vehicles which carry more than 40, 50 or 80 people. These taxes are transferred directly to the peasants who sit in the buses and these coasters. 

The business people will not bother but the peasants will pay and that is why, Mr Chairperson, Members of Parliament complain that the voters keep calling them to ask for money. Even if you paid a Member of Parliament Shs 100 million, because we impose tax on them, they say, “Okay help me; I am going to the hospital.” 

Therefore, this one which carries more people – in fact, to reduce traffic jam and pollution – you would lower the tax because we even need buses in the city. Lower the tax on the buses which carry many people so that everybody can go on the train and buses -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Point of order?

MR EKANYA: The problem you need to be educated –

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we have a member of our committee on the opposite side who brought a wide minority report on one issue but is almost debating in opposite of all these issues he has already debated in the committee. In that regard, is hon. Ekanya in order to dispel all the resolutions we made in the recommendations of the committee for which he is a member?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the honourable member for Tororo got possibly wiser when he came to the House. (Laughter). However, more substantially, really, I think the argument that the peasants would travel in the bigger buses and so they would pay - I think their number numerically would distribute and neutralise whatever excesses. I do not think we should go along those lines of arguments. Let us keep the merits of this thing, please.

MR EKANYA: May I conclude, Sir?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: On the same note?

MR EKANYA: No, on the argument I was making.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, conclude and we move.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I would like to thank you for that very wise ruling. We have the issue of tourism. In this country, of recent, domestic tourism was really booming and most of you know your children are moving across the country. These people engaged in this sector have to pay licences to the local authority and all other taxes. 

Recently, the Ministry of Works signed another agreement to impose another tax on vehicle inspection. Therefore, colleagues, I would like to beg that we support the doctor’s proposal. Thank you.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I heard my colleague’s argument that there is congestion on our roads and our poor people are the ones using the buses. Mr Chairman, that is not true. We are talking about movement on Uganda’s roads. The biggest percentage – 80 plus per cent of our roads – are not yet saturated. If you drove some 10 kilometres anywhere from here, the roads are not congested. Therefore, you cannot bring that argument. 

Mr Chairman, that is why I still insist that we should get more money from these high-capacity vehicles because they have the money. We know they have it and we must tax it and that is the rule of the world. If you have, they tax; if you do not have, you do not pay.

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Chairman, the point I am trying to raise is to answer what hon. Byandala is saying. If you impose more on the high-capacity vehicles then people will abandon them and go to the lower-capacity vehicles yet you can collect even more from lower-capacity vehicles because they are even many. You are going to collect more. My suggestion is to make you collect more money but at the same time encourage high-capacity vehicles to help the poor. That is what I wanted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can I put the question to hon. Lulume Bayigga’s amendment. I put the question to his amendment to change the provisions in Class O licences as he has proposed in those terms in eight to 19 passengers; 20 to 39 passengers and 40 and above. He has proposed those changes that he would like you to consider. I put the question to the amendment that has been proposed.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 6, as amended

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 6, as amended, stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.)

Title agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Finance Bill, 2015” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 2015

5.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Finance Bill, 2015” be read the third time and do pass. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to this motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED THE FINANCE ACT, 2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister. Well done. This is his maiden Bill – (Laughter). 

Honourable members, we still have five minutes; can we handle the reporting of the other Bills and then we see how we can stop?

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

5.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Minister without Portfolio, Member of Parliament for West Budama North, Member of Parliament for Bubulo East and the Minister for Northern Uganda.  Honourable minister, would you like to speak to your motion?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the Bill’s object is- 
    a) to impose excise duty on the value added services mainly on the incoming calls and money transfer services;
    b) to look at some of the issues regarding soft drinks and alcohol so that we will be able to raise revenue to finance the Budget. 
    c) 
I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this Bill was referred to a committee. Before I propose the question for your debate on the principles of the Bill, I now ask the committee to report and guide us on what to do with this.

5.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule Ssebunya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will start by congratulating my Vice-Chairperson for steering those two Bills and for the House to agree with him.

Mr Speaker, in accordance with Rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, permit me to present the report of the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2015. The Bill was read for the first time on 2 April 2015.

The object of the Bill is to amend the Excise Duty Act, 2014 to:
    1. Increase excise duty on soft cap from Shs 35,000 to Shs 45,000 and hinge lid from Shs 69,000 to Shs 75,000.

    2. Increase excise duty on non-premium beers from 20 per cent to 30 per cent.

    3. Adjust the excise duty on un-denatured spirit from Shs 140,000 to Shs 100,000. Honourable members, this is a corrective measure because last year, we had reduced to Shs 100,000 but it was not effected.

    4. Increase excise duty on wines and ready to drink spirits to 80 per cent.

    5. Increase excise duty on petrol from Shs 950 to Shs 1,000 and on diesel, from 630 to 680 per litre.

    6. Remove excise duty on incoming international calls originating from EAC region; that is in the spirit of the East African Community.

    7. Impose excise duty on motor vehicle lubricants.

    8. Impose excise duty on chewing gums, sweets and chocolates at 10 per cent.

    9. Impose excise duty on furniture of 10 per cent.

Observations

1. Increase excise duty on cigarettes

Clause 2(a) and (b) of the Bill seeks to increase the excise duty on soft cap from Shs 35,000 to Shs 45,000 and hinge lid from Shs 69,000 to Shs 75,000. 

The minister submitted this measure. It is intended to encourage new consumers, reduce consumption for the current users and enhance revenue to the tune of Shs 10,000,000,000. 

The British American Tobacco petitioned the committee to urge Government to curb illicit trade which increases with any slight increase in the rate of tax. 

The committee has in its earlier reports of Excise Tariff Bills decried the increasing case of smuggling in this country. 

The committee therefore notes that Government loses a lot of revenue through smuggling. It is important that Government enhances its measures to controlling smuggling.

2. Increased excise duty on non-premium beers.

Clause 2(c) seeks to increase excise duty as mentioned earlier. The committee observes that 20 per cent rate was introduced in 2002 and 2003 to encourage research and development in the use of maize and sorghum towards production of non-premium beers.

The committee was informed that as a result, 71.7 per cent of the total beer production falls under the non-premium beers which attract a rate of 20 per cent. A proposal to increase the excise duty from 20 to 30 is expected to increase the contribution of beer to tax revenue without necessarily removing the incentives and preference over the premium beers.

The committee further recommends that the rate of beer produced from barley grown and malted in Uganda should be reduced to 30 per cent. This is to also encourage research and development in the use of sorghum and locally grown materials for beer production.

3. Increased Excise Duty on Petrol and Diesel 

Clause 2(f) and (g) seek to increase excise duty on petrol from Shs 950 to Shs 1,000 and on diesel from Shs 630 to Shs 680 per litre. 

The committee was informed that the proposal is expected to generate Shs 62,000,000,000 which has been earmarked for road constructions and maintenance. The committee observes that:

    a. The increment in tax by Shs 50 should ideally not have a significant increase on the pump price given that oil prices are falling at the international level.

    b. However, middlemen usually take advantage of any slight increase in tax to increase pump prices and earn abnormal profits. The committee recommends that there should be a deliberate policy by Government to regulate the sector to prevent excessive increases in fuel pump prices.

4. Excise Duty on Incoming International Calls Originating from the EAC region

Clause 2(h) seeks to remove excise duty on incoming international calls originating from the EAC region. 

The committee notes that the proposal is a result of the decision taken by the EAC Heads of State under the Infrastructural Summit. It was agreed that with effect of January 2015, the excise duty of $0.09 cent per minute imposed on the incoming calls from EAC region be removed to reduce on the cost of doing business in the region.

The committee was informed that the other countries have obliged with the above decision.
However, the committee recommends that Government should put stringent measures to ensure that telecom companies follow suit and reduce the cost of international incoming calls within the EAC region.

5. Excise duty on un-denatured spirits is moving down from 140 per cent to 100 per cent. 

The committee notes that in its report on the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2013, the committee had the opportunity to examine this proposal in detail, having been petitioned by the Uganda Alcohol Industrial Association. The minister also informed the committee that charging 140 per cent on un-denatured spirit, which is a raw material, complicates tax administration.

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation on this proposal and that the proposed rate be revised to 100 per cent or Shs 2,500 per litre or whatever is higher.

The justification is that there is no direct revenue loss arising from the revision because importers who are registered for excise duty are entitled to reimburse when filing returns on their output manufactured from imported un-denatured spirits since the duty on local spirit is 80 per cent.

6. Petition to Revise the Excise Duty on water and other soft drinks

The committee received the petition from the Uganda Water and Juice Manufacturers Association requesting Parliament to:
    1. (a) reduce excise duty rate on bottled water from 10 per cent to five per cent as is the case with Kenya and Tanzania; and
(b) in the long run, re-classify bottled water as a non-excisable good.

    2. The soft drinks industry in Uganda request Parliament to revise the rate on soft drinks from 13 per cent to seven per cent. 

The proposals are geared to increase direct employment, improve on distributions and in particular, the soft drinks industry made a proposal to use the reduced rate to donate medical equipment worth $2,000,000 to Uganda.

The committee examined the proposal and urges the minister to consult the industry and study the entire proposal and make appropriate recommendations to Parliament in the next financial year.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that the Excise Duty (Amendment|) Bill, 2015 be passed with the proposed amendments.  I beg to move.

Also, Mr Speaker, here is attached the minority report from hon. Geoffrey Ekanya and signed only by him. I beg to lay the report on Table and also allow hon. Ekanya to read his minority report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture the minute and the full text of the report of the committee. I now invite the honourable member to read his minority report.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the House has just passed the Finance Bill into Act.  Again, the House is about to pass -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the House is not about to pass anything - (Laughter) - what we wanted to do, honourable -

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the procedural matter -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you could allow me. Hon. Kasule said there was a minority report attached. Is it possible for us to receive the minority opinion or should we not receive it? That is where I was.

MRS OGWAL: I think the minority report can be received and then I can raise the procedural matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the member raise the minority opinion and then we see how to proceed.

6.06
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Geoffrey Ekanya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal is my leader; therefore, I had to sit and respect her. 

I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Mr Speaker, this is a minority report and I would like to save the time of the members to say that I therefore move under Rule 194 that the House considers and adopts this minority report. I dissent from the committee position based on the following:

Government, in the Excise (Amendment) Bill, 2015, proposes to increase excise duty on petrol or quantum motor spirit gasoline from the current rate of Shs 950 to Shs 1,000 and then by substituting (b), this is in the main law, that is gasoline auto motor light amber high speed engine from the current rate of Shs 630 to Shs 680. 

Mr Speaker, although the global price reduced by about 50 per cent, the pump price in Uganda has not significantly reduced. In addition, whereas fuel prices in Kenya and Rwanda have dropped to less a dollar per litre, in Uganda it costs higher.

Increase in tax directly increases pump prices and reduces demand for the road transport. The increase in fuel prices has transmission mechanism to the economy, thereby increasing the cost of transport and the prices of other goods and services.

The fuel suppliers have a tendency of increasing pump price regardless of how much the increment, ultimately increasing the cost of doing business.

As you may be aware, Uganda is not doing very well in ranking in terms of doing business. This will be another inhibiting factor to attracting foreign direct investment.

I therefore, recommend that the proposed increment on excise duty on petrol and diesel be discarded.

In conclusion, I implore you to support the recommendation of discarding this increment so as to reduce the negative effects on the economy and exploitation of the citizens. 
I beg to move.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have now received the report of the committee and the minority report which points out some of the reservations that have been recorded by hon. Ekanya.
I propose the question and the motion is that the Excise Tax (Amendment), Bill be read for the third time. That is the question I propose for your debate and the debate will be on the principles of the Bill. If we are prepared, we could start the debate now.

However, looking at the time, we might not be able to debate this matter now but because I want to see if we could receive another report, then come back tomorrow and debate both reports: the report we have just received and the one that is coming next.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. I would like the House and particularly the Attorney-General and you, Mr Speaker, to clarify at what point we do take the decision of this House as a matter of fact and of legal importance.

I am stating this because last Wednesday, we asked the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come back with a report on the budget. That report has not come yet; it was supposed to have come much earlier. However, more importantly, a decision was made in our earlier discussion on the matter of KCCA and the Lord Mayor and a ruling was made that this issue has become so controversial. It is not only polarising the House and the country and more so the city of Kampala, but it is also a very grievous matter. 

A ruling was made that no issue would be discussed until the issue of the Lord Mayor is resolved through a negotiation. The same House made a ruling that because that ruling was made on that day by the Speaker, the Speaker ruled in his or her personal capacity and not as the Speaker.

I would like to know at what point the ruling of the House is a matter of Parliamentary decision while the Speaker is sitting in the Chair. At what point do we pass a ruling or a decision when the Speaker is actually presiding over the meeting in his/her personal capacity? I am raising a very important matter because right now we do not even have the quorum but decisions are being made. We can be challenged in court. 

We therefore want to know whether when the Speaker is sitting in the Chair whether Speaker or Deputy Speaker - I believe even the Deputy Speaker in that capacity becomes the Speaker. We would like to know at what point the decision of this House is taken as a decision taken by the House. I would like that clarification because it has been bothering me. 

I therefore want the Government, particularly the Attorney-General, to clarify on the matter. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I must say I am not fully conversant with the matters being raised - the issue that there was a ruling made by either the Deputy Speaker or the Speaker and that ruling was again changed. Honourable members, there is a big difference between rulings and communications from each of us as presiding officers. 

A ruling arises from a situation that has come and a request has been made that a Speaker has to take a formal decision on. That one, the decision of the Speaker is a ruling. This is because there is a formal position that guidance has got to be made on by the Speaker concerning the subject; that this is the matter that has been brought to me and I guide the House now as follows and this is my ruling. That is different from a communication from a person sitting at Chair. Those two are not the same. 

If you are referring, and I would like to imagine that is what you are referring to, to the statement I made when I was in the Chair about matters of KCCA coming all the time and stressing me when I am in the Chair because they are governance issues that can be resolved but have not been resolved; it was not a ruling for, it was not called for a ruling and I did not make any ruling. 

This matter has been misinterpreted by the press. I think someone extracted my statement and put it in the press and if you read it both in the Hansard and what was put in the press, which was an extract of the Hansard, you will find that that was not a ruling. That was a communication of distress, dissatisfaction and absolute annoyance by the person seated now in the Chair expressing disgust at the way these matters of KCCA keep coming up. They are governance issues that are legitimate but have not been resolved. 

At that time I said, “Nobody should come to this House, bring another matter of KCCA and expect me, Jacob Oulanyah, to chair it.” The records are clear. I will not chair it because I am stressed by this matter. It was not a ruling, honourable members. Therefore when the Speaker came here and said that was a statement from the Deputy Speaker then speaking, I was not making a ruling. I was expressing a personal frustration and making my communication from the Chair as such. It was clear in the Hansard. 

If that is what you are referring to and you require the Attorney-General’s interpretation, on that matter I am the alpha and omega; I am the authority and I chose the words I used that day carefully and I stand by those words. If this matter should pop up, I will stand by those principles and I will not handle those matters. However, that does not stop the House, which is not yet frustrated by those matters, to continue –(Laughter).  

Please, honourable member, who has now graduated from Imat to Atat which I now would like to communicate to the House; that she graduated immediately upon a sad event that occurred. We had resisted from calling her Atat because the mother was still alive. We cannot have two Atats in one family. Atat means great grandmother or Jjajja. Hon. Cecilia was insisting that I should call her Atat which I strongly objected to. On that day, I gave her the full title because the mother had passed on. She can now legitimately be called Atat.  For those of you who can pronounce it, you are free to now call the hon. Cecilia Atat but that one is not for the House and that is not a ruling –(Laughter).

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I thank you because you have not ruled that I am going to be called Atat. I have now understood the difference.  However, the Hansard is there. On that day, you gave guidance as to how the matter of KCCA should be handled and when you did so, I still insist that I am bothered; were you guiding in your personal capacity as hon. Oulanyah the Deputy Speaker of the Uganda Parliament or were you guiding as the Speaker of the Uganda Parliament? I am still bothered and - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please honourable, let me just clear this once and for all. The communication which I mean and by which I stand is that if those matters of KCCA were not resolved by the time Parliament resumed in February, if anybody brings any matter involving KCCA and expects I, Jacob Oulanyah, to chair, they should forget because I will not chair. That is what it is. 

It is clear that from that point of view that we resumed in February and the matters of KCCA had not yet been resolved. Therefore, I stand by my position that if these matters of KCCA come back again, I will not chair. I will be away somewhere and the Speaker will chair because I will not be willing to do it. The issues of KCCA have stressed me sufficiently. You can even see the recurrence of the - please let us leave it like this. The Speaker will handle these matters of KCCA. 

Honourable members, we do not have too much time. The minutes we have spent, we would have received another report and then left them for debate tomorrow. Can you help me and we move on this? 

On the matter of the Excise Tax (Amendment) Bill, this debate will resume tomorrow. I have already proposed a question for the debate. We will not handle item 5. Can we receive the report on item 6 from the committee and the chairperson and then we shall defer the debate to tomorrow. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 26.1 MILLION EQUIVALENT TO ($40 MILLION) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP, FOR THE FINANCING OF THE REGIONAL PASTORAL LIVELIHOOD RESILIENCE PROJECT (RPLRP)

6.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I move a motion for Parliament to consider a request by Government to borrow SDR 26.1 million equivalent to $40 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group, for the financing of the Regional Pastoral Livelihood Resilience Project.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will recall that this motion was brought to the House and referred to the committee. Is this motion seconded? It is seconded by Minister without Portfolio and the Government Chief Whip. Therefore, your motion is properly before the House. You have spoken to your motion already and this matter was referred to the committee. Can the committee briefly report on the matter and then we can shelve the debate for tomorrow. Please, Chairperson, give us a summary of the report. 

6.24
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Evelyn Kaabule): Mr Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow Special Drawing Rights 26.1 million ($40 million) from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group, for the financing of the Regional Pastoral Livelihood Resilience Project.

The committee undertook a field and inspection visit. The Committee on National Economy considered the request by Government to borrow SDR 26.1 million equivalents to $40 million from the IDA of the World Bank Group, for the financing of the Regional Pastoral Livelihood Resilience Project.

In accordance with Rule 166 (2) (b) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure. I beg to report.
I will skip the methodology and the background. 

Under 4 (a); we linked the project to the country and regional strategies. Of course, all this is in line with the regional strategies that we have. 

The objective of the project is mainly to enhance livelihood resilience of pastoral and agro-pastoral communities in cross-border drought prone areas of selected countries and improve the capacity of the selected countries’ governments to respond promptly and effectively to crisis or emergency.

I will highlight the project beneficiaries. These are pastoral and agro-pastoral communities in Karamoja region and the neighbouring four districts in the Teso sub region mainly; Amuria, Katakwi, Kumi and Bukedea. There is one in the Sebei sub region mainly Kween. These are areas that are prone to drought as well as internal and cross-border conflicts in Uganda. 

The project is expected to directly benefit 42,000 people in Uganda, whose livelihoods mainly rely on pastoral activities including but not limited to livestock keeping, processing and marketing. Women will be specifically targeted, particularly in livelihood development initiatives.

Mr Speaker, we have highlighted project result indicators which will help us in evaluating the performance of this project. We have project components which are mainly five and that is on page 8 of the report: Natural resources management, market access and trade, livelihood support, pastoral risk management, project management and institutional support.  If you have the report, you will see that on annex 2. 

The project cost and financing arrangements are highlighted in table 1 on your iPad.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You could actually go to page 14 where you will now guide the House on what we should do. Observation and recommendations on page 14.

MS KAABULE: Mr Speaker, the loan amount that we are talking about is $40 million. The loan period is 40 years including nine years of grace, the service charge is 0.75 per annum on the withdrawn credit balance and the commitment charge is 0.5 per cent per annum on undisbursed credit balance. Those are the loan terms and conditions.

I will briefly tell you about the project institutional implementation arrangement because this affects the region. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Chairperson, please go to page 14, give us the observations of the committee and what you recommend.

MS KAABULE: Mr Speaker, observation and recommendations:

National approaches to regional pastoral resilience

The committee observed that while a number to building pastoralist resilience exists in the targeted areas of this regional project, these same national approaches have not been sufficient in building pastoralist resilience because they did not integrate the aspect of addressing pastoralist resilience within a cross-border regional context. 

As a result, pastoral communities in the project areas have generally continued to live in isolated remote and undeserved areas and relying on mobility to take advantage of transient availability of water and grazing to take out a fragile livelihood.

The committee recommends that Government should timely build on the opportunities that this regional project will create by ensuring that it closely works together beyond the project period with other countries in the horn of Africa in order to realise effective responses to building pastoralist resilience in the region.

Emphasis should be put on strong coordination on investment in shared natural resources and in sub regional infrastructure network.

The second observation is institutionalization of drought management in the country. The committee noted that risk based approaches to managing drought have not been institutionalized as Government emphasis is targeted more at providing less humanitarian response that is less cost effective than enhancing resilience of communities.

The committee recommends that Government should in the long term put more emphasis on promoting risk management rather than emergency response for all pastoral areas in the country. 

Government should scale up investment in the commercial destocking of animals as an early response measure for pastoralists and a range of specific livelihood interventions, which are necessary in improving the resilience of the pastoralist livelihood.

The third observation is a legal framework that enables pastoral mobility. The committee noted that Uganda is a member of East African Community in which both a customs union and a common market have been established. It is also a member of the Common Markets of the Eastern and Southern Africa where a free trade agreement has been signed.

Currently and despite important land trade barriers affecting it, many of the hoof animals are traded illegally between the countries of East Africa. The authorised but not controlled mobility of pastoral communities with their herds as a coping mechanism to the erratic rainfall, that make the trade in livestock more complicated to regulate.

The committee recommends that Government should fast-track the creation of favourable legal policy and institutional framework that will be efficient and effective in facilitating the controlled mobility of pastoral communities, to make trade in livestock across its borders less complicated and easy to regulate.

About project impact on reducing poverty in the country, we observed that the project investments in Uganda will take place in areas that have historically been under-resourced and where a large proportion of households are poor and vulnerable to drought.

The committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture should ensure efficient and effective implementation of the project by fast-tracking the indicators so that the project resilience activities bring wider development gains and contribution to the country’s GDP growth.

Government should develop a national animal marketing policy to guide the review, ratification and implementation of the regional animal marketing policies and other protocols on livestock. In addition, the national policy should clearly spell out the roles of all stakeholders along the value chain in order to sustain productivity growth momentum that may result from efficient implementation of the project.

The fifth observation is about project implementation arrangements where the project will be implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture in collaboration with other stakeholders who have similar cross-cutting interventions that are related to the project objectives.

However, the reporting mechanism from lower levels upwards is not well-catered for. The committee therefore recommends that Government ensures that there exists a strong inter-ministerial collaboration between the Ministry of Agriculture and the Office of the Prime Minister, the Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Karamoja Affairs and Local Government for smooth implementation of this project.

The clear definition and assignments of roles and responsibilities among the partners at different levels and a close monitoring of services, should be taken seriously. Formulation and implementation of a project communication strategy by the Ministry of Agriculture, aimed at disseminating information about the project objectives to all project beneficiaries should also be urgently fast-tracked. The project implementation process should also emphasise the reporting mechanism from lower levels to the top. 

The sixth observation is about institution environment capacity to implement the environmental and social requirements of the project. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture should ensure the timely recruitment of both an environmental management specialist and a social development specialist to fully address all the environmental and social issues respectively, including indigenous and vulnerability issues of the project.

Project sustainability

While the project will build the capacity of pastoralists and agro-pastoralist communities to maintain investments in their livelihood, public investments can only be maintained if operational funds managing infrastructure is provided after the end of the project.

So, the committee recommends that Government prioritises the implementation of local government structures in the coming budget of Financial Year 2015/2016, to enable local government to recruit the requisite staff at all levels, to ensure sustainability of the agriculture sector activities.

In addition, operational funds for agricultural production grants to local Government should be increased from the current Shs 10,000,000,000 billion to 30,000,000,000 billion over the medium time for this coming Financial Year 2015/16.

The other observation is about effects of climate change on project outcome, where we observe that adverse climate change has increased and will continue to increase the incidence of disease outbreak including livestock and other vector borne diseases in the project areas. This will affect achievements of the intended project objectives.  

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture should scale up its livestock disease surveillance in the project areas, especially in the areas where intensive stock systems prevail. 

Government should strengthen the hydrological and metrological services in the project areas in order to broaden its efforts on livelihood recovery and longer term resilience building in these project areas.

Government should also empower project beneficiary communities to be able to define and harmonise early action frameworks, and interventions to mitigate key climate sensitive infectious diseases. Government should also scale up its support to climate change adaptation and drought disaster resilience in the country.

We observed conflict where we noticed that the root causes of conflict among pastoralists are many and include land tenure systems, ethnic animosities, water and other natural resources scarcity that have all shaped social values and community dispositions in the country.

The committee therefore recommends that Government should devise effective approaches as well as innovative mechanisms to conflict resolution in the project areas. These may include building the capacity of local level institutions and support the activities of women as project beneficiaries and respected peacemakers in these communities recognising their distinct role.

Lastly, pastoral community development
The committee observed that the project focuses almost 100 per cent on pastoralism yet there is a need to create a balance by communities focusing on other viable economic activities. The committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture should, during its implementation create an avenue that will guarantee a gradual change of pastoralists from purely pastoral activities to agro-pastoralism in an effort to create a balance and increase the accrue of economic benefits to the communities.

In conclusion, the committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow Special Drawing Rights 26.1 million, which is equivalent to $40 million from the IDA of the World Bank Group, for the financing of the regional pastoral livelihood resilience project be approved, subject to the recommendations above. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to lay copies on Table?

MS KAABULE: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow $40 million. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that.

MS KAABULE: I beg to lay the brief to Parliament with the resolution attached, the project appraisal document, the agreed minutes of the negotiation and the draft finance agreement. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those documents. Thank you, Madam Chairperson, for doing a good job for this particular sector, which seems to be wanting. Honourable members, I now propose the motion for your debate. The motion is on the request by Government to borrow SDR 26.1 million, equivalent to $40 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group, for the financing of the original Pastoral Livelihood Resilience Project. That is the motion for your debate, I propose and debate starts now.

6.41
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee and I would like to beg colleagues that we need to amend our rules. The World Bank has changed. Normally when the project is at inception, the report is made public and in Parliament, we have created a link called Development Cooperation, where we post this information for members to make their input.

This information came to Parliament, it was posted. This project is for the horn of Africa. As we speak, it is only Uganda that has not approved it. This is part of the non-performing loan. I really do not want to debate a lot, I just would like to beg members that subject to the recommendations of the committee, you put the question and we approve the loan. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if that be the wish of the committee, I put the question to this motion so that we can move with some other business, since we do not have much time.

Honourable members, I put the question that the request by Government to borrow SDR 26.1 million, equivalent to $40 million, from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group, for the financing of the Regional Pastoralist Livelihood Resilience Project be approved. That is the motion that I now put for you for your decision.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion approved.)

Thank you very much. Congratulations, Chairperson and your team for this work and the Shadow Minister of Finance for guiding us on this important matter. This House is adjourned until tomorrow Wednesday, 13 May 2015 at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.42 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 13 May 2015 at 2.00 p.m.) 

