Tuesday, 16 May1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice Chairman, Mr George C. Adyebo, in the Chair.)

(The Council was called to order.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

MOTION

(Debate Continued.)

Item No.2

MR WANENDEYA (Budadiri County, Mbale):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for giving me an opportunity to contribute to this Bill.  Mr Chairman, this is an important Bill in the History of our country.

First and foremost, I want thank the Press for having or members of the press in general -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order.  Is it in order, Mr Chairman, for this House to proceed when we are only 41 instead of 90 which makes a quorum?  Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed please.

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman again.  As I was saying, I want to thank the Members of the Press in general for the good job they have done since NRM came to power. I also take this opportunity of thanking our government to allow the freedom of press since 1986.  The press has been able to right and publish anything they wanted.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for this House to proceed when we do not have a quorum in this House?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Adonia Tiberondwa, last week, you were not here and I had to adjourn the Council for 15 minutes in order to wait for hon. Members and hon. Members will agree with me that the whole country is concerned about what we are doing here.  This is a very important House which is the highest organ of legislation in the country and most of you have been elected and you have been promising 18 million Ugandans, that once you are here, you will make sure that you do the needful.  Because you are not here free of charge; government is making sure you are maintained within the law established and we expect hon. Members of the House at least to needful, to ensure that there is a quorum realised, I do not need even to plead with you.  It is your obligation; it is the right of the Ugandans to discharge service from you without even reminding you.  I was ashamed last week to come here only be made out of order to preside over this same august House which did not realise a quorum.  But we are not going to proceed according to that and I may be tempted to come with new regulations that Members who are not going to attend will not be paid and I think you will not rule me out of order; because I can also tolerate to a limit and I am putting it upon you that I will proceed to ensure that business of the government, the business of the House it at least be settled and if hon. Members are not ready, then I may have to adjourn the House sine die.  That is also another option from the Chair.  

So, much as you are raising a point of order, you should also tolerate the Chair, just as the Chair is tolerating you.  But we must harmonise.  So, in this respect, I do agree now that I think there is a quorum now.  So, may I ask my brother, hon. Dr Adonia Tiberondwa that the House now, I think is in order, because I think the quorum has been realised.  But take note of what I have said. (Applause)  Please hon. Wanendeya, could you proceed?

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for the decision you have handed down.  It seems since you came this way to Chair these meetings; you could have passed in the East, where in the Bible, wise men come from, when they came to donate gifts to the Lords Jesus when he was born; for your decision in that matter is a wise one, for the sake of the country to move.  Mr Chairman, I was paying glowing tribute to the press, for the good job they have done and also to our government to have given freedom of the press to the country.

Having paid tribute to the Press, I want also to thank the Members of the Committee headed by the Reverend, who again got another passing to be ordained as a Clergy I had brought a dog-collar for hon. Mayengo, because he was not given the dog-caller last time when he said he had been ordained as Secretary to the Committee or somebody who is taking roll call for the Committee.

Having said that, I want members of the Press to know that sense of justice is badly needed in our country, if we are ever going o get this country to have peace rather than a matter of writing people and stories which may not have head and tail but just for the sake of malicing an individual for whatever motive heaven knows, that the members of the public generally say, could they have been bribed in order to write some of those stories?  

I want members of the press to know that they themselves could also be victims and therefore, it is important that they have sense of justice by crosschecking any information which may come into their hands so that when they publish, they know that they are publishing and they have given the other person the opportunity.  Without doing that, it is one of those problems which have been a destabilising factor in our country so that we knock each other for no good reason.  

You find that if people have got sense of justice they will extend to other people but if they do not have it, then they may not extend it because they have nothing to do.  It is in the old philosophy, the days of whereby what you would wish to do unto others is what you should do to yourself.  But if you do not have that sense of justice for yourself, you cannot extend it to other people.  So, I want members of the press to know that unless they right stories which are educative to our country, to our people, we may never get to stabilise our country and to have genuine peace.  

I want the Members of the press and the public in general to know that there are five pillars of any state.  You know of traditionally three pillars of state that is legislature, the executive, and judiciary, but the press is another pillar in any society and the fifth pillar in any given society which is progressive is democracy.  

So, if press rights, they have got to address themselves to these pillars could put any given country in a proper development process.  Without that, we are just rubbing shoulders with each other and yet some members of the press are Christians and when it comes to going to the Church or to the Mosque, they go there, but after smearing others.  

Therefore, the press should have some kind of morals in order to do a good job which is development, which is peace creating and therefore, there must be Rules.  But some members of our press think that there is - they think there are no rules at all.  Why do they have rules in developed countries like the Scandinavians, nearly every where they have rules to protect the public, to protect people, so that whatever you do is protect rather just having diarrhoea of the pen and writing whatever you want to write.  

So, I want members of the press to be aware of that and I would in fact, say, if you want to build a good country, we should have some kind of censorship of films; because some of our people especially the young generation when they see fighting, killings, on some of these American films, killing, they may copy some of the habits and they have copied some of them.  So, censorship is not bad, but as long as it is with national interest is good character building, and will create peace, that is what the press should do.  

I want Members to balance their stories, and how come later on - but I have made three amendments to the Bill, which would get religious leaders an under Section 13, (ii) f, to be members of the press council.  The point over here is that, the Catholic Church has got a press, the Protestant Church or Church of Uganda has got the press and also the muslims have got some papers.  So, in order to impart morals to our members of the society to the press, the Shariat, they should be represented, even Islam, they should be represented on the press councils with the hope that they will be able to guide some of the members of the press, who write things just for the sake of punishing other peoples names.  

In addition to the rules should be printed in the Bill, I have added three more - journalists shall endeavour to cross check information before publishing stories; especially those concerning individuals.  

I say this because at one time, they wrote about one of the members of Parliament who was paralysed.  He did not choose to be paralysed, but here, somebody is writing something - what do you want him to do?  What he cure that paralysis on his own?  No.

MR KALULE SENGO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, what the hon. Member is talking about provided for in the First Schedule which is on page 22 of the - as amended.  It is under Item 180, no Journalist shall be disseminate information and allegations affecting the good standing of the Government, an individual, or organisation without having thoroughly investigated the details of the allegations as to its truth.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  The point is that hon. Sengo, who is my neighbour here should know that I cross-checked that information on page 22 before I put in the amendment to be decided on by this House.  

I am also saying that journalists shall publish stories which impart lessons to the public and to good morals and economic development.  The third amendment would be, no journalist shall publish stories that degrade human dignity.  As I was saying, you can right about somebody, you say look, Ssengo Kalule has got his mouth twisted, but he did not choose his mouth to be twisted, it could have been a disease or it -(Interruption)

MR KALULE SSENGO:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member to refer to my mouth as being twisted where in fact, my mouth is not at all twisted? (Laughter)

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, my brother is mistaking me, but I meant that it could be anybody, not necessarily him.  So, he should take offence of this - the fact that I mentioned his name.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, hon. William Wanendeya, could you wind up because your amendment will be dealt with at a later stage.  Do not delay too much on the amendment.

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would in the final analysis appeal to members to really consider the amendments I have put forward, I have carefully thought about them, and it is a way of making sure that our journalists can write stories which are nation-building and create peace i our country.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR TIVU (Youth Representative, Northern Region):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I want to comment on this very important Bill on two accounts.  In the first place, I want to comment on the importance of mass media and the rural peasantry and then secondly, I will want to talk briefly on - the role of the Ministry of Information vis-a-vis the press.

The significance of the peasantry in any economy like ours is very important.  We all know that in Uganda, we depend heavily on agriculture, which is a product of the peasant society.  We also know that the peasants are faced with certain problems which need the attention of everybody including the press.  At times, in the peasantry, a lot of things happen, and information I believe is very important.  Information and communication as an entity for development cannot be escaped in human society.  

As I said, a lot of things happen in the rural peasantry and it seems our press go to the peasantry only to collect information which is, you know, not developmental, I mean at times when somebody beats his wife or people are drinking ‘marwa,’ that kind of thing!  

So, I would wish to encourage a kind of press that extends developmental ideas from one peasantry area to another -(Applause)- So that the ordinary man is able to know that the Kisoro people who are living in a mountainous area which is a very difficult area, has served the area for development and therefore, what should the Karimojong do in order to develop themselves?  That kind of exchange of ideas is very important; other than talking about drinking marwa, he beat his wife.

It is also important to know that in our economy and it used to happen in the 1960s; when ideas were being exchanged by government in form of collecting, using YVs and so on; and people used to learn a lot.  You will find there were demonstrations and so on.  But of today, you realise that we just believe under the guise of privatisation, that all information must flow as the market demand.  But at times, this is an awkward situation because, if the facilities to enable this information is not there, it makes it very difficult.  What am I saying?  I am saying, our press must be encouraged and assisted to move first in places of development; so as to take ideas to places where development is not there; because I believe communication is an insect of development.  

Briefly on the Ministry of Information, I do not know how I can term it, but -(Interruption)  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order please, proceed.

MR TIVU:  Mr Chairman, I think every year, we make budgetary proposals here and in our budgetary proposals for the last three years, I have been looking at certain things which have been re-occurring in the budget and have never taken off and then, it makes me think that at times either government is not serious with the Ministry of Information or the Ministry of Information is not serious; because this one is manifested, first of all, in the facility used by the Ministry of Information.  I feel the kind of modernisation we are now - the world is now in, we also have as a country, to modernise and to improve on our communication system if you watch the T.V. at times some things happen and it seems the government is not assisting the Ministry of Information enough and therefore, the work is a bit difficult for that Ministry.  Therefore, I believe it will be of paramount importance if we believe communication is very important to assist that Ministry.  

I also want to say how the Ministry implements its programmes for three consecutive financial years, the Ministry comes and tells us of a certain project and the thing reappear.  I want to be parochial a bit. On three accounts, the Minister has been saying the communication system in West Nile will be improved and when you go to the RC.V Office in Arua, you will find letters and letters being written that facilities will be put.  When His Excellency the President went there, some people came that we were going to fix this.  The other year when the then Vice President, Kisekka went, some officials slept there and this year when they said Her Excellency was going, some officials rushed there, that they were going to facilitate - you know, this kind of lying in government is very terrible and it makes people change attitude towards the government.  How long is it going to take to establish the FM Radio Station in West Nile?

MR ETYANG:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I have been listening very patiently to the submissions made by the hon. Mark Tivu and I was wondering whether to come and say what is on the Floor is a Bill on the freedom of the press rather than the Budgetary estimates of the Ministry.  Now, that he is going on to pinpoint what he calls the short-comings for the lies, repeatedly brought by the Ministry with regard to the performance of the FM Station in Arua, I would like to offer him the following information.  That in regard to Arua, it has been really the local leaders there that have misinterpreted the programmes of the Ministry on the basis of their political convenience or something like that.  I have never stood up in this House and made any form - my Ministry otherwise could not afford in budget terms. 

What I have assured the Members of the Sectoral Committee concerned, is that, the raid Radio transmission in respect of remote stations not only Arua but also Fort Portal, Kotido, Kapchorwa, and all these power plant stations, these are being taken care of on the basis of the stations that are available.  

Right now, I have already indicated elsewhere and Members are entitled to know and I would like to confirm here that we are in a very serious advanced stage of negotiating with a foreign company with regard to the alternative of terrestrial transmission which is a problem behind radio transmission, that is to say, the alternative in satellite communication.  This appears to have been a very welcome development and I want to assure the Member, without in fact, diverting the House from discussing estimates of the Ministry of Information from the Bill that is on the Floor, that if you could - he could rest his case there we can do about Arua beyond what government has in store on the basis of the priorities that are drawn on the budget.  Thank you.

MR TIVU:  Mr Minister and hon. Members, are you aware that I was the Secretary for Finance and I sued at times to sit on the chair, when he the Chairman was not there and at times the Minister came to Arua when in fact, I was on the chair that day and I remember very well what he said, we went up to Gilgil.

MR ASIKU DRATROTRU:  Point of information.  I want to back the Speaker very strongly that the statement he has made is a correct statement.  I am really being frustrated after been in this House six times, after high ranking people from here including the present Chairman of the National Assembly right now, moving together in Gilgil and moving together at Ombaku assuring us that the Ministry of Information would do something and in my presence, saying that it is local to build a house where activity will be taken -immediately.  After two years, somebody comes here and tells us no commitment has been made by government; he is actually a disturbance to the people of Arua and as estimates have not been there for the last five or six years for Arua, that we take it that Arua is not being considered for your information.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  I think the hon. Members who may be affected by the inducive information, I would appeal to you that we are about in fact, we are left with about one month to debate the next budget.  I think that is the time you will really wait for the Minister to respond to it.  As for now, hon. Members, let us restrict ourselves on the Mass Media Bill, please.  Could you wind up?

MR TIVU:  To wind up, Mr Chairman, I think the Bill before us is the Mass Media Bill and when we talk of Mass Media, we must talk of systems of communication and that is why I was addressing myself to that issue.  It is not because I narrowly misunderstood the Bill; because we must facilitate to enable the pressmen and also to enable the wanainchi to receive the idea and the government policy.  That is why I was addressing myself to that.  

I do not want government to fail, but I must point a mistake so that the government corrects the mistake - so that people vote in the government when elections come. (Applause)  

To crown it all, I respect our press, and I hope government is going to take the responsibility to providing infrastructure to enable the market forces to work so that the pressmen can work effectively.  Thank you.

MR KARUSOKE (Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I support this Bill and in supporting this Bill, I would like to start by thanking the committee that has worked so hard and so well to synchronise the various provisions of other Bills to make one which is so good and so less task giving.  I thank the Committee. 

When we talk of the freedom of the press in Uganda, we cannot avoid thanking the NRM Government; because in the history of this country, it is the NRM Government that has ushered in the real freedom of the press, where the press has tickled government and government has not responded harshly.  I remember one day, one of the Papers wrote about the President of this country being involved in a very funny thing, and we were all alarmed, and a week later, the same Paper apologised that they had made a mistake.  Imagine that kind of mistake.  You write about a Head of State wrongly without, you know, and later on government says, okay, go ahead.  This is I think very fundamental, government really deserves commendation for this.  

I would also like to thank the press because for the first time in the history of this country, given the freedom the press has really come out in full blast to inform this public about what is happening in this country without any fear or favour.  

However, I must point out that, freedom of the press, the freedom for one to express himself is a two-way traffic, is a two-way system.  For example, the press should not keep on talking about leaders of this country only.  That is not the only information Ugandans need to know.  We need to know about science which has nothing to do with leadership - political leadership.  We need to know about the economy, the history of certain things.  We need to know a lot of things.  From page one to the last page, we are only talking about leaders and day in and day out.  There are certain people in Uganda who do not want to read about leaders.  But they do read about other things like coffee growing and selling in Bundibugyo for example.  They want to read about the bad roads in Bundibugyo.  

In giving the press the freedom, the press must reciprocate by revealing the information correctly.  The people of Uganda are entitled to correct information from the press.  They have a right to get correct information from the press much as the press has the right to freedom of the press.  In doing this, the press is giving a service to the people.  It is the people who give them freedom and in return they expect the press to give them correct information about facts.  

I sometimes get disturbed when I read about certain stories in Papers and the next day there is an apology disowning the whole thing that it was wrong.  One wonders why do we hurry to print that story before we get facts?  What is the hurry for?  If it is so be News, let it be News but not to disown it.

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that here you would have sometimes like it is printed here ‘Wanendeya fights with court Brokers’, then when they apologise, they write in small article somewhere to hide that it was not correct and sometimes they even make it smaller like this for their own intentions.  

I thank the hon. Member for that information.  The press is one of those functions of democracy in any society.  You cannot talk of democracy minus a free press and if the press has a duty to inform the Members of the public correctly, it is also equally important that those about whom the press the talks especially those of us in the positions of leadership must have the stamina to tolerate the press.  We must have the stamina to tolerate the press more especially where the information they have given about us is more correct than wrong.  I know sometimes it is very difficult for the human being to admit a mistake.  We always think we are correct and think we are on the right truck and never want to be corrected.  

I have another quarrel about the press.  Those of us who come from the rural areas and more especially the disadvantaged areas, have a very strong feeling against the press’s habit and method of keeping its operations within the vicinity, Jinja, Entebbe and the rest.  Uganda means mountains, valleys, hills and plains and so on.  Uganda means you cross rivers and climb mountains and run down valleys and penetrate forests because there are people living there.  You get a lot of very virgin information from these rural areas.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that most of these press corporations are business enterprises and I think their most important target is profit.  Most of the target groups are in the urban areas especially here in Kampala.  If you gave information about Bundibugyo, Isingiro, sometimes it is not selling because very few people from Bundibugyo, Isingiro will read that.  

So, I think we should appreciate the little the press has contributed and may be try to encourage them and if we think it is a government policy to make sure that all the areas are covered, then we subsidize some of these papers so that they can talk about the Bundibugyo. 

MR KARUSOKE: Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member who has given the useless information.  It is useless in the sense that if a journalist goes and reports about Bundibugyo, it is not that people from Bundibugyo to read about it.  It is Ugandans to read about Bundibugyo.  So that information is misleading and it is definitely vague.  The proprietors of Newspapers - I was reading through a Bill again this morning and I felt may be we should add something about proprietors qualifications.  Proprietors must have some sound financial ability to run a newspaper and part of this ability should be that that organisation should facilitate its journalists to move, eat and the rest of it.  These journalists are poorly remunerated.  They lack facilities; they are on the foot walking.  They are really very helpless.  

I am very aware of the fact that any newspapers must operate commercially.  But before you think of making money, you must think of planting the pillars of your profession so firm that the money will begin to generate by itself.  If a Newspaper works along professional lines properly, it will definitely make money.  So, we must know where to begin.  We must begin from the point of professionalism before we think of making money.  

Finally, I would like to say that the mother ministry which is Ministry of Information is a very vital instrument of development in this country.  I do not think everybody has talked about that.  Unfortunately, the Ministry of information is one of those least facilities by this House.  The Ministry of Information is least funded.  It does not have machines, recorders and the rest.  I think the Minister of Information also has no proper retrained personnel, I sometimes wonder when I hear announcements those with O’ Level can apply to become news readers.  Why?  Can they not go through Public Service system of appointments?  Why do we announce on that radio that those who want to read News should apply?  Who are they?

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, for the information of the Member holding the Floor, News reading in the Ministry is not an established post.  Anybody who can be is recruited strictly on the basis; in other words, you may be even a civil servant on your own or even a Member of Parliament.  In addition if we find that you are suitable, we employ you strictly for purposes of reading news only.  Thank you.

MR KARUSOKE:  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for that information.  But I think we should also set up standards for newsreaders so that we do not only depend on O’ level dropouts.  But I will also say I do not see why these journalists cannot read news and announcements.  If someone is working for New Vision, I do not see why he should not walk into Radio Uganda and read news.  Why do we have to depend on school dropouts? I do not see the logic.  Mr Chairman, with these remarks, I thank you and support the Bill.  Thank you.

MR KAZOORA JOHN (Nominated): Mr Chairman, I would like to clarify not the fact that you can allow the debate to continue as you like.  But I thought we were now discussing the report of the Select Committee and not opening general debate on the Mass Media Bill, so that we should really be commenting only on the report.  So, I would like clarification on this.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Kazoora and hon. Members, you remember last week when we adjourned, we had had a report from the Chairman of the Select Committee who in their wisdom had broken their schedule of work and assigned to different Members of the Committee.  I also allowed some Members to contribute to the report and now we are continuing and we shall in a very short time call the Chairman to wind up the debate.  But if there are some Members who may be heading their amendments and would like to make proposals so that we proceed according to Section 66 of our Rule of Procedure, then we shall proceed to the Committee Stage and handle the amendments.

MR KAZOORA:  Mr Chairman, thank you for your enlightenment because voted by Rule 59 of the interim rules of this House.  Mr Chairman, with your indulgence, I would like to proceed by congratulating the Minister for having introduced this timely Bill.  I also wish to say and proclaim to this House that we need the press to keep the public informed; we need the press for right to know what is going on in the country today.  But we need a responsible press.  The press that publishes truth not falseworthy.  The press that informs the public of what is going on.  I do not think that there is a single person in this House or in this country who really does not rejoice having the press.  

Since I was a student some years ago in U.K. I have been a friend of the press.  I used to write letters in Uganda August, when I came back, I ended up being appointed to assist on the Board of Uganda August.  So, I really can say that since the publications of the right of man, I cannot think of anything that has brought fulfillments, knowledge and satisfaction than I know what is going on around me. 

Mr Chairman, since you have clarified that one time we actually discussed the Bill, the Committee Report, if I may with your indulgence refer to Rules so that there can be no misunderstanding and guilty, Rule 59.  ‘Any Committee to which a Bill is committed shall not discuss the principles of the Bill’.  This demand is not made.  So, if anyone says that the report of the Select committee can be read the matter will end there, I will request those that they better read the Rules because they are self-explanatory.  Law one - no any other area can usurp the powers given to this House.  Whatever is discussed in this House is what becomes part of the Bill what becomes ultimately the act of Parliament.  

I would like to show the House that the amendment which I submitted and requested to be distributed they are not contentious.  They are not in any way favouring the government or individuals alone.  This is for all of us.  Now to start off with one example, if my amendment was not permitted -(Interruption)

CAPT. GASATURA:  Hon. Kazoora who is obviously a senior lawyer, we sought from him as Committee as to his complaint on this and he opted not to give us information there.  So, he did not give us adequate opportunity to research what he was saying.  However, the clarification I am seeking from the information I have received from other lawyers, I believe as distinguished as he is, that such suits are done under common law and therefore, I will seek clarification from him as to whether if the Newspaper and Publication Act is repealed because most of the articles are taken care of in the Bill unless, he can show us the specific one that he has not taken care of, I want to know from him, Mr Chairman, whether it is right under the common law to sue the publisher.  Thank you.

MR KAZOORA:  Thank you.  Mr Chairman, first of all, I refused to attend the Committee.   I sent the letter to the Chairman to say that I have been advised by the Clerk to propose this Amendment here.  In any event, for me this is the place where these issues should be discussed thoroughly and accepted.  As I had indicated in the Bill and ruled in the committee, we do not discuss principles of the Bill hon. Member. It is only the details.  So that disposes off part of his clarification.  

The second point again I would have expected the hon. Member to read the Act.  In the Bill, there is hardly when he has not, and I did actually go along with the proposed amendments and additions and I would like to save time addressing the House on merits of my amendments rather than on Youth; hon. Members you received the Bill.  I have sent it to the Clerk such that he can run it around the Members of the House.  When the documents come, you will see that what the hon. Member is saying is not covered.  

So, the answer to the second part of your inquiry, Mr Chairman, is that if you repeal this Act, you will have no protection whatsoever, according to the proposed to sue the publisher of printer.  so, that is why I say, if the Act is in place, if we are trying to hide up the House, what remains was to recognise the media and journalists.  

I start off by saying delete Section 3 because it contradicts section 4.  I do not have to look at the Act because he has to know whether it makes sense or not.  And if it makes sense, then he will agree with me.  If it does not, he will not.  Then I go on Section 4(b) - delete the word appearing on 92 between the words ‘ensingisi’ and ‘individuals.’  Some are just grammatical and others are in English.  Again this is merely, if someone is a convicted criminal, should he be allowed to practice as a journalist?  Now, that again, is a point I am making and I invite comments from you hon. Members as to what you think.  

Now, Section 10 says, add the following words to the last sentence and it reads - the other section states; qualification academically plus experience.  Section 11 says; Section 32, delete the words appearing between the words renewable in the second line and substitute it with shall be therefore.  I think this is clear English, because he says, it is renewable; that is present, but we are talking about the future.  So, it shall be renewed.  Section 33 says, and the new sub-section to read this.  Add new sub-section to read this; he is not willing to declare on Oath, to adhere to, and to abide by the profession code of ethics and practice as set out in Schedule 1.  In law, when you are legislating, you must always find out what you are trying to do; (i) is there mischief; is there something wrong which you want to put right?  Then once you discover that, then you say, how do I remove this mischief?  You know the professional code of conduct, unless I have overlooked the section, it is more or less a binding requirement, but there is no penalty and I assume that is perhaps - that was intended because if there is a professional body to impose penal - disciplinary measures there should be no penal sanctions such imprisonment - more serious matters.  But I thought that we could tide up this clearly by adding on that since someone cannot go to jail for - without abiding by the terms of the code, he must have signed a declaration to say; and the declaration are read to you; Mr Chairman and hon. Members, it is a short one.  It says, ‘I so and so, P.O. Box so and so, with name and particulars and the enrolment have been entered in the register of journalists in Uganda and we qualify that we are entitled to it to be issued with a -(Inaudible)- certificate do solemnly sincerely declare that I am willing to abide to and shall adhere to and to abide by the professional code of ethics and practice set out in the 1st Schedule of this Act and I make this solemn declaration consciously believing it to be true.’ 

So, there is a moral obligation having signed this declaration, but there is also a legal declaration which - legal penalty which but which does not impose signing or being committed to prison.  

The Section 36, Mr Chairman and hon. Members, 36 says, the amendment add the following sentence and the end of sub-section 3.  The Committee shall invite the complaint to be present and to address it during the hearing.  

Now, Mr Chairman, if you allow me and I refer to the Section, the reason why I would like this to be included is that, there is a lacuna - is that there is a missing link there, section 36.  It says this, sub-section 3; it says add the following sentence at the end of sub-section 3.  ‘The Committee shall invite the complainant to be present and address it during the hearing.’  What is in the Bill that is missing if I understand it, a petition is sent - of a complainant is sent, then it is sent to the journalists, and then the Judge comes in, then and then the complainant is not there.  Well, how can you do justice in that case?  And I have also added on another clause, because the journalists earn their livelihood by writing.  

Now, if I am not advancing the Section, because I would like also the journalists to be protected because it is not good enough where the Act says that the petition shall be adjudicated upon summarily.  Now, what happens, a complainant has been made against someone, against a journalist and then he is informed that he wrote something obnoxious on others, but when he answers, his case is not deferred in open court but is actually adjucated upon summarily.  So, I thought we should put that right, that both the complainant and the journalist should be present, they have an open court and then a judgement or ruling is given openly and then they can appeal to a higher court.  So, there, you can see, I am not really being - I am not showing any partiality.  I am simply saying, let everyone be equally treated under this Act.

Section 38, Mr Chairman and hon. Members, says this - I think I have covered that point because it says, the complainant between the word hearing the - to read; ‘after hearing the complainant and the journalists to whom the complainant, then shall decide.’

Section 39 says, in open court, again the Act of the Bill omits that, not deliberately but perhaps they did not realise, because there you have to catch in courts to see how these referrements are - because if it is done in Chambers, the public are not allowed in.  So you could have a case, a serious case again a distinguished journalists, heard in camera a decision made about him, he loses his practising certificate, he is out of the job, but public does not know the merits of the complaint.  

Then, Section 39, sub-section 2, that is why I said, the words in open court between by judge, has to read; having decided upon in an open court, by a judge, this sub-section deals with the livelihood of journalists to be decided their appeals summarily would be unfair and contrary to natural justice.  Section 39, sub-section 2 says, delete the word ‘summarily’ wherever it appears.

Section 44, you remember, Mr Chairman and hon. Members, hon. Kanyomozi raised the point, he said, well, how come that if someone in Uganda receives a matter or documents sent from abroad, to him, may be unknowingly, he can actually be brought under this Act.  Well, I thought that I could help here by again balancing up the rights of the against whom the State may want to impose a penalty and the rule of law.  So, I have provided an amendment which goes like this.  Delete the words afterwards after the summary hearing, disappears in that sub-section.  

Section 44 says this, and a new sub-section stating this - it shall be defence for a charge under this Section, if it is proved that:

(a)	The determination was innocent,

(b)	Provided that prior to dissemination such measures, to verify the origin and contents of published material were taken by the recipients.

(c)	That the matter published outside Uganda was not in breach of Uganda Law.

Now, where hon. Kanyomozi perhaps misconstrued reception -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, with due respect to the Speaker, would it not be appropriate for the Speaker to move the Amendment during Committee Stage?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  That is what I was saying. (Laughter)

MR KAZOORA:  Mr Chairman, I really did not understand what is happening.  This is a Committee Stage - it is in Second Reading.  This is a debate. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  As I did say at the beginning, hon. John Kazoora, you still have time to propose your amendment at a later stage.  Could you just give us a summary and then wind up?

MR KAZOORA:  Yes, I am much obliged, Mr Chairman.  I am most grateful because hon. Pinto was confusing me. (Laughter)  I am about to finish, Mr Chairman and if hon. Pinto allowed me a few minutes, he would have seen that I have finished.  But I would go back to the Section and move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  No, what we are saying hon. Kazoora, please, just summarise, you will come at a later stage and present your amendment.

MR KAZOORA:  So, Section 44, as I said, dissemination is the offence, it is not the receiving of the document.  So, if you receive documents and you do not disseminate them, nothing will happen to you.  That is what the Bill is proposing.

MR KANYOMOOZI:  Point of information.  When you receive the information, it is in a sealed envelope say, you would not have seen the contents and it is unsolicited information which comes to you.  In addition, I have raised a case of Sanyu Television or the CTV, they are screening on our Television CNN and they did not know what CNN is going to do.  The thing comes on your Television, but it has passed Sanyu Television.  Now, are you going to say, Sanyu Television should be prosecuted for that matter or are you going to say, CTV, should be prosecuted because they do not know, they have no control over the air waves; they cannot even edit it?

MR ETYANG:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, may I offer the following clarification to the hon. Kanyomozi with regard to electro media?  First of all, I take it that the House is generally agreeable to the splitting of the Bill, so that this particular matter will be felt at length when I table the proposed Electronic Media Act or Bill.  However, with regard to CTV and Sanyu, they are entirely liable and accountable for any matter that they published both companies are locally incorporated and therefore, they take full liability on what they publish and there is a mechanism by which they can do that and if the hon. Member would like, I am inviting him to come over and see for himself.  Thank you.

MR KAZOORA:  Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, could you summarise hon. John Kazoora?

MR KAZOORA:  If I would only comment, Mr Chairman, on Section 46.  It requests changing words practice and adding on such ethical code, 42 again adding on practice on ethical codes 48, that it should be gazetted in the Uganda Gazette because they mentioned that if it is published at least twice in the well read Newspapers.  But we have a government document, we have a government gazette, that is what sanctions matters which originate from the government.  So, I suggest that we should include the Uganda Gazette in addition to the two well know Newspapers.

Finally, Section 51, sub-section (c).  Again it is merely an omission; there is word - this is omitted between one paragraph and another.  I am most grateful to you for your indulgence and also hon. Members.  The Schedule is self-explanatory and I would like to say that I obtained all the information in this Schedule from the Code of Practice which is now part of the press.  It was the press which compiled all these and you can read them, they are self-explanatory.  So, I have in fact, by - research managed to get what is pertaining in a highly developed country, where there is a highly developed press and media, the protection which they enjoy in U.K. who would be enjoyed by our citizens here if the Bill passes with this addition.  I must thank, Mr Chairman.  I support the Bill.

CAPT. GASATURA KAINGANA (Rushenyi County, Ntungamo):  Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I wish to thank all the Members of the august House for the warm reception and friendly criticism presented on the Mass Media Bill 1995. Mr Chairman, I just rise to answer a few questions being one of the members of the Committee before we proceed.  There were several questions raised and one of the questions - I will not go through them one by one, but one of the questions was why we had to create of NIJU rather than work with UJA and several of my Colleagues have ably addressed that but suffice to say that even when I had the opportunity to meet the President of the UJA and several other journalists, one on one; they realised the need for UJA, to go by majority, who do not have degrees in the profession of journalism, we agreed that still at Makerere, the professors are in the minority, but they are the ones who know and that is why we chose and agreed among ourselves and even the journalists we have talked to, that to set standards, standards must be set by those who have the knowledge and the only - a yard stick we could come up with, was a minimum of a University Degree plus a qualification in journalism or Mass communication.

We do realise that one of the principles in this Bill is to ensure freedom of the press.  As such, we have moved away -Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Point of clarification.  The hon. Member on the Floor has told the House that, in their Committee, they seem to have agreed with the journalists that the minimum qualifications should be - the minimum qualification for a journalist should be a degree holder.  Since he is a member of the Committee, I would like him to clarify to me and the House that if this Bill was to come into force with that provisions, what would happen to the hundreds of the good journalists who are there today and who have no degrees; and are they going to seek foreign aid and bring foreign journalists or what will happen?  Thank you.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, i will and indeed I was going to come to that - to respond to the issue of what happens to the hundreds of journalists, able, competent journalists that have served this nation through think and thin, who do not or may not possess a University Degree.

The issue - first of all, let me clarify NIJU.  National Institute of Journalists of Uganda is the body to set standards.  Just like professors, and again, if I may quote my talk with the President of UJA, who told me she did society, with the grass root than her own professor.  But the professor sets the standards.  Now, if you permit me, the NIJU sets - the Member asked a question and he is trying to answer it himself it seems, but if he permits me to respond, NIJU, the membership - the full membership, there are three categories, full member, associate member and honorary member.  The full member is that one defined as holding that qualification, a degree in journalism, mass communication or any degree plus a qualification and one year of operation.  Now, these members in their General Assembly would vote for other individual groups or organisations to belong to NIJU as associate members.  Therefore, they would have the power or the capacity under this Bill instead becomes law, to vote for these other whether diploma certificate, S.4 or even as we said, an oral journalist, some grandmother who speaks orally and somebody records and regularly sends to some Newspapers.  This decision will not be taken by the Committee of this House, but by the registered body, that is NIJU and once these diploma fellows are registered after being voted as associate members, registered as such in NIJU, now they can have their practicing certificate and continue to operate.

MR NTIMBA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I want to seek clarification from hon. Member holding the Floor and my question is; if a person does not hold a University Degree and belongs to that majority of journalists who have not had the opportunity to go to the University, if such people do not have access to membership of NIJU, how will they be able to pleas for the interests of non-degree holder journalists?

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, I want to refer Members again to Section 20 - membership of the institute - full membership associates and honorary.  The person eligible for full membership is thereby given and in sub-section 3, the general assembly may set qualifications for associate members, for associate members of the institute or may provide that specified class of members of the institute.  This is where our friends who have not and I want to call it, not yet had opportunity to get a university degree are - may fall; under associate membership and here, they can continue to operate the way they have however.  Now, there is a target set for these members to acquire degrees with more advertising for yet another university; there is ample opportunity for such members to go back for study and even their own organisations possibly to sponsor them.

MR KALULE SENGO:  Point of information.  Mr chairman, on page 12, Clause 19, sub-section 2 (a), we say, to advise on courses of study just at the bottom) -courses of study - to advise on courses of study, conduct of qualifying examination.  Now, under that small section, conduct of qualifying examination, we expect NIJU, to set membership, Mr Chairman.  Thank you very much.

LT. COL. SERWANGA LUWANGA:  Point of clarification from the hon. Member holding the floor, he is telling us that there are eight Universities in the country and as far as I am concerned, and maybe he will educate me, because I know, it is only Makerere University which is offering Mass Communication and then we have a school of journalism which is offering a diploma.  So, why does he not reduce his qualification of degree to fit also our circumstances?  Because some of us are running papers, but we do not have these University degrees and we have been in practice for the last nine years and he is saying, we should close up.  so, I am seeking clarification from him.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, order.  Could you reply to the clarification from hon. Lt. col Serwanga Luwanga.  I hope it was not a warning!  The way you were -(Laughter)- could you clarify please and try to summarise please.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, again Article 20 sub-section 2, (b) having given two areas; the degree holder or in journalism and mass communication.  2(b) says, a holder of a university degree per se plus a qualification in journalism or mass communication, even if you came with a degree in military science, plus a weekend qualification in New Vision Seminar, it becomes a qualification.  Mr Chairman, if I may wind up -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Members.  Please could you please, hon. Gad Gasatura proceed please.

MR MWANDHA:  Point of clarification.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman one of the major objectives of this Bill is to establish journalism as a profession; that is the most important thing.  Mr Chairman, you know very well that even in the Legal profession, if you go to Makerere and get your degree in law, you will not practice in our courts until you go via the Law Development Centre and get a diploma in Legal Practice.

Some of the degrees in Makerere are supposed to be professional degrees which others are not.  But even professional degrees take example, the Degree of Commerce in Accountancy option, a person qualifying as a Bachelor of Commerce with Accountancy option, he will not necessarily be a professional accountant.  My biggest quarrel, I would like to have these professions established by law, but I think the biggest problem with these proposals by the Committee, particularly with regard to Section 20, in fact, Section 20 needs to be re-drafted.  Section 20 does not make journalism a profession; if the person who was on the Committee begins to tell this House that actually if a man has done any degree, including a degree in military science, and then he can go for a weekend course in New Vision, and all of a sudden becomes a professional in journalism, surely are we being serious?  Can we pass a law of that kind?  

In my view, it would have been better, the clarification that I want to get my friend, is that, has he considered the possibility of these new professional bodies actually setting up an unqualifying examination to somebody to be a profession; so that their academic qualification per se, will not necessarily have to make one a professional.  We see it in law, after doing your law qualification, you still have to go and learn the profession at the Law Development Centre.  Did they consider the possibility of NIJU actually setting up professional exams to qualify people for this profession?

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, I am impressed by my hon. Member here and my neighbour hon. Mwandha but he has not had an ample opportunity to read through the functions that one of them is setting qualifying exams. But we set the minimums that even with qualifying exams, those people must be this minimum standard; a University Degree.  While he though degree in Military are of an AK47?  Now, I am sure somebody with qualifications in Military science would be a very competent war correspondent. If you took somebody in Agriculture or Veterinary Science, people would be competent in Environmental Institutes.    

However, as I was saying earlier, we have moved away from censorship by the State and the replacement for that would be best put to the Journalists themselves as a self-censorship.  The best way to do that is to have these fellows informed and as I said, still somebody who got a degree in agriculture may be a better-informed person than somebody from S.2.  We have been told that some of these gentlemen and ladies have worked for over 10 years in journalism and excelled in their professions.  I did raise this in fact, in the Committee, but I was ably answered, if they are so good then they should be better by going back to study.  Somebody who is well informed, a graduate has probably a better view of the world.  If he came across an article that he thinks might sell very well but damage the country, he has a better understanding of IMF, World Bank and so forth, and may opt not to publish that.  That it why we believe that the best way to hand this responsibility to them is to assure that these gentlemen and ladies are well informed and have the capacity to judge on behalf of society.  Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

LT. COL. SERWANGA LUWANGA:  Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification and also I want to clarify to the hon. Member holding the Floor that he is not getting us properly.  

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is the Member on the Floor in order to talk while pointing fingers at the Members of the House?

THE CHAIRMAN:  The hon. Member is in the habit of emphasizing, pointing at the Members.

LT. COL. SERWANGA LUWANGA:  Mr Chairman, the hon. Member holding the Floor is not getting us properly.  What we are saying is that when we look at Clause 19, it is not related with 20.  In 20, we are saying people can become full Members, associate Members.  When we look at 20(3), we say, that the General Assembly can decide.  There is no criteria you are telling us that if you have done these professional exams, or if you have done these professional course, you will qualify.  You leave it so open that eve somebody who may cone from say, World Bank, and because he has not published an Article, can be considered by the Assembly, yet we people who have been struggling to qualify ourselves in the profession, we are not looked at.  So, what we are saying, I want the hon. Member who is part of this committee to read this 19 and 20 so that at least, we have the future.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, I want the hon. Member holding the Floor to inform me as to how talented people like Sir Wilson Churchill.  He did not go to University but he wrote the books of history of the English Speaking People.  So, what I am saying, is how would such people be taking care of with talent?  Is it at all anywhere here?

DR LUYOMBYA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Wanendeya that Sir Wilson Churchill was an author and not a journalist.  There is a difference between authorship and journalism.

LT. COL. SERWANGA LUWANGA:  Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, when Lt. Serwanga Luwanga, when he pulled down his finger, he articulated his point that he would like to see how these gentlemen and ladies continue to operate.  We thought that rather than we deciding the standards, we set up a professional body which has been a constant demand for the last many years by the journalists themselves.  I have said we set qualifications of a professional body which would then get standards and I am surprised the Engineer cannot under stand English.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order.  Is it in order for the hon. Member to say that engineer does not understand English, yet it is precisely written in Clause 20 that, a person shall be legible for full membership of the institution.  We do not want to be half membership.  Is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN:  I do not think hon. Gasatura intended to insult anybody.  Otherwise, he was not in order.  Proceed please.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, a person applies to the Executive Committee for four memberships or associate membership and the Committee shall satisfy upon the enrolment of a person under Section one of this section, the General Secretary shall cease to be issued a certificate of enrolment.  In Article 32, the Council shall upon the receipt of the prescribed fee issue a practicing certificate to a person who is enrolled under this Statute.  They shall also enroll the associate member.  The difference being the associate member participates in all activities except voting.  Voting because we thought if we would allow everybody to vote, the majority of course are those who are not in the North.

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Mr Chairman, I think we are having a problem because we seem to be having carried forward from the CA to this Bill because we are trying to do everything the Institute would have done.  Why did we not set up the institute and give it a mandate to prescribe what is considered as authentic?

MR OBWANGOR:  Mr Chairman, this question is very important because we want to make a big law.  If the Members in the Committee have the wisdom of the whole House, and are refusing to listen to the voice of music which we as a majority, then we say those who were the members of the same Committee say, they did not know journalism.

MRS MPANGA:  Mr Chairman, I think we are getting confused over professionalism for journalism.  Among teachers, we have teachers with certificates; we have teachers with diplomas; we have teachers with degrees and postgraduate diplomas.  They are all professional people and they are all teachers.  I think we remember that there are very, very few people who would decide for the majority.

MR TOM BUTIME:  Mr Chairman, the information I want to give is that if you want to set up an institute for Uganda Institutes of Surgeons, we will make sure that the people who sit at that particular Council are medical professionals.  If you want to set up what we have today called the Medical Council, we will have real doctors sitting on that Council.  If you set up the Law Development Centre, that Centre will be manned and examined by lawyers.  If you want to set up the National Institute of Journalists, the people to make that institute even if they are ten or twelve, they are the chore.  They must have those qualifications.  The rest can practice but they cannot automatically become Members of that profession.  

I would like to appeal to Members here not to down grade because this has been the problem of journalists in this country.  The Journalists have been abused, and everybody looks at them as if they do not know anything simply because there has never been an academic basis for any journalist.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Minister for the information.  My patience has been rarely been tested this much.  Again let me say that creating that qualification has nothing to do with the right to, of those who have certificates or diplomas or may be in training. Why should Journalists have to renew their practicing certificates?  I am a professional Pilot and I would have to renew mine every six months.  

Finally, when the British Politician Joseph Padson almost 300 years ago said, if the minds of men and I guess today with women, were laid there before us, we would find a little difference between that of a wise man and that of the fool.  The difference being that the wise man has learnt to speak differently for conversation and communication.  The fool permits all his ideas to fly out in different words.  That is why we would like these journalists to have that education to pick their words for conversation and communication.  Leave the fools alone to allow their words fly out indifferently.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

REV. ONGOLA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, I would like through you, to thank all the hon. Members who have ably contributed to the Motion that has been tabled before the House.  I would like also to thank the hon. Members who have attentively listened to their Colleagues and in that appreciated the fact that a report of this nature was worthy.  I would like also to thank all the hon. Members of this House because whoever has contributed here, I did not at one point here any person saying, he or she stands or stood to oppose the Motion of Bill on the Floor.  Even hon. Marwas who was at the point nearly opposing eventually supported the Bill.  

As I said earlier, it was the wish of this House that this particular Bill should not be rejected out right but be pushed to a Select Committee for panel beating which we have done and that it should be reported back to this House.  There are areas because when we bring a report of this nature with the Bill that is going with it, that you can always be ready to improve basing on the Member’s contribution.  For example, Mr Chairman, hon. Members in their contribution on Clause 20, they expressed here that the committee did set up a very high standard.  But that can even be because we have the power to do that under our Rules of Procedure - Rule 59, sub-section 2.  There are some good amendments proposed and it is in the interest of this House that the Committee can go ahead and improve on that.  

Observing what hon. Mpanga said, regarding teachers as professionals, be the grade 2, 3, diploma holders, it is actually upon the Institute tat this particular institute if you look at Clause 19 sub-section that it is seeking to establish and maintain professional standards of journalists.  This particular institute if you look at Claus 19 sub-section 1, that it is seeking to establish and maintain profession standards of journalist, but the most important thing here is, should this institute be put in place as one of its objectives in sub-section (1) (e), this is to carry on such activities as specified or conducive with the attainment of the object as specified.  This I see they can go and also see what type of requirement they can put in place.  And even in section 2 sub-section 1(a), the institute will also advise in courses of studies to conduct qualifying examination in and generally on matters related to professional education for journalists in Uganda.  It is then up to the institute to look into it that, it is not all that limited.  

However, there were some good proposals made by hon. Member from Kajara who is absent but I think whatever explanation given he gave was satisfying.  I would not therefore, though that I was at a point whereby the Committee after receiving the proposed amendment set and viewed, those that could have been taken and included the fact that he is not in, may be since he was referring to British Constitution, may be he cannot appreciate the Constitution and Rules of Procedures in Uganda.  The Committee was charged and it is that responsibility that we are - the Committee has strived and Members have seen the direction that we are pushing to.  That is to say, we must have a free press the world over taking our neighbours in Rwanda here where there was a mother of journalists for that is lack of freedom, and this august House would like to remain on record that at a given time, they were able to legislate upon a need to have the freedom extended to the Press.  That it is that Press - the journalists should be responsible which this Committee, as hon. Members have seen and appreciate the fact that there is now a professional code of ethics in place.  At least, if it is adhered to and followed by the practicing journalists, then we feel that the state will not be injured.  The members of public who are the consumers will also be protected, and also they the journalists - hon. Wanendeya did observe that sometimes a damage is caused by the journalist in the papers and that - when they are making a rejoinder they put it in a very obscure place.  We have given liberty in the reported and as Members have heard, there is right of reply whereby if we feel the journalist knows it better, that if something wrong is reported front page, that it should also be corrected on the front page following upon the page that particular thing came up in.  

So, I fear like all the other Members fear that we need to have the institution in place, we need to have a council in place we also need to have a council which is the supreme body controlling these journalists in place.  So going through the proposal, I have not seen any major objection to this, and that is - is the more reason why I beg to move that the report of the Committee be adopted.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members at this juncture, I would have put the question seeking the adoption of the report of the Committee then subsequent to that, if there are Members who may be having their amendments which either have not been circulated or circulated, then those Members would come up now with a Motion.  The Motion that certain provisions of the Bill as reported by the Committee be examined in the Committee of the whole House and at that time, if it is accepted or adopted, then we go to the Committee of the whole House and examine those Clauses that may be affected by the proposed amendment.  That is the procedure we are following.  

Now, it appears that some of the Members who circulated their amendment last week are not here, I do not see hon. Marwas, hon. John Kazoora who had about 30 amendments here and I also see that there may be some Members who may make some proposed amendments to night in respect to certain sections here especially, 20, 19 and so on, and since the Chairman of the committee has no objection in accordance with the provision of section 59(2) that in - that there are any Members who would like to propose some amendments with the hope of improving a Bill, we have no objection.  

I would, therefore, now rule as follows; that those who have their amendments should forward their amendments to the Clerk and let their amendments be circulated and also those Members who have the amendments who would like to discuss with the Members of the Committee with the view of changing certain clauses or make amendments, should do tonight so that tomorrow during the Committee Stage, we can handle them without much ado.

(The Council rose at 4.35 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 17 May 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)

