Thursday, 11 May1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliamentary Building, Kampala.

(The Chairman, Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair.)

PRAYERS

(The Council was called to order.)

MOTION

MR ASIKU DRATRATRU:  Is it in order for the House to continue debating when the quorum is not formed?

THE CHAIRMAN:  It is not in order.  Due to lack of quorum, hon. Members, let us adjourn for 15 minutes.

MR ONGOLA ATWAI (Lira Municipality, Lira):  Mr Chairman, I beg to present the report of the NRC Select Committee on the Mass Media and Journalist Bill, I beg to present.  The report that we are presenting covers a general survey of the Bills represented by interest people and groups and the research findings carried out by the Committee as well as our recommendations which we are presenting here for presentations, consideration and adoption.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman is it in order 1995, since it is a completely new Bill that we are handling this week.  The other Bill was substantially changed, many articles are deleted, it seems there constitutes a new Bill.  So, Bills before this report could we - new first reading of the legal statute 1995.  Is it in order, Sir?

THE CHAIRMAN:  It is completely in order because this Bill was presented to this House then it was referred to the Select Committee with stamps of reference as to what to do.  Now they are reporting to the House what they did.  And there after questions can arise there may be some hon. Members who may have amendments which were not even tackled by the Committee at that stage we shall go according to Rule 66 whether we are to re-committing the day to the Committee Stage and then discussions shall commence and we shall deal with the thing.  It is completely in order.

REV. ONGOLA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, you will recall that on Tuesday 1st November 1994, the hon. Minister of Labour and Social Welfare, Mr Atekele Ejaru standing in for the hon. Minister of information, voted before the Chairman and the house a Bill, the Mass Media and Journalist Bill, 1994.  In moving the Bill, the hon. Minister went at great length in trying to elaborate on the justification for tabling this Bill and why it should be passed by the august House.  The Bill was debated with many of the hon. Members mentioning its motives or justification.  On the 2nd November 1994, hon. G. Gasatura moved that a Bill be referred to a Select Committee of the House for appropriate questioning of just adjustment before being returned to the Council for reconsideration.  That is what we have done.  It was suggested that the said special or Select Committee be composed of five Members selected or appointed by the Chairman from the Members of the House and that the committee completes its work in not more than 30 days.  Thereafter, the Chairman put the question that the Bill entitled Mass Media and Journalists Bill be referred to the Select Committee as proposed by hon. Gasatura and it was agreed to.  The Chairman then nominated the following to be on the committee; hon. Mayengo, hon. C. Kiyonga Chairman, hon. Prof. Mondo Kagonyera Member, hon. Basoga Nsadhu Member, hon. Rev. Ongola Atwai, hon. Kalule Ssengo Member.  The Committee then first met on the 4th of November in the parliamentary Conference Hall under the Chairmanship of Dr C. Kionga and all the other Members mentioned.  

The Committee now, Mr Chairman, wishes to thank the Clerk to the National Assembly who established and supported the Committee throughout its period of operation, particular thanks goes to Mr Dan Bahingire, Assistant Clerk, Mr Alosious Kikonde the Clerical Officer and Masaka from the Attorney General’s Chambers.  These officers did a lot in trying circumstances as the marathon went ahead.  We also have to extend our appreciation to the staff from the Clerk’s office; Isaac - and Merabu Tugeize who worked tirelessly to bring this report and a Bill to a successful conclusion.  Last but not least, the Committee would like to acknowledge the cooperation of all those patriotic Ugandans who either submitted memoranda or appeared physically before the committee to testify.  

The Committee’s first chapter was to set out a framework under which it would operate.  Below therefore are some of those things as to define the terms of reference; to define the methods of work.  And two; and resources acquired to execute the work.  To draw up a programme of work and to identity who the interested parties in the Bill were.  In order to gather enough Bill the Committee decided to carry out wide consultations through its Clerks, Members of the public, government, the Press and foreigners living in Uganda were invited through the Press, radio and television to send memoranda or physically give advice to the Committee.  

Others listed were some of the people whom the committee extended invitation too, they were religious leaders, Chairman and Members of Sectoral Committee on social Affairs, Ambassadors through our Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs especially, those that we have stated or comparation of. The Managing Director of Private radios and televisions were also invited including UNEPA and UJA.  The Minister of Information and his Permanent Secretary and the Director of Information and Broadcasting were also invited.  Because of some overlaps, we also had to invite the Minister of Transport and Communication and the Managing director of Uganda Posts and Telecommunication Cooperation.  

It is unfortunate Sir, that some of those people who were invited and members of the general public did not respond to the Committee’s request to come forward and give their views.  The whole exercise was dominated, therefore, by Members of NRC like hon. Wanendeya, hon. Dr Tiberondwa, hon. Wafaana Masaba Catherine, hon. Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga, hon. Rutaro, hon. Sibo Adrian, hon. Ssekitoleko S., and hon. Dr Jack Luyombya.  We are specifically grateful to all those Members who sacrificed their time to physically appear before this Committee and those who sent in their memorandum to our Secretariat.  We have all the summaries of those who appeared physically, either on their own behalf or on behalf of their organisations and those who sent in their memoranda have also been included in the Appendix.  

The Committee also carried out wide research on the Press laws of various Western countries and other democracies such as France, Sweden, china and USA.  The Committee research officer was requested to carry out summaries of all these laws and the Committee study them in detail.  In the course of its work, the Committee, hon. Dr Kiyonga and one other Member of the Committee, hon. Basoga Nsadhu were appointed Ministers in the Cabinet reshuffle of 18th November 1994.  Consequently, they appointed me as the new Chairman of the Committee. (Applause)  

Two other Members hon. Gasatura Capt. and hon. Joan Rwabyomere were appointed to be part of the Committee. In the handling of its work, some of the major issues of concern cropped up.  The Committee noted that the Bill did not contain any standard definition of a journalist and yet one of its objects was to recognise journalism as a profession.   

The Committee further noted that before one is recognised as a professional, minimum academic and professional standards for the profession are to be rectified.  The Committee also noted that the Bill gave the Minister of Information too much power over the press, this was the reason why it was vehemently opposed by the journalists as they saw it as a means of muzzling the press.  

The Committee also noted that the Bill has been given very superficial study and needed extensive quantitative improvement.  Because of all those issues, the committee felt that and may be this will answer the point of order which was earlier raised that there is need to re-draft the bill.  The Committee noted that the Bill in its existing form, and body contains articles which lacked and contradicted the principle of the freedom of the press.  

Consequently, the Committee appeared and reviewed memoranda presented to it by persons who appeared before it and memoranda presented in writing by various persons and groups of persons.  Details of these memoranda Sir, are contained in appendices attached to this report.  We did this because at ample time, we would find that people who submitted their memoranda can turn round and say that is not what we presented.  

So, to keep record, we had to take that one into consideration.  On the basis of the Bills contained in these memos Sir, the interviews conducted and researched carried out by the Committee, it was resolved that the entire Bill be re-drafted in order to realise the principle of freedom of the press, the recognition of journalism as a profession and provision of a free and responsible press.  Therefore, such article as requires the registration of the newspaper were deleted.  These could be found in the old Bills, in Articles of Clause 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8.  Also deleted were Articles 9 and 10 which provided for the re-defer of newspapers.  To them, they felt that there may not be very many newspapers creeping up and to have an officer purposely for that, would be a waste of resources.  

Part three of the Bill which concerns the censorship board was equally deleted as Article 11 to 18 were deleted because they were covering that particular section.  Article 19 to 20 of the Bill which provided for the establishment of communication commission were also deleted.  In doing this, as a debate this particular area of communication would recall and bring in Post Office which is under different ministry and certain areas it will bring international total areas and this is why at a later stage the hon. Minister seated here will re-enforce this Bill.  

Part of the Bill which provided for the media council was adopted as appropriate by the committee as Article 26 to start or begin were preserved in the new Bill.  Part (v) of the Bill, that is the old Bill Article 31 to 36 were preserved and put under the National Institute of Journalists of Uganda.  Part (vi) of the Bill Article 37 to 45 were also preserved and put under the media council.  The Committee had these observations Sir, and recommendations including the resolutions which we would like this House to consider and adopt.  

The observations; the Committee observed the need to establish the media council whose main functions is to regulate the conduct and promote good ethical standards discipline of journalism and to arbitrate disputes between the public, the media on one hand and the state then the media on the other hand.  The Media Council would elect a sub-committee on discipline which would administratively handle all the disciplinary cases presented to the council.  In doing this, you would find that in the old Bill, a lot of power centres were created and appointments to those committees were to be effected by the hon. Minister and the Committee now finds that if there is a supreme body known as the media council it should have sub-committees answerable to it.  

The Committee also observed that the Bill was a repetition of the existing law and had not been effectively and adequately consolidated.  The Bill did not provide for a code of conduct and did not tell out the minimum qualifications of the journalist.  

The Committee further observed that some journalists had abused the principle of responsible journalism and therefore, there was a need to put a law in place to regulate the Press so that no party, that is to government or members of the public or the press disagrees.  The Committee also observed that the Bill intended to give an upper hand to the government in controlling the press.  

So, there was a need to have a body which would compromise or balance membership from all the interested parties which would regulate the conduct of the journalists.  All that was contained in the memorandum like recognizing journalism as a profession and consolidating and incorporating all laws relating to mass media that was covered in the Bill.  In fact, the Bill did not give a clear definition of journalism and for that matter the Bill did not recognize journalism as a profession in the traditional sense.  Since it did not take minimum standards for the profession nor did it state the professional code of conduct.  

Finally, the Committee observed that the Minister of Information in his personal capacity as hon. Paul Etiang was treated unfairly by the press who held irresponsible at the of the purported draconian Bill yet he was implementing what had been agreed up on by the Cabinet.  He is also saying, the Committee noted that when the Government Minister comes here, he is feeding the Floor on what had been agreed upon and in this particular case, they also found that this Bill before us today their making was conceived way back in 1987 and each minister comes and goes and another one, so there is no way you can blame a certain minister who is only - who is to convey what should have been laid.  

In their resolutions and recommendations that we have, the Committee after going through observations, pointed out as above resolved that the Bill be reserved - be re-drafted and eliminate elements that were undesirable.  The Committee expressed strong belief in promoting free and responsible press.  It was resolved that the new Bill be called, the masse media Bill, 1994-1995 with the following objects:  To ensure freedom of the press, to encourage and recognise responsible journalism and to recognize journalism as a profession.  

The Committee also resolved to create an institute of journalism called National Institute of Journalists of Uganda with the following objects:  To establish and maintain professional standards for journalism.  to foster the spirit of professional fellowship among journalists.  To encourage trail equip and enable journalists to play their parts in society.  To establish mutual dealings with International Journalists Organisation and other related organisations.  The institute would have the functions, to advise on course of study, conduct of qualifying examination and delivery on matters related to professional education for journalists.  To promote the uses of journalism which is not contrary to the morality or other social values.  To encourage research in journalism for advancement of professionalism.  

The Committee set three categories of membership of this institute, full membership associate membership and honouring membership.  The Committee also resolved to recognise journalism as a profession to set minimum standards and provide a code of conduct for the profession.  Basing on the memos received and interviews carried out, the Committee resolved to carry a regulatory body a media council for the journalists in the country and disciplinary committee would be set up grown media council as a sub-committee.  This Council would be established with a composition of four members from the public who are appointed by government and two others by the journalists association.  While the electronic media would be represented by two members and one representative from the performing act.  The Committee recommended that the State and Public Entertainment Act and the Penal Code retrafficking in publication amended Ordinance of 1962 should in the laws books as they are or transferred in the new law and of them repeal.

Finally, the Committee has attempted several times to meet and consult the Minister of Information and the Cabinet Committee because in our consultation the Committee was open to the public, government an the journalists.  But we did not succeed at first.  The Minister later forwarded the Cabinet proposal to the Committee but it was too late to consider them since the Bill had already been printed.  On this, I will also add that sometimes we are always mis-reported.  For example, there was an article which appeared in the papers that the First Deputy Prime Minister hon. Eliya Kategaya had stopped the presentation of the Bill which was not the case.  Because once the Bill clips from the Floor of the House, it is no longer a Government Bill, it is a Bill belonging to this august House, and the committee is answerable to you and the Members Sir.  The Minister was instead then advised to bring his proposals in form of amendment when the Bill is tabled.  

On this, I would like to add that later on there was good response from the government side, their views were forwarded, these Bills were studied, those that were found applicable are stated and that is why in some cases we had to harmonise and agree that the Bill be split into two.  This particular handled the media council, then the other one to be presented by the hon. Minister at a later date will deal specifically with electronic media.  We agreed, and that is even why there are these consequential amendments appearing.  Because electronic Bill which earlier on was in our Bill has now been deleted because even those figures that we are seeing transferred.  

And I would like, Mr Chairman, through you to apologise to you and the House that the amendment which the Committee with me on the chair did circulate earlier on, were actually referring to long area.  This we have withdrawn and replaced with the clear one and those amendments do form part of our new Bill, Sir.  With this report, I beg that the Committee report be adopted. (Applause)

THE MINISTER FOR INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING (Mr Etyang):  Mr Chairman, before I say something on that, could I take this opportunity first of all in joining you and the other Members in welcoming amidst us those new Members of this hon. House who have joined it since the Bill was first tabled last year.  And to that, I would like to add that you yourself have been elevated from position of the Government Business Leader to where you are now.  I want to congratulate you for that, Mr Chairman.  I would also like to apologise to the House for being absent when the Bill was first read, but I was unavoidedly overseas on official duty which had previously been scheduled in such a way that which anticipated the winning of this Bill and it through this House before the time when I was eventually out.  I would like to assure hon. Members that it was not an absence of convenience, it was a coincidental absence which was unavoidable at the time when the Bill was presented to the House very ably by my former Colleague Minister of Labour and Social Affairs.

I would like to compliment most sincerely on behalf of government the Committee’s report.  I would like to commit the report to support the House because the Members of the Committee individually and collectively did a highly commendable job.  It is not surprising, if you look at the composition of the Committee not to mention those who offered their attendance.  The Committee composed of Doctors of Medicine, Doctors of Veterinary Service professionals, Professional Pilots, Eminent Teachers, Journalists, not to mention Lawyers.  Certainly from such a composition, you could not, but come out with a very balanced report such as we have been presented with.  

I have two points to make on this report.  One part relates to the report itself and the other one on the Bill as now re-submitted to the House.  My Ministry would very much have wished or have appreciated been included among those Bills facilitating the work of the Select Committee.  The Ministry was willing and ready to assist the Committee endeavour in whatever way it so requested.  They are not complaining, they are just making an observation.  

Secondly, I would like to make a point and this perhaps reflects on the Membership of the Committee.  But maybe the serious omission in the composition as far as professions went, was perhaps the assistance of somebody on the diplomatic front. I say this because among those invited to testify before the Committee were accredited heads of diplomatic missions in Uganda.  I take this opportunity given my background, for future reference that diplomatic conducts of diplomat business is normally through the executive not the legislature to invite or to the heads of missions to appear before it.  

Therefore, it is surprising that in the Committee’s report, no head of diplomatic mission turned up in spite of the invitation.  I am not saying this with any inclination to please, but I think it is an opportune moment for some of us who had something to do with this sort of - this area to point out that the House in its supremacy even in its supremacy has limitations.  The House may not sermon an Ambassador to come and appear before it, that is my understanding.  

Under the major issues of concern that the Committee has covered the reported noted that the Bill submitted by Government did not include a standard definition of a journalist.  I would like to draw the attention of Members that you would take less time to compare the Bill that was tabled by my Colleague on my behalf last year and that now presented to the House, you will find that the description of a journalist is identical.  I admit entirely with what the Chairman has said that in the previous Bill the minimum standards for journalists have not been made but definitely the definition of a journalist was offered and the Committee has stood with exactly the same identical definition a word for word.  The point that have had a lot of treatments, comments counter comments in the debate that has lasted last eight years was that this Bill - is the issue of censorship.  

I am glad to note that censorship was sort of in the previous submission confined to electronic media that is the video, cinematography, and plays for public consumption.  It never touched anything on the press media, I think that argument goes on those so many numerous seminars that very benevolent NGO has been sponsoring for this Bill.  I am very, very delighted on behalf of government to note that the Committee in its wisdom has maintained the element of censorship in this area.  The censorship board as such does not appear in the Bill but censorship which is till necessary in respect of electronic media is maintained and I want to compliment to the Committee still further on that.  

As to the reported attempt by the Committee’s Chairman, to consult with me, which is said to have failed repeatedly I have already had the occasion of addressing the Committee as to our accountable events.  I had the first contact from the Chairman of the Committee that his Committee has started this work at the beginning of February this year.  The occasion was the Chairman’s submission to me of the Committee’s draft bill.  Indeed, as he has put it, I did indicate to him what he already knew that at the level of Cabinet there was a Cabinet Committee which found this matter serious as it was and the Chairmanship of that Committee fell on the National Political Commissar the First Deputy Prime Minister.  

To cut the long story short, since all the Members of the Committee were fully briefed as to the level on the side of the Government or the apparent level of the fund of government.  When government received the re-drafted Bill, it was seem to have been very drastically changed from the original Bill.  It was not therefore possible for a Minister of Information to respond directly to the Committee on that matter without reference to Cabinet.  And it is a matter of policy; it is a matter on which there had to be a cabinet collective decision on.  In the substance correspondence between the Chairman and myself it was agreed that there was need for the two Committee to meet, in fact that was Cabinet’s position.  When we eventually met and we had two meetings at which we were very, very frank in each and as the Chairman and admitted we came on the very strong reasons, one or the other from both sides.  And I am glad on the meetings that took place on the 20th of April and the 26th of the same month, a full concurrent of views was achieved to this that the Bill be split up into two.  

First, we separately provided for a media council recognition of journalism as a profession on one hand which is a Bill now before the House.  And on the other hand as a Chairman of the Committee as indicated an electronic media is yet to be presented but subject to this House is the endorsement of the proposal.  But as the Chairman has said, given the stage at which the work of this Committee had reached including the and publication of his report and the draft bill, it was agreed that the Select Committee submits its draft Bill together with its report.  The meeting that we purportedly had the position or the suggested amendment that Cabinet has submitted to the Committee were discussed, accepted and amended as the Committee so felt.  The splitting of the Bill was fully discussed as I have said, agreed and adopted and that the amendments that my Colleagues have before them are consequential to that splitting.  

The Bill.  I would like to report to the House that the Bill has to date had eight years of gestation.  It has been handled by four ministers.  It has had more seminars of all people interested in this Bill, the majority of whom may not have been necessarily journalists.  It has been sponsored interestingly enough by all organisations except Ugandan organisations, those seminars government is not about this, government is grateful that this statement has been given to the Bill that the Ugandans as well as foreigners had have a say in this Bill, that the Bill form first of the fundamental human rights of which we cherish in this country and that at the end of it all, it should be a Bill generally acceptable without anybody claiming having one or not or lost.  

Having said that, I would like to categorically state that government’s objective for this Bill have always been and continues to be honourable and one intended.  The Bill as government sees it, is to provide a statutory safeguard for one of the major freedoms we cherish for our country that is the freedom of expression and of the papers.  It so happens that this freedom of expression of the freedom of the press is not only of interest to who he is exercising it, it is open also equally of interest to the list as well as to the powerful or persons for whom or about whom the expression is being made.  

That is the central interest, public interest to this Bill.  But it is just not confined to the expression - confined to the right of publication for expression, but it is also of equal interest to those about whom such expression or writing is intended.  In other words, the right of the press to publish must be guaranteed that is government’s position.  

Equally, the right of the public and privacy of the individual must be protected.  Now where is division?  The balancing of this interest of these two groups in this - in the exercise of this freedom brings into place the third party namely the government.  I am generally very satisfied that the Select Committee’s report has provided a well balanced arbitration mechanism in the Bill between the interest of the media, the public at large and the government.  The Committee is to be highly commended for this.  

The other objective of government is to state necessary amendments on the existing laws on the media.  It is only an act of political wisdom that the present government has not seen it fit to implement all the laws that my friends in the press could write draconian.  These laws date back to the 1960s and they are quite a few of them.  All the laws on the press media except the TV Licensing Act were passed during colonial days.  And successive governments particularly the NRM Government now has been very silent on some of the provisions of those laws.  I admit that there have been exceptions here and there where expressions of freedom have been not yet under abused.  The present Bill also calls for the - in providing journalism as a profession expects journalism to be respected which should be responsible that is self-accounting. 

May I now just touch on the point of electronic media?  Why is it that it has been found necessary to produce for electronic media separately?  This is an aspect of journalism on electronic media which is very fast changing throughout the world.  Almost weekly a new electronic apparatus comes into place.  So we being a least developed country which done not produce any of these equipments, have been at the receiving end and for sometime to come from outside will be at the receiving end.  

Now, what is the present situation?  There are about two conventions, two international conventions, two regional or OAU treaties and about three national acts that are directly related to electronic media.  At the level of international conversions, we have got the IPU conversion on band zones.  This is the one which is presently administered and under the Ministry of Transport, Works and Communications. And it simply says that you may not in your territory of jurisdictions establish radio transmitter which interferes or goes deep into the territory of a fellow IPU member.  The second conversion is on intellectual properties.  Now, this is presently under the Ministry of Justice.  What relevance has it got to broadcasting?  

My Colleagues may not be aware but the same port laying of signatures tune in a broadcasting apparatus without the authority of clearance of the owner of the composer of that tune constitutes a breach.  And Uganda is a signatory of the International Properties Conversion and has therefore the obligation to impose the respect of that conversion within Uganda territory.  The two OAU treaties to which Uganda is a signatory are on Pan African News Agency, and then oruner, that is the one related to radio and television.  

Now, this fall under the Ministry of Information.  Then at the same front, we have several statutes namely; there is a law on phonography, the administrator of this law is the Ministry of Internal Affairs.  There is the Post Office Act under the national registration board is located.  Now that comes under the Ministry of Transport and Communications.  Then there is the TV licensing Act, again that comes under the Ministry of Information.  Now, all these laws, treaties and conversions need to be harmonised and it is increasingly - it is becoming increasingly necessary in the context of what I have just said about the first thing in the electronic media, a need to have an independent technical body to harmonise and ensure that all these scattered laws and conversions and status that relate to broadcasting should be adhered to.  

Already, we have a very unsatisfactory system of registering the new broadcasting.  All what we need is to go to the national register board to get a frequency.  The frequency board and no objection letter from the Ministry of Information, we will give it to you, that is what the law on broadcasting is.  There has not been any law to date preventing any Ugandan from establishing broadcasting radio that is a fact.  

Now, given the draconian authority from outside, and the scrambling that has now followed liberalisation uphold, we are at risk to have our people thoroughly confused in the Airways that are apparently anybody’s business.  It is, therefore, government’s considered view that the fast changing in electronic media has necessitated a coordination of national obligation to these laws by the one body encompassing all interests, private professional government and public.  Subject of course as I said to the NRC adopting the present report of the Select Committee before it.  I intend to bring to this House the proposed Bill on the electronic media as soon as possible at any rate before this honourable council is resolved.  I support the Motion. (Applause)

MR MAYENGO (Kyamuswa County, Kalangala):  Mr Chairman, during the course of our hon. Reverend, Chairman ordained me the amendment officer.  He had requested that I go through the amendment.  As the Minister has mentioned, this Bill has had a troublesome journey up to this moment.  Has just mentioned that it has survived three Ministers, he is the fourth.  In the capacity of the amendment’s officer, I have taken liberty and noted that in the course of its being printed and reprinted, several small mistakes happened.  The very first one is the wrongest cardinal.  We forgot somehow to include the definition of journalism and yet it is an important aspect in this Bill.  But the technicians are working on that.  So, in the interpretation section, the word journalism will be explained.  

Also, in Section 32 sub-section (i), there is a kind of misprint, if the Members will turn to section 32 and look at sub-section (i), they will notice the word payment; actually the word should have been re-fit not payment, so, I will appreciate the Members making that minor correction.  In the same Section but sub-section (4), there is the penalty imprisonment of three months.  The Committee did not intend to put it that way actually; it intended to say, not exceeding three months.  So, again I will appreciate the Members’ making note that is Section 32 sub-section 4 where it says of three months, it should be deleted the word ‘of’ and substitute it with the word not ‘exceeding’ three months.  

I will look very sporticiary at some of these amendments, I will not go into the details, most of the reasons have been explained and where it is a very simple amendment, I will just skip it and I will take it that Members will take it.  The list of amendments are 18 of them, No.17.  Let me look at first the one which more important amendment No. 4, Clause 6, the Members can notice that Clause 1 just a matter of press and journalist for mass media that is in Clause I and the reasons have been obviously explained in Clause 2 again insert immediately after the definition of council and the definition of editor and that definition Members are following is only to include a person who is at any given time in charge of programme production at radio or television station.  This again was taking care to look at the wider spectrum of what media is.  And in heading for part two, we had to substitute mass media for newspapers again to reflect the wide spectrum.  

Clause 6, the same reason.  Media organisation being substituted for newspaper.  As you noted amendment No.5, Clause 7, already in the text of the Bill which Members are looking at, the amendment here appears printed that is (a), it printed and (d) is printed.  The only part which is not printed is (c), that is in Clause 7, the additional sub-section (c) is not shown. This actually will be more significant in the new Bill which the Minister has promised us the one on electronic media.  Amendment No.6 which concerns Clause 8, again is a matter of substitution Mass Media organisations for newspaper.  Same reasons I have explained, Mr Chairman.  

Then amendment No.7 is a deletion of Clauses 9, 10, 11 and 4, the Minister has explained as well as the chairman that since we are going to have these two separated, it was necessary to remove the sections which were directly in relation to electronic media since No. 9 and 10, 11 and 4 are to go.  

Clause 14, we had to insert immediately after the expression takes, this is 14 sub-section 1(e), Members will notice enumerated items and there we added takes after the expression plays that is for the items which the Committee thought should be censored and plays to be censored, it was thought that there is high possibility that you could have a play which is very phonographic and perverted.  So censoring plays was included.  

Amendment No. 9 which is in Clause 14 sub-section 2.  I think there is no need to mention one of those simple amendments just as the one in 10 also is.  Probably the significant one is the amendment 11 which is in Clause 30, in Clause 30 you will notice that there are three sub-sections.  The Committee added her forth and the forth, goes on the reasoning that Parliament is the custodian of public money.  Whenever anybody or any organisation takes or uses some of the public money it would be good if Parliament would be informed about it.  It is for that reason that this sub-clause is inserted to state that the Minister shall within three months after receipt of the report referred to in sub-section three of this section before Parliament.  

Amendment No.12, which is in Clause 34 concerned these journalists who come visiting, when the Pope’s entrant and he would like to do some reporting.  This Section says, no person being an employee of a foreign mass media organisation or working as a freelance for that mass media shall practice journalism in Uganda unless he is in possession of an application card issued by the Council.  So, these whom we call temporary journalists who just visit will have to get these temporary cards to be able to have that bit of practice in journalism while they are in Uganda.  

From there to this amendment 13 and 14, really we need no explanation.  But, this 14 actually need a little bit of words, it concerns things which are printed or disseminated outside Uganda one would say, since this magazine is coming in from out the country and I never printed it, I never published it, I am not responsible for what it says, in this Clause 44, we are saying no, we are saying once you have it and you disseminate it, you are reliable for the negative effects of the information in that document and the position is that for perhaps of this section matters published outside Uganda shall be taken to have been published in Uganda if they have been delivered for dissemination in Uganda, we found that to be necessary.  

Amendment 15 concerns Clause 45.  The idea has been that if anyone in the business of journalism would feel agreed, he must be given a chance, the maximum chance possible to be heard.  It is for that reason that in Clause 45, we are adding sub-clause 3, after No.2; it says; any person agreeing by the decision or order of the court may appeal to a higher court.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Point of clarification.  I just wanted to know this dissemination of information, if it comes through the post office in my box to pass on to you when I have not looked at it, I am, I know reliable according to this amendment for having disseminated that information I would like to know exactly what the hon. Committee meant, they just tie me down because I am just an innocent conveyor and I may not even know the contents of the document.  

MR MARWAS:  It so happens that the country receives a lot of publications from outside and when I buy one of them, focus on Africa call it anything, the concord and there is some material which you think to be against the provisions of this, so, I am asking who is to bear the consequences because government has not banned the importation of these magazines, the vendor going to be in trouble because he was just selling them on the street?  I need some clarification from the Committee.

MR MAYENGO: We are having a kind of collective responsibility, I will let my hon. Colleague answer these queries.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, please.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Why do we first answer the other one, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay.

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Chairman, these amendments were circulated sometime back hon. Mayengo is not adding anything to these amendment other than to mention that these were the amendments which were made by the committee.  As a matter of fact some o the amendments which were mentioned, I would also like to do what hon. Kanyomozi has done to query and get clarification, is it not better for us to proceed with the debate rather than having to go through that amendment, that amendment, that amendment, I think it is much better.

THE CHAIRMAN:  In fact, hon. Members as I told you at the beginning, we are coming to that, but we would like to give chance first to the Committee members.

MR KALULE SENGO:  This provision was meant to cater for the modern electronic media for example, at one Sanyu Television decide to plunge in say, these CA men and then what he screened on their sachet is very offensive to our morals, so these are the kind of things we had in mind, there is a transmission here which at times plunge in a foreign station which may come up with a very, very obscene pictures, Mr Chairman.  Thank you very much.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Something different, if the Government knows that CNN is going to bring some offensive; it is the duty of the Government to break or to ban it or declare that this is going to be offensive.  Earlier I asked about Newspaper, a letter which passes through my boss, I am a vendor of a magazine, I have not done anything about it and it comes, I sell it you have not banned it or a book for that matter and I am going to be held responsible for it.  I think the committee should give out how a person of that nature is supposed to know before hand how the newspaper contents are dangerous to the general public and also even for electronic media, we should be in position to know who is going to judge which is morally wrong to this society before it is screened.  So, the duty of government should have a censor board which looks at CNN before it is broad based. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  We shall come to that.  In fact, I think hon. Kanyomozi provided the solution to the query he was making but we are going to come to that and please could you proceed.  

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, I am sure hon. Kanyomozi knows that when he receives the play boy magazine in his mail box and passes it to a friend of his that is not a type of dissemination that we are talking about.  Mr Chairman, I had already gone to and beyond amendment No. 16 -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Members, we started very well, let us continue with that spirit.

MR MAYENGO:  We are now at amendment No. 16 and this I should mention because there is again an error on the amendment sheet itself.  Clause 51 is the one we are trying to amend but, it has several sub-clauses this particular amendment refers to sub-clause 3; Clause 51 says, it is amendment 16 it says, substitute cabinet for legislature.  This amendment should be in sub-section 3 in that Clause 51 if Members could look down, they will see that in sub-section 3, it appears that the word ‘legislature,’ that is the one for which we would like to substitute the word ‘cabinet.’  The least are not so vital and section B a consequential amendments which are resulting from the fact which the Minister explained that this Bill has been speaking the truth.  When the House will have gone through all the amendments and the Bill itself, the House will be satisfied that the Committee - bend backwards to ensure that the free press is the watch dog of democracy.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I thought you had your share already when you were given time to answer hon. Kanyomozi and hon. Marwas -(Interjection)- okay, it is alright.  Hon. Members we would like to keep the Floor to reasoning as presented by the Committee and I think in their wisdom they wanted hon. Kalule Sengo to speak.

MR KALULE SENGO:  Mr Chairman, the arrangement I am talking of is the arrangement of the Committee that each one of us has a role to play in presenting this Bill, it is not a hidden agenda as Members thought it to be.  According to our agreement in the Committee, I am supposed to talk about the media council, some of the provisions about the media council have been highlighted by my Colleague, I will try my best to point out what I feel is necessary to clarify some of the issues involved there.  

You will appreciate that in the old Bill which was rejected by this House there was provision for several committees like the censorship board, the medical council, a disciplinary committee and communication commission. Following the consultants we made in the presentation which we have not followed by several parties, we decided to create a one stop centre for all the functions having to deal with the mass media and that is how we came out with a medical council.  You will appreciate that on several occasions the Press has misreported the intension of the Committee.  

There was a report at one time that we have deliberately decided to ensure that the whole media council was infected by government machinery, contrary to what was put in the Press, I now want to request my Colleague to have a look at the membership of that media council that is in part 4 according to the Bill, referred in the amendment, page 9, Clause 13.  The council consists of the following, the Director of Information or a Senior Officer from the Ministry responsible for information which shall be the secretary to the council

Two, a distinguished scholar appointed by the Minister in consultation with the school of Mass Communication.  Now, when we talk of consultation what we have in mind is that the school of Mass Communication will appoint a mandate who is capable to be on this Council, then as a matter of procedure the Minister will appoint, it is not that the Minister will dictate to this school of Mass Communication.  The same applies to the mixed members on page 10 at the top; we talk of a distinguished scholar appointed by the Minister in consultation in the school of journalism, so that the school of journalism find a proper man, then the Minister as usual appoint.  So, the fears that were raised by one of my colleagues hon. Marwas where he was proposing that these people should sit down and appoint should not actually arise because he is actually saying exactly what we are doing in our Bill.  

Under (d), we said a representative nominated by the newspapers editors and publishers this again to ensure that there is balance on this Committee.  Now, (e) we are having 4 representatives of whom two shall represent the electronic media these are again people from groups which are dealing with the media itself and another two shall represent the National Institute of Journalism and this institute in fact, when my Colleague comes to talk about it will be constituted out of the very people that are dealing with the mass media.  

Under (f) we are providing for four members of the public not being journalists this is because we feel the mass media is consumed by the public they are the ones who consume it and therefore, they should have the right to sit on this council because they are the consumers of what is printed, of what is on the television, of what is tagged in plays and all that.  That is why we say we should provide for members of the general public who could be yourself hon. Chairman, who could be anybody depending on who the Minister feels should be the right man to come on this Committee and when it comes to appointing these people two of these people shall be nominated by the Minister but, then the other two each one shall be nominated by the Uganda Newspapers Editors, and Publishers and Journalists.  

Then lastly, on the formation of the constitutional of this Council we are providing for a distinguished lawyer.  So, the point I am trying to drive home is that, there is no hidden agenda whatsoever, the Committee made sure that it informed the Council that it was fully balanced.  In fact, if you are to examine the Members of this Council you might find that actually the Newspaper or the mass media is holding an upper hand because government is more less saying, well, this is your job, you do it for yourself, we want to see how best you can do it.  

I now want to move on Clause 14, which deals with the functions of this Council.

Under A; we are talking of the functions of regulating the conduct and promote good ethical standards in this thing of journalist, which the majority of the Members are from the profession itself we are saying, let them regulate themselves because regulating them is part of their functions since the form the majority we want to see how best they can regulate their own profession.

B; To arbitrate disputes between the public and the media and then between the State and the Media.  Because quite often, these are the parties that are offered but what is written in the papers, so we are saying, okay, you play that role of arbitration because you are having the majority of the members on the council.

C; To exercise disciplinary control over journalists, Editors and Publishers we are saying, well, you discipline yourselves, let us see a new Press that is responsible because you are the people that are going to do it.  

When we move on to (D) we say to promote generally the flow of information and under we are saying to censor films, video tapes, plays as my colleagues has already pointed out and then all other apparatus for public consumption.  Again, here we have in mind the protection of our morals in this country and we are saying the players in this whole affair of mass media should be the very people to make sure that our morals are protected.  The same goes to sub-section 2, where we are saying in carrying out his functions under paragraph (E) of sub-section I; the council may refuse a film, video tapes, or apparatus to be shown, exhibited or acted for public consumption.  Again this is the whole idea of censorship because, you will appreciate, Mr Chairman, that the Bill has abolished the censorship board.  Because we felt the censorship board though it was provided for, was not actually effective, it was not able to do its work nor the Bill we rejected was proposing that we even have a district censorship board having examined the dynamics of society we said, the board should not really function and in this place we said, let the council pay this role.  

I now want to move on to Clause 15, which is actually talking about the meetings of the council this is provided for in Schedule 4.  Now, under Clause 16, we are talking of renumeration which is actually the usual provision in any law we enact and under Clause 17, we are referring to the laying of the report that this Council come out with a report annually and this report will be passed on to the Minister who will in turn lay it before Parliament for its consideration.  

Now allow me very briefly to move on to part 4 which is dealing with the regulation of public practice.  Under part 4, we are saying that it is the council that will be responsible for registering journalists.  The same council will under Clause 32, will be issuing practicing certificates to those journalists that would have satisfied the requirements of the law.  My Colleagues will be point out the categories of journalists who will be able to qualify for such practicing certificates that will be hon. Kagonyera when he comes up to talk about NIJU.  

Under Clause 32; sub-section 4, we are talking about the punishment for those who may contravene the provision of the law.  Now we are moving to Clause 33; Clause 33, we give conditions under which a person may not be granted a practicing certificate the provisions are set forward are not taking much time on them.

Now under 34; again I am talking about the work of regulating by the council under 34, we are providing for the manner through which a foreign journalist will be granted an accreditation card this one had been hinted on by my Colleague and I do not need to dwell much on it.  

I now want to now move on to the disciplinary committee.  As we said, we provided one stop centre which is the media council, now it is the same council that will be responsible for the discipline, now the committee that will handle discipline will be a pointer or rather will be nominated from among the members of the council.  The members of the council will sit down and then they select out four of their number to go and represent them on the Disciplinary Committee.  The Chairman of the Council will again be chairman of the disciplinary committee and the Secretary to the Council will again be the Secretary to this Committee.

Now, as we said, the journalist will form the majority of the members of all these bodies, surely the idea was that we do just to these people that we leave no room for complaining that they have been oppressed as they were claiming in the Press.  Because, we are saying, okay, when you come to sit in the council you nominate people who will represent your interest on the disciplinary committee so that you have no way of saying government is trying to oppress us.  

I have already pointed out the membership of the council, now under 36; we are saying that any person is free to raise a complaint against a journalist, it could be the government by any person we are referring to government, we refer to individuals, even a member of the council can also bring up a complaint against a journalist because we feel when these journalists write, they can injure anybody, it could be government, it could even be a member of the council, it could be an individual and we are saying as far as complaints are concerned, even where an individual who has been injured is not aware that he has been injured, any third party is free to bring up that complaint to the disciplinary committee because, you may injure my poor father who may not know that he is being injured.  

So, a good member of society or a member of the council is free to raise on behalf of my father down in Gomba who is complaining to this disciplinary committee.  

Having covered that, I now want to briefly talk about the provisions of the first schedule which is on page 22 which is dealing with the professional code of ethics, because this is - part of the council.  In formulating the Code of Conduct for the Press men, we actually consulted them very, very widely and you will find that much of what is reflected in the Code of Conduct is actually expressing the feels of the journalists because we consulted them, we consulted several codes of conducts from other countries and the journalist actually in agreement with the kind of schedule, the kind of code of conduct that we came up with.  

I am highlighting this to state the point I made at the start of my contribution that nobody should come up and say that he was oppressed or government took side because, the journalists were actually the very people who insisted that this code of conduct should be part and parcel of this law and this is why we provided for it in the schedule.  

In conclusion, I want to assure the House and Ugandans at large having been a Member of this Committee that when we did this job, we wanted to be as far as possible, as fair as nature could allow us to be fair.  

So, let nobody have any feelings about the provisions of this Bills, I am stressing it because, even up this morning there were some members actually complaining to us because we made our Committee open to everybody.  Some Members of the journalist association were still complaining that the provisions of this Bill were unfair to them that they were oppressive.  Now, this is a Bill which we worked out alongside together with these people, I am really wondering why at this moment they are raising queries about the thing to which they were actually a party.  With those few remarks, I beg to support the Motion moved by my Colleague hon. Ongola Atwai.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

PROF. KAGONYERA (Rubabo County, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  First of all, I must thank the Chairman of our Committee hon. Ongola Atwai for having lead our Committee in the most exemplary manner -(Applause)- and also, to thank my Colleagues for having in my opinion done very thorough job and everybody we worked with including the government, including the journalism, Members of Parliament and anybody who contributed their views to this Bill.  That is primarily aimed at ensuring the independence and freedom of the Press in Uganda because all of us in our committee and I believe many Members of this House are convinced that there is no way we can receive a democratic society unless the Press are given freedom to be watch dogs on the activities to everybody in this country. (Applause) 

Therefore, any shortcoming that may appear in this Bill may be precise require by our desire to make sure that freedom of the Press in Parliament.  When my Colleague hon. Kalule Sengo was making his contribution, I realised that maybe, this was not important to use in our provision. 

I would like Members here to appreciate that a lot of what we put in this Bill is not necessarily it is thorough comparative study of the literature of all over the world and we found out that in an effort to standardise what a journalist should be, it is desirable to have an organisation that must set the professional standards for a journalist.  

Now, one of the problems we had in our inability to come with reasonable agreement with members of the Uganda Journalist Association, because they feel that the institute of the - the National Institute of Journalists in Uganda is going to take over the role of Uganda Journalist Association.  We went all the way to explain the difference between the National Institute of Journalists and the role of the Uganda Journalists Association.  We drew parallels with other professions.  First of all, we insisted that if journalism is going to be a profession, therefore, the journalists must themselves be professional; and if they must be professionals, I do not want or nay other professional does not want to see through a professional journalist.  So, if he is a professional journalist, his journalism must be respected.  Because, number one, he knows what he is talking about; therefore, we insisted that there must be an institute that will set the standards.  Consequently, among its major object, is to establish and maintain professional standards for journalists; and if you go further down in sub-clause 2(a) ‘to advise on courses of study, conduct of qualifying examination and generally on matters related to professional education for journalists in Uganda; (b) to ensure the maintenance of professional education for journalists.’  

Mr Chairman, you know very well like all other Members do, that unless the people are educated in whatever they are doing, they will always lag behind everybody in the world.  Be it science, medicine, politics, economics or journalism.  Journalists we agreed are cornerstone in the building of a nation, and they must be among the most highly and broadly informed in any society, to be able to study, and it is these institutions that will set the standards.  It is these institutions that will collaborate with teaching institutions on what the content of courses should be -(Interruption)

MRS KALEMA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that in addition to journalists having enough knowledge, they must be able to research.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Yes, Mr Chairman -(Interjection)- that kind of thing, but  I thank the hon. Member for the information but if she went down on (c), we say to encourage research in journalism for the advancement of professionalism; and somewhere we even thought about publication of a journalist, and many people do not appreciate the value of a journalist, the value of a journalist is to encourage independent and basic research; therefore studies.  

Now, the functions I would believe of Uganda Journalists Association would be largely to look after the welfare of journalists; in other words, it is things like what journalists are aware of getting; conditions of work in their places of work; how are journalists treated by their fellow men.  The Welfare and I am sure they would be doing more with the on. Minister in charge of labour matters that with the technical side of journalism.  So, really the roles of the two are not the same but rather complementary; like we have in other professions, you have the Uganda - I believe - Association of surveyors, but you also have an institute of Surveyors which looks after the professional standards.  You have got the Uganda Medical Association, but you also have the Medical Board which looks after the professional side, and so forth and so forth.  So, for every association of professionals, there is a counterpart professional organisation that looks only after the standards of professional standards, not the welfare.  For us after we have trained, you as a professional journalist and we have given you qualifications, we all do not even mind where you go and work; but when you go there and work, then your association insists that your employer treats you properly like a professional journalist.  

There may be some queries about the funding of the Executive Committee of the institute by the government.  I think it is the high time we agree - I mean that executive arm of government, that government, a journalist and everyone of us are partners in progress of this country.  We must not look at one another with suspicion and what have you.  All we are trying to do here is to make sure that the institute of journalists does not go broke.  Because if you look at the other sources of funding, these are not very reliable sources.  So, we are saying that the government which is interested in professional standards has a duty to support this organisation.  But that does not in any way compromise the independence of the institution.  I have not yet to see anybody go to Makerere and decide on what the standards of a doctor is going to be, although the school of medicine at Makerere is a hundred per cent funded by the government of Uganda; the same thing applies to what is taught in political science, otherwise, I am sure you know very well that there might be some courses that the government had to say wait a minute those courses should be not given - but Makerere has got freedom, every other institution in Uganda has got freedom to teach what they want, in spite of the fact that they are a hundred per cent funded by the government.  We would like this institute to have a fairly reliable source of funding.  

I think, Members have listened rather long; I did not intend to go too far, but I would like to really end by also affirming what hon. Kalule Sengo said that in our deliberation, we all acted independent; we are quite often at each other.  So, this product is a product of well-studied and thoroughly understood job by your committee.  Nobody - government did not do anything to compromise the duty of the committee and, therefore, this product is an independent job of your committee.  I thank you, Mr Chairman, for allowing me to contribute.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Now, hon. Members, as you know this Bill has been with us for quite some time and you heard from the Chairman that it took eight years, and has seen four Cabinet Ministers, and also three Prime Ministers; and the committee has done a very good job according to what we are listening to.  Now, I think even if the committee members have presented their case, it will only be fair that I gave time to other hon. Members to contribute, but knowing that things have been more clarified by the committee members, I would urge you to be on time and say what you want to say very briefly so that we minimise on time.  Now, I call upon Members to contribute, hon. Bakashabaruhanga.

MR BAKASHABARUHANGA (Kashari County, Mbarara):  I thank you, Mr Chairman.  I also believe in free press -(Interjections)- I am saying that I also believe in the free press, like power, is like a river.  When River Nile is flowing from Jinja to Sudan and then to the Mediterranean, as long as it keeps within its banks, it is alright.  But if along the way it can go over the banks, it can be very, very disastrous.  So, I also like the free press, because it stops those who are powerful from becoming too powerful to verge on being dangerous.  So, like power, I think we should have free press, but a responsible press at the same time.  It is not fair for the press simply because it is free to overflow its work.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR ONGOM (Omoro County, Gulu):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  First of all, I would like to say that I agree that the committee did a good job, it has reduced what came to us as a very voluminous Bill to one fairly reasonable in size, to start with.  But, I have misgivings about some of the provisions here which are still included in the Bill.  One of them is Clause 6.1(b), it is talking about registration of particulars relating to the Editor; now, this requires that the proprietors of newspapers or media organisations to register the editors with the council and with certain qualifications.  

I do not particularly see the reason for this, even the relevance of this, because these media organisations are supposed to be private and they are business.  Now, why should a businessman with sort of, maybe, a newspaper and so forth, be restricted as to who he can employ.  If he employs a wrong person then that business will not work; people will reject it.  So, I look at this particular Clause as another attempt yet to restrict the freedom of the press.

The same concern I express on Clause 8, that a person shall not be appointed an editor of a mass media organisation if, a, b, c, d, first of all, why should that implementation in (a) be necessary?  Supposing I wanted to set up a newspaper and I was under the age of 18, and I wanted to run my newspaper myself as an editor, why should anybody stop me employing my funds they way I want?  Obviously if I do it badly, again the matter will rule me out.  So, why restrict me there?  In any case, I do not see why any proprietor would want to employ an editor who is of unsound mind.  Surely, that goes without saying -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to take this opportunity to inform hon. Ongom that not very many months back we have been talking about abuse of drugs in our markets, and we said whoever establishes a drug shop he must have a qualified pharmacist  who is not a pharmacist, but when my shop is existing there, it must be of and a registered qualified pharmacist.  Hon. Ongom can go and establish his services everywhere; what we are saying, if you accept that part of journalism as being professional, just like a pharmacist is professional, then why do you not get the editor who is registered - what is wrong with that?  Thank you, Mr Chairman. (Applause)

MR ONGOM:  Thank you for the information, although I do not think it was very useful -(Laughter)- the damage of morality may not be the same thing as death from a bad drug.  But, I am saying in (a) that the whole of that provision seems to be unnecessary to me, and it seems to be unnecessary restriction really, because first of all, all the things listed, a normal person would normally not employ such people and objecting particularly to that of age, and the rest seem to be unnecessary to me, Mr Chairman.

I would also like to comment a bit on the institute of journalism which is being established by this Bill.  Whereas I agree that such an institute is necessary, in my view, I thought it was for the professionals involved really to create such institute.  Because once a government or we start regulating it by legislation, then by implication we are also controlling it.  

Whereas I agree that with regard to the funding, if anybody who grants money to any organisation definitely he will have to exercise a lot of control; hon. Kagonyera said it is about time we thought that will be the whole part of development and government assist this body to develop by giving them grants.  But are we not unnecessarily opening a free gate to other similar organisation?  I would seek a clarification from hon. Kagonyera whether similar such institutes are being funded by the government.  For instance, the Surveyor Institute he is talking about, then you have the Medical practitioners Institute and so on; are they all being funded by the government?  If they are not, then obviously by funding this, we are now going to -(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr Chairman, the information I want to give to the hon. Member is that, yes, at least, for those organisations I know, the Medical Council and the Veterinary Board are fully paid for and funded by the government Uganda; but they still maintain independent professional standards of their profession.

MR ONGOM:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I thought the Medical council and the Medical Board are different organisations from the institute we are trying to institute here.  This is like the Chartered Institute of Engineers for instance, these are not funded by the state; these are members’ organisations, they are trade unions, if you like; and I do not see why government should go funding such organisations.  By funding it means we are going to have to exercise control on them.  So, although I agree that the committee has done a good job, I think there are areas which still need room -(Interruption)

MR BASOGA NSADHU:  Point of information.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform my Friend on the Floor that it is possible for government to offer assistance to this institute by whatever name we shall call it, through sub-section (d) where they say grants, gifts or donations.  Really these grants can come from government of Uganda, or from even the government of Libya.  So, if you have a quarrel with (a) for fear that government will be arm-twisting these journalists, I think it is alright that if government is serious about maintaining certain provisions, there are ways in which these institutes by whatever name, can benefit from grants.  After all, the Ugandan government is also benefiting from a number of grants from many countries without necessarily, this Parliament legislating and giving a specific clause that we must receive grants from a particular country.  Thank you very much.

MR ONGOM:  Thank you for the information, hon. Member; and that is exactly - I think the Member has perhaps, explained what I tried to do more precisely.  I really wanted to say that it is not necessary for us as legislators here to give statutory instruction for the government to pay.  Obviously if such an institute wants some grants from the government, they are free to go and beg, and if the government or the executive feelings that it is necessary to assist them for some reason they will do so without the necessities this is exactly what I wanted to say, Mr Chairman.  With those few remarks, I support the Bill.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA (Army Representative):  I thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Now, Mr Chairman, and hon. Members as you may notice this Bill has taken quite a time before it was brought before this House for legislation and as you may also have heard one Member was elevated to a Bishop who later on obeyed one of his member and which member was not properly dressed as a Priest because, we do not have collars. But I also appreciate the work of the Committee more so in one way or another their work has been appreciated and by so doing many of them have moved to the front benches. (Laughter)  

Mr Chairman, with those few remarks, I would like to support this Motion but with some valid observations.  Hon. Bakashabaruhanga has given a vivid warning to say that journalists should act as rivers not to overflow the banks, but it is also common that in some areas where the rivers go through some times needs these rivers to be overflown for irrigation purpose.  

So, if we require to irrigate our systems, our discipline, when there is a desert of lack of information; sometimes these rivers should overflow.  In support of this Bill, I have very few remarks which I think are pertinent to this Bill more especially where hon. Kagonyera and all other Members of the committee have laboured to inform us that actually the work done is so far good and they have gone on to of course impress it upon us that their work was so successful that they have even displayed it by the massive bombardment of which we have turned into enemies so that we do not list up our heads to answer back because when you have got successful bombardment you are definitely defeated.  

But in this case, these hon. Members of the Committee, I think made a concerted effort to work together and show to us and the journalists committee that all is well, whereas I do believe that it is important that there is regulations management of society must go with regulation, if you have to become a manager of any organisation, you must also express and expose your leadership quality.  

The journalists and the leaders have collective responsibility to this country -(Applause)- the journalists of this country have really helped us as a country and as government to highlight some of the shortcomings which I believe also government must be thanked because it has been tolerant enough to listen to some of these sometimes unbearable remarks appear in some of these papers, but it is equally important that law must be put in place to regulate some of these papers, whereas also in journalism we expect some responsible reporting.  It is not always necessary that when you are resignating information to the public, you should leave them to speculate some times you should be able to substantiate if you are called upon.

The journalist association seems to be apprehensive about this Bill and which I think I should also oppose their demand and requirement that their proposal be considered in this Bill.  It is true the Media Council Clause 35, the Media Council has been put in place for the purpose of disciplining with journalists and hon. Basoga has also informed us that this could be in any form but, if we have got to be good leaders, journalists inclusive, why do you accept these suppose tomorrow I may misinterpret them as arm-twisting, supposing you are about to write something about my character and then I give you a kick back what would happen?  We have seen a number of these journalists and I believe if we encourage the journalists to have the free press but of course regulated and this Bill is definitely good and that is why I am supporting it, there must be some discipline in all spheres, leaders and journalists inclusive.

Now, when you look at these gifts and the journalists in general, when you definitely very bit gap in between, the journalists have I think tried also to create what one of the leaders was saying a fundamental change.  They have also made a fundamental change in their reporting, and government also has been tolerant enough to show the world that, there is a bit and resemblance of democracy to have a free press.  

One would wonder sometime back where you would never find a very interesting cartoon of a head of state.  It goes, it is put in the paper and nobody reacts to that.  That is freedom.  Now, when it comes to also the discipline of the press, there should be some responsibility why for instance, if you want to criticize Brig. Kyaligonza is an individual.  Why do you talk about Brigadier and not the collective responsibility of saying so and so, the NRA is bad.  Not all of them are bad.  So, I am expecting of course this law when it is in place, it will protect both of us.  Those to be talked about, those to write and those to read.  So, there should be no aggrieved person except what I also want to complain about, when they talk about government.  

Sometimes it becomes very annoying really when you find some of the leaders, they challenge some of these presses.  They challenge them even up to court.  Somebody draws a very good cartoon of the tongue twisting his throat and so on, the person goes to court and his defeated.  The paper that was sued is dissolved, it is not that, the person has been suing that paper, is not awarded the cost.  What does that mean?  In simple terms, it would mean that you have actually been defeated.  And, therefore, what the press was talking about is correct.  And to me, if the disciplines could improve, both in the leadership, both in the press, both even in the public.  Either you come and substantiate so that you are clear.  Because that is the purpose.  You clear your image and repetition.  And it is against the press, the press also should come to clear.  Because this business of threats; I sue you unless you substantiate.  And the press just puts something in the concern to regret for what they have published.  And that is enough.  But somebody has sued government - has sued that paper, why does that person not seen ashamed enough, because you have said the man is corrupt.  The press has helped this country very much.  We are talking of fighting corruption, how are we fighting it?  Is it through the press?  Somebody gives information that you were not expecting, the pressman.  He risks his life, he goes to collect some information then you call it trash.  Oh! What is wrong?  Why do you not prove it?  Give us the correct information.  The person has put it before you to prove it.  At the end of the day, the people are thrown in prison; they are thrown before courts for trial.  I think there is need for us now as leaders to protect equal partners.  

We are comparing our press to the developed press.  We are talking of censorship.  These bazungus when they come here in conferences, sometimes they fool us and I feel offended.  And it is therefore necessary that we should have also some media council.  We should have a media council that is disciplining these fellows.  If you are coming here, you should have a temporal certificate to allow you to operate.  For instance, when you look at some of these journalists being shabby, very, very dirty fellows, sometimes with lice around their heads, is it really one of the ethics of journalism?  Is that also journalism? (Applause)  Somebody comes in very dirty shoes, he is going before the President, and is that the journalists’ culture?  I think there is need for all of us to discipline ourselves and understand what we are actually doing.  

Finally, in support of this Bill, I do not see why we should first of all get a cohesive about what the Minister has put before us to consider.  Late Namakajo tried and he had initiated this journalist school - I think school of journalism.  But when you talk about a journalist who is well qualified, I think we are also expecting too much from some of these fellows. Really the facilities we have a s country, when you look at our schools of journalism; the one which has been started at Makerere, is so infant.  And all these other schools of Media Mass Communication and so on, they are not properly equipped.  And we should expect these people to have the equivalent qualification with those people coming from Europe.  This is where we make a mistake always to equate our workers, journalists inclusive to the standards of the outside fellows.  

So, with that, I support the Bill and we expect these journalists to be professional as one Members is warning me here.  It is really important that to be a professional, but at what level of professionalism?  Because you may find somebody is only using his journalistic ethics and common sense and that is what sometimes we should expect from some of these journalists. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR DRANI DRADRIGA: (Ayivu County, Arua):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I want to welcome the report of this Committee, and I want to thank them for the job well done.  Although they went beyond the mandate and took too long.  I look at this law in the making as a New Vision in Uganda, capable of bringing about modernisation.  I am particularly pleased with three issues which have been addressed in the report.  The first one is to make journalism a profession.  The second one is the establishment of Regulatory Mechanism through the Media Council, and the Disciplinary Committee.  And of course the third element is the involution of a Free, Vibrant, expensive, responsible and democratic press.  The freedom o the press.  The freedom of the press is an important base for democracy.  And it is important that, we have called it, especially in our level of democracy today; we have to uphold it and ensure that it is done within the law.  

However, I would like us to be like in some countries in the third world, where they will tell you to feel free by putting you in a long corridor with very high walls and tell you to feel free.  So, I want us to address the question.  How free is this freedom?  It is a fundamental issue which must be addressed in practice once this law is in force.  

Another element which has been addressed adequately under the report is the fact that, this law will be able to manage the social, political set up - that culture, social, political culture in the people of Uganda.  And it is expected really in a view that democratic values and practices can prosper.  One element where I am not so pleased is the checks.  Checks which have been distributed, especially in respect of I know that there are some checks here and there, but I would have wished to have stronger checks.  Our youth are at a very risk and if you look at what the public is given to consume through these, which are not censored, you find we have a very big challenge.  The youth may get out of hand, if we allow them to be exposed to some of these programmes on radios, some films that really do not go with public morality.  Therefore, I would have wished to see, stricter regulations. (Applause).  

Another area where this law can be very effectively useful to us is monitoring.  The mechanism for monitoring I have seen are not so strong.  I would like this Media Council when it is set up, if this law is passed, to ensure that there are monitoring mechanisms right from the level of government, down to the lowest unit in this country.  There was an issue that was brought out here, about publications.  That error to me is a bit tricky because who determines what?  What is the mechanism for determining?  As one hon. Member pointed out unless I have got a hidden agenda, if I should receive some publication, sometimes even without my knowledge.  I think I should not be penalised wholesale on that issue.  We should look at every issue on its own merit.

Finally, I have said the press should be responsive.  And I want to emphasize his.  The responsiveness I am talking about is the point already emphasised by one hon. Member.  The press must ensure that there is a give and take spirit.  For example, you are free to write about somebody but you give that person an opportunity to be heard. (Applause)  If it is a rejoinder for instance, allow him to explain.  Then that is when we can have a balanced view - the public can consume very good information which is balanced and justice can be ensured.  Otherwise, this is a god job done.  It is my hope that eventually we shall be able to avoid these accesses where there are suits for deformation, all those.  And I hope the accesses in the relationship between government, the public and the press, can now be finally bleached.  Thank you very much.

MR MARWAS (Dodoth Count, Kotido):  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I have tried to compare human to animals.  At times we feel animals are more responsible than us, because no animal ever press its young.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Members.  Let him explain.  

MR MARWAS:  Mr Chairman, I am saying other human beings need control because at times they do things that animals do not do.  Therefore, the principle of this to me I support.  But I have many problems with some of the Clauses.  My first question is, this Bill is here not just because everybody is affected, it is because there are always two people responsible with the management of society.  One thousand is a politicians who manages society because politicians at times are like rivers.  Just because they can rule other people therefore, the press comes in to make sure the water in the River Nile is kept along the bank.  So, I say it the politicians at times who become rivers not the press.  Because the press is there to tell you what happened.  As a politician, I think we should expect than be expected.  Because once you go into the field, you should expect somebody is paying, you should expect to have anything.  Therefore, this question of trying to gag the press.  Because it is not everybody in Uganda, yet there is still millions.  But it is we the leadership who are always at war with the press.  And the reasons are why?  Of course their guess is as good as mine.  All of us need the press to be free.  But one thing is certain.  It depends on which part of the things you have.  

Because yesterday, my hon. Friend the former Attorney General was attending to one of the press when he was in the Chambers, and I think he is quoted every day.  Now, he thinks he quoted even more.  Now on the other side, on the data side, so it really tells me where you are as a politicians.  But once I am out of here, I must make sure nothing about me is always reported.  But once I am out of here, the man who is going to be voted in after me, I would like the press always to report any negative thing about him.  But I do not want it about me, because I am still in Parliament.  Everything is war between the press and the politicians, in the management of society.  I think we need both.  We need the press to tell the people what is happening.  And I think NRM has managed a lot through the press.  Uganda Times, started publishing much about NRM, right in 1992/93; and up to now, he is with us.  And at that time, we really needed all the expositions.  Now, we are saying we are fine please, there is a law here, and we must have everything according to this law.  No freedom is absolute.  Even journalists themselves are self-censored.  Surely no journalist can stand up and write something about this country which he knows defend the sovereignty of this country.  

Secondly, I look at this law and sometime back, a committee of this House had recommended for the resolutions of some of these Ministries.  I seeing this and this in my opinion, I am seeing this as the Minister created a department for the Ministry, he is creating an institute for the Ministry so that tomorrow in case the statement of the Ministry come, there is no way I can say, I think I can survive because I have what to do.  

MR ETYANG:  Point of information.  May be this should have been a point of order.  Is it in order for the hon. Member holding the floor t allege that the Minister - I assume the Minister of Information has proposed the creation of the national Institute of journalists as a way of ensuring that his Ministry in future will be sustained.  When in fact, the proposal has come from the Committee and we have heard from all Members of the Committee, particularly professor Kagonyera, that at no time did the government have an influence in the discussion of the committee.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Marwas, there are two things.  Either you substantiate giving evidence or else withdraw.

MR MARWAS:  Mr Chairman, I withdraw. (Laughter)  Mr Chairman, I want now to turn to - I have several amendments on this Bill, and this thing called the Uganda Journalists Association was started way back in 1963, I stand to be corrected.  One of the founders of this association is currently a senior leader in this country and in this government by the names of the Rt. hon. Kintu Musoke, he was among the first founders of this association.  So, if you look at the provisions of the National Institute of Journalists of Uganda (NIJU); and you get a chance to look at the Constitution, and the code of conduct of UJA; the Committee either appreciated what was there and brought it to the Bill who are saying, UJA has received national and economic recognition.  And endures good relationship in a number of international, professional bodies which include the Union of African Journalists in Cairo; the West African Journalists Association, the International Organisation of Journalists.  They are many.  

Now, I am saying, since the committee saw to it that everything in the Constitution and the code of conduct of UJA, are to be incorporated into this Bill.  Now UJA has just been striped naked and left in the so we are saying instead of NIJU, we remove that UJA name and make it statutory; make it law since everything in it is good.  

HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, it is not true and correct to say that everything was lift from the UJA Association and incorporated in this Bill.  Earlier when the Chairman, Prof. Kagonyera presented the findings of the Committee to this House, it was clearly stated that we had working documents, and there were several of them.  From outside, from within, from all journalistic associations.  Therefore, it is wrong for him to say that it was lifted from UJA and incorporated into the Bill.

REV. ONGOLA ATWAI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I have been sitting an listening very attentively so that at a later stage, I will be refined; but I thought that at this particular time, I would inform my brother hon. Paulino who is holding the Floor; who was also with us this morning together with the President of UJA, and a representative of UNEPA, that we laboured on this point and everybody was agreeable that UJA remains what it is and what it has been for the last 28 years as a pressure group.  A pressure group on what to do between government and also looking after the venture of its members.  And the hon. Paulino was there, I thought he had this point well taken.  And when I see that he is still on it, anyway, you allow him to labour on.  Thank you.  

MR MARWAS:  Mr Chairman, me I was present, I was there this morning.  I think it is erroneous to say we agreed.  Because the hon. Chairman of the Select Committee is aware that even today I presented to the Committee my amendment; the Committee started criticizing on right away before I could no anything.  And because these days numbers matter and the Committee was large; therefore, what they said according to the Chairman, was accepted by me, but otherwise, I would not be talking here.  So, I am saying UJA, all the provisions - I was going to answer that.  I am saying I have the Code of Conduct of UJA here, the Constitutional Code of Conduct, I have the Constitution here.  And I have read the report of the Committee.  And I have compared all this.  All the good things that are here, have been discussed there.  The whole of these things which are part and parcel of that NIJU are the control method.  Otherwise, in a way UJA has been dissolved, so we are saying, since its provisions have been removed and it is now naked, why do we not take even the NIJU.  We were saying nobody is against the provisions of NIJU, but we were saying for purposes of history.  We have ever sat here - somebody has ever stood up here and say, we should not say , the national Resistance Council; we should say the National Assembly.  

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point f order.  Is it in order for the hon. Member of this House who has been given a chance since November last year to have brought all these views and have them incorporated in this Bill to now stand in this House and begin taking us back to where we have come from?  Is it in order for him?

THE CHAIRMAN:  I think he is representing minority view. (Laughter)		   

MR MARWAS:  Mr Chairman, I am glad to inform the hon. Member from Soroti to the effect that even at this material hour, the Committee is already removing parts of this Bill to draft another new Bill.  Therefore, not everything is there because how did you also fail to see that the electronic media was not defeating the same thing and you are going to remove it at Committee Stage.  So, where are we?  I think I am speaking because not everything has been done well.  I was saying, when NRM was in the bush -(Interruption)

MR BASOGA NSADHU:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  I am seeking clarification because I am getting worried with the trend.  Will it be possible at this stage for the Members of the House to move an Amendment like the hon. Minister has done., like some Members of our Select Committee have done; will it be possible?  Because I know from your comment, you are saying the presentation of hon. Marwas are minority report, yet he is moving certain amendments on the Bill.  Should we therefore, assume that we are simply wasting tie, the Bill or the Report of the Committee is already passed?  I would like to have this clear, Mr Chairman in my mind.

THE CHAIRMAN:  In that case, you are asking the Chair to clarify?

MR BASOGA NSADHU:  Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, as the trend of the debate is on the Floor, I think two things are left.  One, hon. Members who had wanted to contribute will be given time, and if we have the time, we shall call upon the Chairman of the Committee to react, and if anything arises on the Floor, that will may be warrant the debate to go to the Committee Stage; then we shall allow that.  To allow those who have amendments to be discussed, that is the procedure we are going to take.  So, please continue.

MR MARWAS:  Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  Sir, at the later stage, as other Members, I shall beg to invoke rule 66 of our Rules of Procedure.  I was saying some of these names carry at times something good, now, I am saying since everything has been taken, why do we not take name also, and after all we shall be controlling it.  The name is Uganda Journalists Association, and it is well known the world over.  It also guards against somebody jumping up tomorrow, maybe, and say that government has created a body that is going to check the press. 

MR KALULE SENGO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform my Colleague about the name UJA.  I think what my Colleague does not appreciate is the fact that not all media associations belong to UJA.  In fact, we got representations from seven groups who did not belong to UJA, and were even against the whole idea of having UJA coming into the law, because they were saying it was an association like any other association; and that is why we decided to come up with a body that would create these professional standards we are talking about.  

So, there is no way you can say, UJA is going to come that professional body, because it is an association, it is like any other trade union and what we need is to create a body that is going to be neutral to all these other bodies.  I do not know why the Member is labouring so much on this issue of the name when we explained it to him this morning so many times, but he deliberately refused to heed to what we extended to him.  Thank you, Mr Chairman,  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Marwas, could you now summarise?  

MR MARWAS:  Yes, Mr Chairman, just to answer that.  There is even a letter addressed by UJA and giving the composition of UJA to the Chairman of this Committee and it says, if you allow me to quote; ‘We would, however, to re-appeal to you and your committee to revisit the proposed name of the National Institute of Journalist of Uganda called NIJU, to be substituted by its old historical name of UJA’ which means the UJA is - all these other bodies are -(Inaudible)- to UJA we are saying -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Is it is in order for the hon. Member who knows the rules of procedure and has presented his amendment, to go back and start the arguments which should have been done at Committee Stage, and he has not been supported.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Brother of mine to go on be-labouring points which should be be-laboured at Committee Stage?  I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Well, before that one is ruled, I think the hon. Member could wind up quickly and sit down.  Could you wind up?

MR MARWAS:  Mr Chairman, I will wind up by saying that, let us not pretend to be leaders, we -(Inaudible)- leaders of tomorrow.  let us make a law that guarantee the safeguard of society even tomorrow when we are not here.  Because hon. friend, hon. Marwas he has his problems with the Press; but I hope they are not going for sentiments.  I thank you.

PROF. KABWEGYERE (Nominated):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I am glad, I am speaking after the last speaker, I will make remarks, I hope which will clarify the kind of problem we have not only with mass media but with other problems that face our society. I am glad we have now come out with a document, a framework that is more comprehensive than the one we had initially, and I am glad that the methods of work have been able to produce this.  So, I thank the Committee like all others have done.  What we have here is an institutional framework; we have a law defining organs that will help build immediate tradition, a tradition that would be contributive to the development of this country.  

There are some people who seem to think that the media is a force against government, that there is necessary collision between the two all the time.  In the past, the consumers of the media, the largest consumer of the media is not government, it is the population; yet of course, in our very young stage in building the nation, there are people who will even start newspapers specifically because it is against the government, and if a government changed tomorrow the papers would die; you see?  This is because again of the lack of appreciation of the role of the media in national development, and you will find today as we talk, there will be papers which would disappear if tomorrow there was no NRM.  Now, this is okay, in as far as we are going through the crawling stages in our development.  

So, from that point of view I am looking at the organs we have established by this law, and asking, will they help us to achieve the culture that has been talked about?  For example, the media council, if the media council, as we have defined it here, was to be established on a kid of guidelines that some papers today prescribe, where it is argued, where is the Chairman from, where is the Secretary from and so on, you may find that we might have a media council which may be of such quality that will not guarantee the objectives that we are trying to achieve.  

So, I remember having a very enjoyable encounter with one of the media goals here in the name of Ogutu and asking him that look, how many people do you have in your Newspaper that come from your area where you are born; and fortunately, even if he is hearing, he said there were more people from outside his area of birth than those from his area, and the reason is simple, the people who are born in the city like Kampala, who are familiar with Newspapers will be more exposed to journalism than people from villages in some Eastern corner or Western corner.  Therefore, if we are talking of quality at the end of the day and we were to insist, like for example, Monitor does that there must be representation of ethnic groups on whatever is done; we are going to get the Chairman of the media council, he has come from here; the distinguished Professor he is to come from there, and you have that problem, you will have a problem of achieving the objectives.  So, the framework is correct; now after a lot of work, now let us see how we infuse real operational values that make the framework to work.  The same thing disciplinary council, but before I come to the disciplinary council, I believe that we should consider for a specific mention on that media council of a child’s psychologist.  

A child’s psychologist particularly knows of the professional knowledge in estimating the impact of not only the media but generally the objects of knowledge on mind formation, on thought formation and all that.  So, I believe that, I would myself propose that we would have a child psychologist specifically for that; because the impact that we get from the screen, the impact we get from what we read is too important to be left to just any other person other than a professional, and I think we are talking of professional journalist, professional psychologist and other professionals.  Now, we go to the disciplinary committee.  

The disciplinary committee now is part of the media council, so it could have a problem there where the disciplinary committee which is composed as we see in the Bill, failing perhaps to carry out the disciplinary role, because on the one hand, they seem not to be the court that the court we know it is supposed to be.  They are the ones who are supposed to issue our compensation for whoever is injured.  Now, I do not know because in the outline here, there is sensitization of a lawyer, only one out so many.  So, I do not know to what extent this disciplinary committee or indeed the media council will have their capacity of acting as a court in the same way that journalists who have been exposed to the court will experience.  

I move now to the practice, and this is where the practice is not something that you can legislate.  It is a question of time and investment of effort.  When you look at CNN, you look at a man like Rally King, than man did not get there yesterday, he has been there for sometime; of you here of Robbin White; obviously, here we are talking of Toya Kilama.  

Now, I am not saying Toya Kilama is not material or Robbin White, I am not saying that, but I am saying he had not had enough tradition time and experience in materials to help him develop the intellect that can guide even the media.  Because people tend to think that the media is guided by government, it is government - the government has failed; but government is guided by society as well.  The problem with the third world countries, Uganda inclusive, is that all the time tend to look to government for direction; even for Entandiikwa even for this, even for that; and even when Kabwegyere has put up a house, somebody because he does not have it, he says, because Kabwegyere is near government, government has built it for him and so on and so forth; because of where we are.  

So, the practice which we must encourage and that is why I support very strongly, unlike hon. Ongom, Institute of Journalism should be supported very strongly to build a capacity, to build a quality, just as we are building all these others; build a quality that can therefore, transmit this independence of the media and be able to impinge on government.  This idea of hon. Bakashabaruhanga of rivers breaking the banks, but if the banks are not building a government tradition, a tradition of up-rightness, we must also build the up-rightness, the integrity of the press; and government, unfortunately, at this stage must put in a lot more than other countries do so that if a child of my friend Ogutu was to be a journalist, she could read how his great grandfather acted when he was a young editor or when he was struggling to make a name; because this is really what we are trying to do, and that is why I believe this is a foundation law in that direction.  The quality of media; we are now - you listen to Radio Uganda, you listen to Sanyu Radio, Capital, look at the content that is Ugandan.  We are here like - the other day I wrote in the newspaper, we are here swallowing the cigarette like the picture on the Marlboro advertisement.  We are just receiving!  Now, even talking about the censorship, the quality of who censors a film and judges the impact, it will have on the growth of child, or who is going to go to a nursery and see the paintings on the wall and how they will affect the personality of that kid, that quality needs to be developed.  

Therefore, this business of saying we the journalists are here, government is there and we are right, they are wrong, that is too simplicitic an assessment.  We need first of all to be in charge of our own media; today we have opened the space, Radio, Television an all; now, I understand France International is also on air.  Now, how many of us are sitting here who read French, who know French and listening to what the French are communicating to our population, and be able to say, look, Mr France, I think you are directing us nowhere.  Who are we in the media among the journalists, who will criticise the media in Uganda and say look, the radios, the televisions are saying this, yet Uganda should be saying this.  That again is a tradition we must build; yet at the same time, when we now say journalists please, and they say no, no, you have not been able to guide us, you are not yet stable.  

The other day I had a very interesting debate with Mr Tumusiime of the New Vision.  You must sort out yourselves first before you can give dictations onto us.  As if sorting out is only in government and not in the media.  There is a lot to be sorted out and I feel, therefore, the standards must be set high and I think this law which says that even to be an editor you should be at a certain level, is good although we may have to be tolerant for sometime because some of these standards cannot be reached yet by the people who now are our moguls in the country.

Lastly, the society we are in, the society we are in, many people will go to make money, they will go to make money irrespective of whether making money is at the expense of that society, and I have listened to programmes on radio, there is doctor programme, I listen to some debates on some of these media, and you wonder whether the speakers or the organisers of those programmes have considered the society that is receiving their message.  But then, of course, it happens to be the case that society is not so organised, the private individuals who listen to come and say, look, I have not read in the newspapers where they say look, what I heard on this programme was not acceptable. 

Only yesterday on Radio Cine, there was somebody talking rightly on a programme of music ‘naye nze ndi kukyeyo’ trying to popularise ‘ekyeyo’ which is just going to be a laboratory attendant in Britain; that he on radio Cine he is on ‘ekyeyo’ so as far as he is concerned, he can put on any record because he is on Kyeyo.  Now, does that person know what it may mean, just because he is introducing a record by so and so that ekyeyo might be picked up as a concept like ‘muzungu wange’ like all these thins that have been picked up. (Laughter)  

So, I thank you so much, but I say here is something, let fill in, let all of us who think we are there, we are not there.  It is true of politicians, it is true of journalists, it is true of businessmen, we are beginning to grow.  I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that, we have come to the end of today’s session, and I adjourn the Council until Tuesday next week at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 5.05 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 16 May 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)


  

