Thursday, 17 May 2012

Parliament met at 11.42 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting and I request you to avail me your presence by attending the sitting continuously so that we can transact as much business as we possibly can. I further request that you extend this co-operation to tomorrow when Parliament will be sitting beginning from 10.00 a.m.

Honourable members, the Bank of Uganda had scheduled a two-day retreat with specific committees of Parliament at the Imperial Resort Hotel, Entebbe beginning today Thursday, 17 May 2012. I am advised that the retreat has been called off and the concerned members will be informed of the due date of the next retreat. This has been necessitated by the programme of the business of Parliament, which is currently quite hectic and requires the presence of all members. Bank of Uganda apologises for any inconveniences caused. I wish you all very fruitful deliberations. Hon. Mutyabule, you have two minutes.

11.45
MRS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter related to business of this House. Mr Speaker, you may recall that Uganda ratified the UN Convention on the Rights of Children. In 1974, Uganda domesticated the UN Convention on the Rights of Children into the Children’s Act. 

In 2004, it was realised that due to the challenges the society was facing, the Children’s Act could no longer protect the rights of children. Therefore, a review was called for and it was agreed that the Children’s Act be amended. The ministry concerned was given this opportunity to do so in 2004; it is now eight years down the road and this issue has not been handled, and the ministry concerned has not reported to this House. 

Many honourable Members of Parliament have raised this issue, for example, hon. Milton Muwuma, hon. Benson Obua and recently, last year on 16th December, hon. Flavia Kabahenda presented a statement on this Floor to urge the minister to inform Parliament what they have done about the Children’s Act. Up to date, the minister has not done so.

Mr Speaker, we are all aware that children are undergoing a lot of abuse and violation and there is no legal instrument that is protecting the children. Now, as Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children, we are concerned. What is the minister doing? Is it because the children are not important in this society? Is it because the children cannot come to Parliament to speak for themselves? If they cannot come, we, the Members of Parliament, are speaking for them but the minister is not doing what he is supposed to do. (Dr Epetait rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She has risen on a procedural point.

MRS MUTYABULE: Mr Speaker, this is why I stand to request you to compel the minister concerned to come to this Parliament and explain why the amended Children’s Act is not here. We need to amend it to cater for the children’s rights and protect them. They are being sacrificed. They are being killed. Thank you very much, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The point is made. The issue is that an amendment to the Children’s Act has been pending. There was an undertaking made in this House that it would be amended to correspond to the issues arising from the review. We need an urgent response from the ministry responsible. This matter should be handled quickly because it has been pending for a while. I think that is clear and straightforward. So, Leader of Government Business in the House, please take note and advise the ministry responsible accordingly. 

11.50
MR CYRUS AMODOI (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of public national importance. In 2007, the Government of Uganda took on the road from Soroti-Gwere to my constituency after a devastating flood. To my surprise, up to today this road has never been worked on and as we speak, the road is impassable. I wrote to the Minister of Works to inquire as to why this road has not been worked on by the Government and yet the Government took it over. It is my prayer, Mr Speaker, that I get a response from the ministry. It has always become a habit in this House- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is the urgent matter you want to raise?

MR AMODOI: The urgent matter is that Government should expeditiously repair this road because it is impassable as we speak. Thank you.

11.52
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): I thank the honourable member for raising this important issue of this road which is in a state of disrepair due to the heavy rains. Yes, I have been to the Soroti, Teso area lately and it is true the roads are not in a good shape. I am aware that the honourable Minister of Works has been on a tour in that part of the country, and I am sure very soon the necessary repairs will be undertaken. Kindly bear with us. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.  

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

11.53
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Irene Muloni): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, honourable members. Pursuant to a request by the honourable members for clarification on the issuance of licences in respect to East African Gold Sniffing Company Limited and Hima Cement Limited, I was required to make a statement, which I wish to communicate as follows. 

At the outset, I must emphasise that the matter of issuance of the said licences is the subject of litigation-(Interruption) 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable minister is giving information and she is making a statement. However, as you can see, we do not have any copy of her statement and we shall not be in position to follow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, did you bring copies? The copies are there, please proceed. Please pick a copy. 

MRS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker and honourable members, the matter of issuance of the said licences is a subject of litigation. A case was filed in the High Court and is pending adjudication. Therefore, in accordance with rule 60 of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure, the matter is sub judice and I am constrained in what I may report.

The matter of investigations into officers alleged to have irregularly granted licences is pending before an inter-ministerial committee and I am also constrained in what I may report. Notwithstanding the above, I hereby report to this august House as follows:

On the 26 April 2012, I conducted an administrative review under Section 118 of the Mining Act 2003 in respect of a complaint Hima Cement Ltd lodged regarding grant of an exploration licence, EL 0932, to East African Gold Sniffing Company Ltd.

It was established, during the administrative review, that the proper procedures under the Mining Act 2003 and Mining Regulations 2004 were not followed in granting Exploration Licence 0932. It was also established that Mining Lease SML 3480 granted to Hima Cement Ltd had expired. The written decision of the administrative review has been made available to the parties and is available to the public.

East African Gold Sniffing Company Ltd is challenging the administrative review’s decision in the High Court. The matter is therefore sub judice and I am unable to comment further.

Meanwhile, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development has instituted a committee to review the current licensing procedures. This is being done with a view of streamlining the processing of applications and improving due diligence in assessing competence of applicants for grant of mineral rights. 

Also, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development has instituted an inter-ministerial committee comprising officials from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Ministry of Public Service, Office of the President, Uganda Investment Authority and my ministry to investigate officers implicated in the alleged irregular grant of mineral rights. The investigations are ongoing and I am unable to comment further.

The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development reaffirms its commitment to establish and promote the development, and strategically manage and safeguard the rational and sustainable exploitation and utilisation of energy and mineral resources for social and economic development of Uganda. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay this communication on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, you can debate it. Debate is open and limited to 10 minutes. Proceed with the debate, honourable member. Are you seeking guidance from me? There is a statement which has been made so give your submission on it. Please proceed. The matter is open for debate now. 

12.00
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The statement before us as presented by the minister did not have the details because she indicated that it is sub judice. Would it therefore be procedurally right for us to debate? First of all, can we debate on information which is not complete, which has been given half-way due to the nature of the case? Secondly, we cannot debate a matter which is already deemed to be sub judice. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, the matter which has been raised is sub judice to a large extent but there are issues which have been raised by the honourable minister which could warrant comment. However, if it is the opinion of the House that the matter is not debatable, I would be bound to say the matter is not debatable. However, there are aspects of the report which could attract some comments; that was my assessment. Proceed but of course observe the sub judice rule.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I oblige to your guidance. I want to thank the honourable minister for her statement and for all the constraints she is going through to administer her mandate - (Interruption).

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, I am wondering whether it is procedurally right to continue making any –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have made a ruling on that. Honourable member, resume your seat. I have said there are aspects which could attract comment, not the details of what is sub judice. That is my ruling. Do you want to challenge it? Please proceed.  

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have rightly guided that we should observe the sub judice issue. If possible, I want to be guided to what extent we can go to because the minister gave not even half of the information which we need to know. How far can we go when the statement is halfway, yet we are bound to know most of the details? Could you guide us to what extent? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I leave that to your judgement, and I suppose you have some judgement. The issues which have been raised, which are sub judice, are clear. In my judgement, there are some aspects which can be commented on. Yes, let him finish then we move.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I think what we are obliged to observe is not to discuss the merits and demerits of the subject matter in court. I will adhere to that. I only want to ask the honourable minister about what she reported that the lease for Hima Cement expired and she communicated to them. We want to know the current status. We were in that place and trucks were bypassing us carrying the limestone. Did you just stop at communicating to them and they are going ahead to do the mining? What is the current status in that area? 

12.02
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

The honourable minister is talking about instituting a committee to review the licensing and assessing the competence of applicants. This is a problem. When we were visiting as the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, we found out that many briefcase companies have been given rights to mine minerals in national parks without consulting even the Uganda Wildlife Authority which keeps these national parks. So we need to go further, not only to constitute a committee to investigate those officers who are involved in this scenario but also to find out more on these other areas where permission has been given to briefcase companies. At the end of the day, this is the reason Government loses money in compensations. 

I request the Minister of Energy, first and foremost to find out more on the rights given to companies and establish whether they are competent to do the work assigned to them. Secondly, investigate those officers who issued licences to Hima, besides other companies which were issued with licences. It is going on and people are buying plots of land where minerals are located. In future, they will be the ones owning the right over these areas and it will hinder our investors who are capable of investing in this sector. People are buying plots where the minerals are. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.05
MR HUSSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, thank you for bringing this statement to the House. Well aware of the sensitivity of the matters relating to mining minerals in Uganda, I would like to urge you to bring more information to this House. The current licensing procedures towards exploitation and exploration of minerals need to be streamlined. We need to bring them here because this matter is not in court.

On the issue being in court and us discussing it, we must understand the sensitivity of the matter given our strength – (Interruption).

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, hon. Fungaroo. I want to inform you that the information you are seeking in regard to the mining procedure is contained in the Mining Act of 2005, which was approved by Parliament of Uganda. 

MR FUNGAROO: When we talk of bringing something here, we mean that you go and extract it from wherever it is and bring it to Parliament – (Interjections) – Why else would we bring the Constitution here when we know some things are already in the Constitution? 

Mr Speaker, there is a problem with our laws when it comes to the issue of mining. We should take this opportunity to look at them critically alongside other matters, like that of oil. Mining of minerals like cement and other minerals should be reviewed. Otherwise, I thank you very much for bringing this statement – (Interjections) - Even if it means attending the court sessions quietly in order to get information on what is going on there, we are ready to do that. We cannot allow the wealth of Uganda to go just like that with confusion between the companies competing for licenses and the profits which come from the mining sector. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there seems to be some little confusion about what we are talking about here. Let me again inform the House. What is before court is clear; it has been established that the mining licence that had been given to Hima Cement has expired. It has also been established that a new licence had been given to East African Gold Sniffing Company. Now, when that licence was given, an administrative review was carried out and it was found that the way the licence was given was not proper and therefore, the licence was cancelled. East African Gold Sniffing Company went to court challenging the decisions of the administrative review that led to the cancellation of its licence. That is what is in court. So, it does not make the whole statement sub judice. 

What is in court is a very limited aspect of this statement. They are challenging the recommendation of the administrative review which led to the cancellation of the licence given to East African Gold Sniffing Company Ltd. So, if you are going to ask questions like, “how was it awarded to East African Gold Sniffing?” that would be sub judice.

12.09
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the minister for her statement. I feel uneasy when unclear circumstances are brought about by Government people. In 1991, a new lease was given to Hima Cement and it is supposed to be expiring on 31 December 2012. I feel perplexed when the minister says that the mining lease for Hima Cement expired yet there is documentation here that indicates that the commissioner, in the names of Wafuba Gwobi – (Interjections) – but this is what the Speaker has pointed out. 

On 15 March 1999, this communication was made indicating to the people who had bought this factory that their lease is expiring on 31 December 2012. Therefore, I feel that the East African Gold Sniffing Company was registered –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do not go into that area. You are now overstepping the area I had allowed for debate. That is the subject of the litigation, so do not go there.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, my prayers are three: One, that East African Gold Sniffing – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please resume your seat.

12.12
 COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker and dear colleagues, I call your attention to point No.2 of the report. “The matter of investigations into the officers alleged to have irregularly granted licences is pending before an inter-ministerial committee...” I want to be convinced that it is not sub judice if we discuss this, because it is administrative and is within our jurisdiction.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is under review by another agency, so let us leave that area. 
 
MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, I feel that it would not be right for us to continue debating this statement from the minister when the issues that are actually of contention are being restricted. I want to ask for your indulgence; it would not be procedurally right for us to go outside the scope and yet the issues in contention are not being debated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have already ruled. (Laughter) Honourable members, if you do not have an area where you can make a comment on this statement, just keep quiet because you would not have found an area. The point raised by hon. Tinkasiimire, for example, is not sub judice but it is important. He says that the licence has expired and this one has been cancelled but there are still trucks ferrying limestone.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, he is just assuming –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he said that he saw them. So, his question is: under what procedure or arrangement is the mining of limestone continuing in that region? That was the question to the minister. Isn’t that a relevant question? Isn’t it? Let the honourable member finish and then we move to the next item.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: This is really shocking. You all know what Hima is and where it is located. Couldn’t have those officers who issued out this new licence alerted Hima that in the interest of this investment, your licence is expiring? They should have gone further to alert these people. However, the fact that they went ahead and issued a licence means that they do have this country at heart. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you want to make a response to some of the issues?

12.16
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I appreciate all your concerns and as I said, I am constrained to give details because the matters are before court. As a ministry, we are carrying out the administrative duty to address the concerns that you have brought up to streamline the processes, investigate those who took the decisions that they did, with a view of coming up with a proper way in which we need to handle these resources.

On matters of reviewing of the Act, arising out of the investigation, definitely issues that will require review of the Mining Act would then be brought to this Floor of Parliament. According to the Mining Act, if a licence expires, then the resource reverts back to Government. For now, that is the update. I am constrained to give further information. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is the issue raised by hon. Tinkasiimire that trucks are ferrying limestone. Are you aware and what do you say about that?

MRS MULONI: That is the issue that I was talking about; the resource reverts to Government and of course there is a process that undergoes -

MRS BAKIREKE: I thank you. The point of order that I want to raise comes from the rule that the minister cited when she was bringing the report here. The minister cited rule 60 as being the reason as to why she brought a report of this calibre to this Parliament. When you read the rule, it puts the matter to determine what is sub judice and what is not to your Chair, Mr Speaker. 

That the minister sat alone in her office and declared – The background is that a matter was raised here as a matter of national importance and in your wisdom, you requested the minister to come here with a statement. She singlehandedly sat in her office and wrote that this was already sub judice whereas the rule she is citing here indicates that it should be in the opinion of the Speaker to declare something sub judice.  Is she therefore in order to have brought here this report, having sat and usurped your powers and declared the matter sub judice even before it was brought here and ruled thus by your Chair? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you so much. All Members of Parliament are supposed to be acquainted with the Rules of Procedure and all Members of Parliament are supposed to act in their own judgement while brining matters before the House. (Applause) If the matter should, in the opinion of the person bringing it, be sub judice, then there is no point in indulging the Speaker to invoke his or her own judgment on whether the matter is sub judice or not. The rules are very clear to all the members. 

When the matter was brought to the House, I exercised my discretion under that same rule to exclude what, in my opinion, would be sub judice and allow debate on areas that I feel are not sub judice. Areas that are sub judice, that are before court, are very clear in my opinion. That is why the point raised by hon. Tinkasiimire and all the other members on the laws and regulations for mining are not sub judice, and that is why I have allowed this debate. The minister has responded. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you do not have to distribute it yourself because there is a lot of help. (Laughter)

12.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, on Tuesday this week I promised to respond to the question set by hon. Dennis Obua, MP for Ajuri County, under rules 31 and 33 of the Rules of Procedure. He asked the following question; “Would the minister explain to this august House why government has failed to pay benefits to the members of the Presidential Commission who served as the head of the Executive in Uganda under Legal Notice No. 5 of 1980?”

Government has not failed to pay terminal benefits to the members of the Presidential Commission who served as the head of the Executive in Uganda under Legal Notice No. 5 of 1980. I wish to inform the House that prior to enactment of the Presidential Emoluments Act 1998, and in the most recent past the Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister Act 2010, the heads of state in Uganda did not have a law providing for payment of retirement benefits to them. Moreover, the Acts, on coming into force, were not retrospective in application. There is therefore no law to guide and regulate payment of retirement benefits to the members of the Presidential Commission who served as head of the Executive in Uganda under Legal Notice No.5 of 1980. 

However, Cabinet considered this matter and following consultations with his Excellency the President, an ex gratia payment of terminal benefits to all the former heads of state, including the members of the Presidential Commission who served as the head of the Executive in Uganda under Legal Notice No. 5 of 1980, was agreed upon. Subsequently, we requested the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide funds for these commitments and they have indicated that they would do so in the fourth coming financial year, 2012/2013, which is around the corner. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that this matter was raised by hon. Betty Amongi sometime in the past and it was raised again by hon. Hamson Obua. The minister has decided to title the response as a question for oral answer. It does not fall in that category; this is a ministerial statement and it attracts debate. I will allow hon. Amongi, hon. Sabiiti and hon. Obua two minutes each.

12.25
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Looking at the statement of the minister, she says that they made a request in this year’s budget. While it is true that they made the request, the information I have right from the budget framework and the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, under which this ministry falls, is that this budget is not in the MTEF. So, I want a clear explanation on whether she is very sure and certain that this particular budget is there. 

I have had an interaction with the committee and I have not seen this particular budget in the MTEF. So, we need clarity on what she is saying or we need the chairperson of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government to confirm whether or not this is in the budget. This is because I have clear information, from my interactions, that it is missing.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, she also states that the Act which we passed does not apply retrospectively. However, I want her to also clarify in the matter of the widow of the late president Milton Obote. I would like her to clarify whether she should be benefitting from the Act and why she has not been benefiting from the Act when it is already assented to. What is the status and what can you tell us on that particular matter? I want to know why the law, in respect to the widow of the late President Obote, is not being implemented. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

12.27
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, the statement of the minister is very clear, that there was no law and there is no law to date authorising the release or the payment of this money. I would like the honourable minister to explain to this House what the ex gratia payment is. Does it cover anybody? Does it mean that all the persons that have ably served this country should be paid ex gratia? Some of us have served this country faithfully in different capacities, are we entitled to this particular payment? 

I think this commission did a good job during that particular period. Where they not serving in certain institutions and being paid money during that time? I am not creating a barrier to this ex gratia payment but can the minister be very specific and be very clear under what circumstances such monies should be paid. Mr Speaker, I beg to request the honourable minister to explain to this House. 

12.29
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to start on the note of the law. I hold a diploma in law, a certificate in law and a Bachelor of Arts in Social Sciences and there are so many lawyers in Cabinet. For the honourable minister to come and tell this Parliament that there is no law to cater for former leaders who served before the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution, I think is not right. 

Mr Speaker, Section 29 of the Parliament Remuneration of Members Act, cap 259, provides as follows: “For the avoidance of doubt, section 3 of the Parliament Remuneration of Members Act shall continue to apply to a President or Vice-President who ceases to hold that office before the commencement of the 1995 Constitution.” Section 3 of the same Act provides as follows: “Remuneration of past presidents and vice-presidents. 3(1) Parliament by a resolution supported by the votes of not less than half of all the Members of Parliament shall authorise the payment to a former holder of the Office of the President or Vice-President of an allowance not less than two thirds of the salary of the President or of the Vice-President respectively.” So, the issue of the law, in my opinion, does not apply. For leaders who served after the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution, the applicable law is the Benefits and Remuneration of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister’s Act passed by this Parliament, I think in 2010. 

Mr Speaker, these are the two applicable laws under which all these former leaders, from Sir Edward Mutesa through Apollo Milton Obote, Idi Amin, Yusuf Lule, Godfrey Binaisa, the shared presidency of justices Nyamuchoncho and Musoke and the late Tito Okello, should be paid. These are people who served this nation. At 50 years, I strongly believe that Uganda is old enough to pay these former leaders what belongs to them. (Applause) The Bible says, “Do unto others what you expect others to do unto you”. It also says “Give to Caesar what belongs to Caesar and to God what belongs to God”.

My plea to Cabinet is that there is a law, there is no doubt about that, and I have quoted for you Bible; the only surviving former President who is resident in Uganda is Mzee Wacha-Olwol. He served as President under Legal Notice No. 5 of 1980, which was about the shared presidency. This old man who served this nation with the late Justice Nyamuchoncho is soon making 90 years. Of course, you know the ailments that are associated with such advanced age. I do not want to see this old man die before receiving his ex gratia retirement benefits and his body is only brought to Parliament. What we will do is to only praise him for what he did when many Ugandans could not sacrifice to lead this country at the time.

Cabinet members, while today we are talking about such benefits in respect of Mzee Wacha-Olwol, tomorrow we may be talking about your benefits. The old man was the highest ranking officer in the Ministry of Public Service. Actually, this ministry should be championing the move to pay such people.

Second, the President, as the Chief Executive, has all the political will. I can lay on the Table letters that have been signed by the President in regard to this particular matter. I am tempted to believe that the problem to do with such payments lies within two ministries – the Ministry of Public Service and Ministry of Finance. Can I therefore, with your permission, Mr Speaker, proceed to lay on the Table some of these documents?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please proceed.

MR DENIS OBUA: Mr Speaker, the first letter is communication from the Ministry of Public Service. If you can give me time –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought you said it was all about laying the papers. Just do that.

MR DENIS OBUA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The first letter is a document from Ministry of Public Service. It is dated 7 November 2011 and addressed to the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury. The subject is about payment of ex gratia retirement benefits to the former presidents, vice-presidents, prime ministers, speakers and deputy speakers of Parliament. It is signed by Jimmy R Rwamafwa, Permanent Secretary. It entails the list of all former leaders who should be paid. According to this communication, the grand total is Shs 1.4 billion. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let that go on record.

MR DENIS OBUA: The second document is a letter addressed to Mzee Wacha-Olwol, former President, on P. O Box 73 Kampala. It came from State House and is dated 27 February 2012. It was signed by Y K Museveni, President. The reference is about payment of ex gratia retirement benefits.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let that go on record as well.

MR DENIS OBUA: Finally, I beg to lay on the Table a summary of the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No. 2. At one point we were told that these payments would be catered for in this schedule but it does not appear anywhere and is now changed to appear in the main budget. So, let me lay this summary for financial year 2011/12. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Isn’t that one already before Parliament. If so, you do not have to lay it.

MR DENIS OBUA: Thank you so much for the opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will allow just limited debate. This guidance thing just consumes our time, so please debate, honourable member.

MR SABITI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Denis Obua quoted the law which talks about former presidents. However, from what he has laid on the Table, I realise the categories are numerous. With your guidance, I would like to suggest that the relevant person looks at these laws. I am saying this because for us to just always take the President’s directive as the basis for payments is dangerous to this country. In that regard, may I get to know whether what he has quoted is correct or not? That is important, because we need to know if the people quoted are the relevant people to be paid. I seek your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Jack Sabiiti, how do I guide on that, surely? Let us hear from hon. Patrick Amuriat.

12.39
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, it is very unfortunate that Cabinet has come here to embarrass themselves. I am saying this because through the Minister of Public Service the Cabinet has exercised double standards. The individuals who got to be leaders of this country by virtue of Legal Notice No. 5 of 1980 are no less presidents than the people who are being considered under the Presidential Emoluments Act of 1998 and the recent Act that we passed in 2010. It is unfortunate that instead of them benefitting in the same way with the former presidents, they are being paid ex gratia.

This ex gratia is a one-off payment to say, “thank you”. It is different from emoluments that keep coming. What we are telling this House is that whereas they gave a dedicated service to this country, you can only thank them before they go back home. What message are we sending to leaders? These are leaders in their own right; whether they came into leadership through Legal Notice No.5 of 1980 or they shot themselves into power like Gen. Idi Amin and Yoweri Museveni, they have been presidents of this country.

I, therefore, would like to seek an explanation from the Minister of Public Service as to why Mzee Wacha-Olwol is being treated differently yet the Musevenis, the Obotes and the Amins are treated in another way.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that I do not appreciate pension issues so much because that is not my area. Even my appreciation of ex gratia may as well be very limited. However, I am rising because I wrote something about the time Prof. Kakoma died and after that, I received very many responses from very senior people including the late Prof. Senteza Kajubi who died recently. 

What surprised me most is that it was not only the national anthem that was composed but there was someone who did a job to come up with the court of arms and someone did a good job to come up with the national flag. The national flag was designed by the late Grace Ibingira. The coat of arms was designed by a one little known Olel, a teacher from Kitgum in Lamwo, who died in 1991. The family members have been calling me that they have heard that they are going to be called to Parliament for recognition. The poetry of the national anthem was written by a Briton and the song was composed by Prof. Kakoma. So, if you are talking of ex gratia, is there a way we can have these three people paid - the late Grace Ibingira’s family members, the late Olel who made the coat of arms, and the late Prof. Kakoma. Is there a way we can have some ex gratia? 

By writing that article, I have carried a very big burden. The family members of Olel keep calling me asking whether they are going to be invited to Parliament. What they want is just recognition. These are people, Dr Crispus Kiyonga will agree with me, to who even an ex gratia of Shs 5 million and a formal recognition with those medals would mean a lot to them. 

Mr Speaker, with your permission, I am wondering whether we could broaden the issue of ex gratia to include these people who – (Interruption)

MR AJEDRA: Thank you, hon. Otto, for giving way. The information I want to give you and the House is that there has been a lot of debate about who designed the national flag. The man who designed the national flag is Mzee Nyai Semei Matia and he resides in my constituency. As a matter of fact, he has the original documents of the national flag and he has written to the Office of the President a number of times. Mr Speaker, I have a copy of those documents. I will also lay them on the Table. (Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much for that information. Mr Speaker, I think at an appropriate time we should ask the Minister of Information and National Guidance to come and give a formal statement on who did what. I was also consulted by some British who said that Mr Peter Wyngard, who was a colonial administrator and was in the police band, worked jointly with the late Kakoma; one wrote the anthem and the other composed the song. I rest my case, but the Minister of Information and National Guidance should come and give a formal statement to Ugandans on who did what and whether they have been paid. 
 
12.46
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of payment to former leaders of this country was raised in this House by two members, hon. Betty Amongi and hon. Denis Hamson Obua. However, the minister preferred to restrict herself to a question raised by hon. Obua and yet the concern of Parliament was to look into issues of payment to all the former leaders. In this case, the minister restricted herself to payment of only members of the Presidential Commission. I think tomorrow, when these issues come to the Floor, the minister will again separately look at other former heads of state and that would be dragging us behind. 

However, the minister said there was no law but went ahead to mention the Presidential Emoluments and Benefits Act. I would wish to read No.3 of Legal Notice No.5 of 1980: “Subject to paragraph 4, all privileges, prerogatives, functions and exemptions formerly enjoyed or exercised by former presidents of the Republic of Uganda under the Constitution or any other written law are hereby vested in the Presidential Commission with effect from the 12th day of May 1980. The Military Commission shall be the heads of state of government and shall exercise executive powers of Government. “

Mr Speaker, with all this very clear, how do we come to tell Parliament that there was no law, that the members of the Presidential Commission cannot be considered under the same law like the presidents, vice-presidents and other leaders to benefit from this? (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

12.48
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I find it very difficult to believe the statement of the minister. I think the minister ought to have made enough consultation of the law she was referring to. In fact, she is wrong. She is referring to the Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister’s Act 2010 and she is stating that this law was not supposed to work retrospectively. However, the actual spirit of this law was for it to work retrospectively and forward. To cite an example, this law was passed in 2010 but it is the Act under which the former Vice-President, Wandira Kazibwe, is being remunerated. Isn’t that acting retrospectively? 

I think the minister should think about amending this statement because it is actually wrong, and they should consider remunerating our party leaders as it is required within the law. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I think we will stop here. Honourable minister, if it is indeed true that there are legal statements and legal provisions referred to by hon. Hamson Obua and that they are in our statute books, then you will be required to review the statement you have just made to the House. I have asked for the laws to be brought to me so that I look at them, but if it is true, then you need to revise your statement so that the House can move forward. (Applause)

12.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca B. Mbaguta Sezi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. First of all, I want to clarify that the former Vice-President, Specioza Kazibwe, is actually not being paid according to that law that was passed in 2010.

Secondly, I would like to say that we did a lot of consultation with the Attorney-General and the Solicitor-General on how we should pay past leaders and we were advised that we are not to pay. We had proposed that we pay them but we were advised not to. One member referred to the Members of Parliament Remuneration Act, 1982 and we had moved on that Act so that we could do the payment, but we were advised that we could not. I focused on the Presidential Commission but that too became complex and we had to do a number of consultations. 

The payment of ex gratia, and I want to clarify, will cover the following people: the former presidents, that covers Sir Edward Mutesa, the late Dr Apollo Milton Obote, the late Idi Amin, the late Yusuf Kironde Lule, the late Tito Okello Lutwa, and the three members of the Presidential Commission, the late Justice Nyamuchoncho, the late Justice Paulo Musoke and Mzee Wacha-Olwol.

The second category that will be paid this ex gratia is the late W.W. Nadiope, the late John Babiha, the late Wilson Gad Toko and the late Dr Samson Kiseka.

The third category is the former prime ministers: The late Eng. Abraham Waligo, the late George Cosmos Adyebo, the late Eric Otema Alimadi and Mr Kintu Musoke.

The fourth category will involve the former Speakers of Parliament who include the late James Wapakhabulo and the late Francis Ayume. The fifth category will include the former Deputy Speakers of Parliament, the late Betty Okwir and Hajji Kigongo.  

I would like to confirm that when this payment is being made, there are other roles as administering estates of the deceased persons and that payment will be made. I would also like to confirm to the members that a budget of Shs 11 billion covering all these categories has been made. The provision is under statutory instrument because it is a form of pension. That is why it is not in our budget framework paper. Ministry of Finance has confirmed that they are giving us the money in July to pay these ex gratia payments.  

While I am neither legal nor paralegal, I would like to confirm on behalf of our ministry that the delay of this payment was due to wide consultations so that we can actually pay. During the enactment of the Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister Act, this is where possibly those amendments should have been. 

I would like to say that the issue that has been raised on the Floor, of the Ugandans who did other categories of work, has not been part of this presentation. When it is raised with the relevant sector ministry, which is not my ministry, Government will look at it. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, my understanding of ex gratia payment is that there is no legal basis for it. It is a token of appreciation. The question I am asking you is in relation to what the hon. Hamson Obua asked, that there are actually legal provisions which have retrospective application that should cover these people substantially and not resort to ex gratia considerations. That is the point I would like you to address. Hon. Obua quoted provisions of the law which directly say people who were before the law would be covered under those laws. So, how does ex gratia come in if there is a legal provision covering the subject and also the issue of surviving widows? 

MRS SEZI: Rt hon. Speaker, we came up with a number of laws including the Emoluments of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister Act and forwarded them to the Attorney-General who advised that we would not be in a position to use them to pay. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you. Mr Speaker, you have guided the House and the minister to relate her presentation to the statement whether according to our colleague, hon. Obua, the law does exist or not. Instead of answering that specific question, is she in order to indulge in consultations with the Attorney-General thereby trying to dodge the question you have asked her? Is she in order, Mr Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the proper thing you should have done - You said that you are neither a lawyer nor a paralegal but the question raised is legal and citing legal provisions, and that would bring the ex gratia payment into issue. If there is a legal basis for the payment to be made, then you do not talk about ex gratia payment. That point has been raised. If you are not able to answer it, why don’t you put it on the hold, but to haphazardly answer it may cause you problems that you may not understand. (Laughter)  

There is a provision of the law that the law should apply retrospectively covering all those leaders. Your position is that there is no law. Would you like to consult on this matter before you make a statement or would you like to make a statement? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise to move a motion without notice under our rules that the minister’s statement be withdrawn from the Floor of this Parliament by her since issues of law have arisen. Because the moment the issue of law arises, she may have to bring another statement. I move the motion that the statement be withdrawn so that she makes further research and then reports to parliament at a later date. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, I had made a proposal to you; would you like us to move on the motion or would you like to make a statement? 

THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, I have agreed with the minister that we take your wise counsel and the minister will go and consult with the Attorney-General on the legal question and then she will come back with a statement after that consultation. Thank you. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, in the circumstances, therefore, I withdraw my motion because we have achieved our objective. (Laughter)
                         
PERSONAL STATEMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, I hope you know the rules that apply to personal statements. They must be noncontroversial and offer an explanation to what has come on the Floor of the House or what has come out in the media that requires your explanation. The statement you have prepared looks like it is five pages; that is very long. So, I am going to ask you to restrict yourself to the response; no backgrounds, just the issues that were raised that affect you directly and just explain them to the House, please.  

1.01
MS ANNETTE NYAKECHO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Rt hon. Speaker, for that wise guidance. I would like to proceed and state my personal explanation on the Floor of this House. This is an explanation on the land grabbing in Atira Parish, Olilim Sub-county, Otuke District by hon. Ogwal Jacinto, MP Otuke County.  I move this statement under rule 42.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, yesterday, 16 may 2012, during the plenary debate chaired by you my colleague, hon. Jacinto Ogwal, MP Otuke County, made an allegation against me to the effect that I and others are championing the grabbing of land from the residents of Atira Parish, Olilim Sub-County, Otuke District. This land, he said, is approximately 45 square kilometres. 

The background issue to this land dates back to 9 December 2012 when the people of Otuke, through their opinion leaders, political, cultural and religious leaders, youth and women leaders, among others, met H.E. the President at Barlegi State Lodge in Otuke District. This group was led by Mr Ogwang Ogoo who is the current district chairperson.

In this meeting, one of the requests raised by the people of Otuke in their memorandum through their leader was that the President directly intervenes in re-stocking Otuke District. This was because Otuke people were the first in Lango sub region to be displaced, especially by the constant raids of the Karimojong cattle rustlers. This was even before the problem was compounded by the over 20 years of the LRA atrocities in Northern Uganda.

In response to this particular request, the President instantly offered 200 heads of cattle for the start to the people of Otuke District. He further advised the leadership and the people of Otuke District to identify land within Otuke and earmark it for the district animal breeding centre/stock farm, and survey and title it in the names of Otuke District Local Government, with the consent of the people in the area. Otuke does not have an animal breeding centre or stock farm and if they got one, this project would be more sustainable and owned by the people to enhance the re-stocking hence fighting poverty and increasing household incomes.

In response to the President’s advice, the opinion leaders and all those that attended the meeting accepted the advice and promised that they would have thorough consultation with the people on the matter and inform the President accordingly.

Furthermore, in a later meeting convened and chaired by the L.C V chairman of Otuke District, Mr Ogwang Ogoo, on the 19 January 2011, after the district council had endorsed and decided that each sub county councillor be tasked to identify land in their various sub counties, he went to Olilim sub county where he comes from and sold the idea to the people. During this meeting, the subject was exhaustively debated and that is how the land in Atira parish, Olilim Sub-county, came to be identified as the proposed site for the district animal breeding centre.

Residents from the 24 villages of Atira parish who attended the meeting unanimously agreed to give the land. A subsequent meeting was again held on the 15 March 2011 and chaired by the district chairman of Otuke parish in Atira parish. In this meeting, it was resolved that the local people of those areas and the land owners own the process of consultation so that a consensus is built as to whether they are in agreement to offer the proposed land or they do not agree to do so.

As the consultations were going on, my colleague, hon. Jacinta Ogwal, after seeing the President’s letter, which I personally made a copy of and sent to him, went to Atira parish and the neighbouring parishes of Ogwete and Amunga and started making accusations against me that I had stolen people’s land. This action prompted the local residents led by Mr Oboro Otiti- (Mr Odonga Otto rose_) If you will allow me to say something about Oboro Otiti; he was elected by the people themselves to lead them. This action prompted the local residents, led by Mr Oboro Otiti, among others, to take this issue and resolve the matter themselves as the wanainchi of the area.

When the above resolution was communicated to the people of Atira parish, they requested their political leaders, including myself, to stay aside and allow them as area residents to consult independently and communicate their resolution to the district through the sub-county, which some of us respected. This resolution was made during a meeting dated 30 March 2012, which we all attended, including my colleague, district leaders and the local residents. Subsequent meetings were then held by the local residents without involving any political leadership of the district. This meeting of the wanainchi was held on the 4 May 2012.

I got information that when the local residents of Atira parish, Olilim Sub-county, organised their second meeting on the 6 May 2011, my colleague, hon. Jacinta Ogwal-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it 2011?

MS NYAKECHO: Sorry, 2012; it was a typing error. On the 6 May 2012, my colleague, Mr Jacinto Ogwal, attempted to illegally attend the meeting. I was reliably informed that he was allegedly chased away from the meeting- (Interruption)

MR JACINTO OGWAL: Rt hon. Speaker, I do not know the person the honourable member is talking about. It was I who made the statement yesterday and my name is Jacinto and not Jacinta – (Laughter) - and she knows me very well. Is it in order for her to keep on insisting and calling me Jacinta when she knows very well that my name is Jacinto? (Laughter) Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To the knowledge of the Speaker, the name Jacinta belongs to a woman and the name Jacinto belongs to a man. If there should have been any mix up of Jacinta and Jacinto, honourable member, you should restrict yourself to calling Jacinto. (Laughter)

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. I apologise to my colleague. I think it was a typing error; someone wrote it as Jacinta.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I got information that when the local residents of Atira parish, Olilim Subcounty, organised their second meeting on the 6 May 2012, my colleague, hon. Jacinto Ogwal, attempted to illegally attend the meeting to which he had not been invited. I was reliably informed that he was allegedly chased away from the meeting with humiliation and total embarrassment. 

In my opinion, I think that my colleague, hon. Jacinto Ogwal, believed that I am behind his humiliation and hence the reason for the spirited fight he has put up against me. Mr Speaker, this is not true. As I stated earlier on, the local residents had requested us to stay away from their consultative meetings and wait for the resolutions they would come up with, which would later on be communicated to the district through the sub county.

Concerning my letter to the President, this was an update on the status of the on-going consultations with the relevant stakeholders, namely, the local residents, the sub-county council and the district council.

I am reliably informed by Mr Oboro Otiti that the residents have met and taken a decision to offer this land, which is proximately 8 by 5 square kilometres. Out of this, three square kilometres is for the proposed Otuke animal breeding centre/stock farm and other infrastructure like buildings, a proposed health centre, primary school, roads, among others. For the rest of the land, the wanainchi proposed that it remains a communal cultivation ground with no particular ownership for all the villagers.

The residents have also proposed that the land be leased in the name of Atira parish. This idea was generated by the community who thought that it was wise for them to allow development to take place since for over 50 years the land has been vacant and redundant. As stated earlier, it has also always been a transit route for the cattle rustlers, which is the main reason as to why it has remained vacant with no human settlement for that long. The decision of the local residents is yet to be communicated to Olilim Sub-county council, which will in turn, after sitting, communicate their decision or resolution to the district council. The district council will then sit to approve this proposal. The documentation to this effect will then later on be submitted at the appropriate time.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I wish to categorically and emphatically state that the allegations of land grabbing labelled against me by my colleague, hon. Jacinto Ogwal, are baseless, unfounded, frivolous, malicious, filled with political propaganda and aimed at keeping my people behind development. This is the politics that has been in the area for a long time and which the NRM Government is fighting to eliminate.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I will not sit down and watch my people continue to suffer and live in abject poverty. (Applause) I, therefore, wish and request my colleague to join me in the struggle to liberate my people from poverty to prosperity for all in Otuke District through the NRM Government instead of antagonising the goodwill that the President has shown to the people of Otuke District. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules about this are clear; a personal statement does not attract debate, but the issues raised are involving and it might be wise that we consider them. I think we shall need to refer them to the committee in charge of infrastructure so that it can look at them and resolve them as well as advise Parliament more comprehensively. Let us have the next item. 

Honourable members, I have been informed that this statement on the National Youth Venture Capital Fund cannot be made today. The reason is – the Minister should have been here to tell us – but the reason is that there has been some correspondence on this issue and therefore there is no final position on the matter. This is what I was told, and I felt I should share with you so that you also know. 

You can make statements on it if you like.  However, the Minister says that a statement will be made once the proper consultations with other offices involved in this and the banks have been concluded. Apparently, the information that has gone to the banks is not the same and all the banks are doing different things in an uncoordinated manner. That has been the matter affecting members, and it is the reason we brought it forward so that it is discussed before we go for recess. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, this is a very sensitive matter. It has been reported that each partner bank is doing its own things and yet we are talking about billions of shillings in the name of supporting the youth. In the meantime, as we harmonise the modus operandi, can we pronounce ourselves and say we halt the process until we have come up with a common position rather than having each bank doing its own things and therefore risking the fund as well as making the youth lose out? I beg to propose. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, I have asked the minister to come here tomorrow at 10 o’clock to make a statement. You can make those requests then.

MRS SANTA OGWANG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The guidance I am seeking is in relation to the other submission, the personal statement given by hon. Annet Okwenye. I am sorry for taking you back but as a member of the Lango Parliamentary Group, coming from the same sub-region, the inquiry I want make is whether the timeframe – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this issue came as a matter of public importance. Allegations were made against a member and I used my discretion to allow a member explain instead of having a confrontational debate between the two. Now that she has explained, I have referred the matter to the committee in charge of land. So, all of you will be summoned to appear before the committee at an appropriate time so that this matter is cleared. By the time it comes back to the House, it will no longer be that controversial. That is my guidance. So if you are from the Lango Parliamentary Group, you can as well appear before the committee. There is nothing you are going to say to this House that will help the situation.

MR JACINTO OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I think it is the duty of all of us, Members of Parliament, to guarantee peace in the areas which we represent. Secondly, I think it is a fundamental right that each of us should protect the property and lives of individuals. Moreover, lives are sacred but tomorrow we shall have people dying in Otuke while here we are referring the matter to the committee. (Interjection) Please, I have an eviction order here and loosely translated, it says, “An eviction order written by the LC II Chairperson of Atira…” -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it an eviction order? An eviction order comes from court; is that a court order? 

MR JACINTO OGWAL: Mr Speaker, this is written by the LC II chairperson –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, it is an eviction notice. 

MR JACINTO OGWAL: But that is what is being carried out.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, you are on the record of Parliament and you need to use language that is understandable. Please resume your seat briefly. If you say it is an eviction order, those are issued only by court, but if it is an eviction notice, then anybody can issue them. So which one are you holding in your hand?

MR JACINTO OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I meant an eviction notice by the LC II Chairperson of Atira parish in Olilim Subcounty. Loosely translated, it reads: “To the LC I Chairperson. Sir, by the order of this letter, I am informing you to evict the residents of...” - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, there are legal issues about translations. If you are now talking about your own translation, we cannot take it on the Hansard because translation has got to be certified by people who do translation. 

I have tried to assist you so that you can come to a proper resolution of these issues because if you are to open up the debate - The statements that have been made by the honourable member and the statement that you have made are no longer in the judgement of the Speaker to rule over. You need more information on this thing, and that is why I referred it to the committee. It might be more fruitful to do that. In the mean time, of course, the ministers will not sit and wait for people to die. They will take appropriate action, look at the situation as the Executive and deal with it. I thought I had done this properly. 

DR OGWAL: Mr Speaker, most obliged and thank you for the way you have guided.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011

1.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakabulindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was fortunate today at 10 a.m. to get a copy of the report of the Committee on Social Services. I have read it and internalised it. I have looked at the points they raise and their conclusions and I am of the view - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this is your Bill; you are supposed to move your motion for second reading and speak to your Bill. You are not speaking to the committee report; you are justifying your Bill. 

MR BAKABULINDI: Mr Speaker, it is coming. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, please move your motion for second reading of the Bill.

MR BAKABULINDI: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the University and Other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2011 be read for the second time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Honourable minister, you can speak to your motion.

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, for some time now we have been having a problem in the universities, particularly the public universities, on the issues of the Vice-Chancellor and his deputies and the way they are being recruited. After a long time of interacting with different authorities, and on considering some other recommendations from the Visitation Committee and the White Paper, we thought it was a matter of urgency that we should harmonise the methodology on how the Vice-Chancellor and his deputies would be recruited in the university. This will solve the current problem in the universities. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

1.26
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Dr Sam Lyomoki): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to present the report of the Committee on Social Services on the University and Other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2011. 

This is the report of the Committee on Social Services on the University and Other Tertiary Institutions Bill, 2011.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, you will not read the entire report. You have seven minutes, so summarise the report.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much. The Bill was introduced for the first reading and referred to the committee. 

The object of the Bill is to amend the University and Other Tertiary Institutions Act in order to reform the method of identifying and recruiting vice-chancellors, deans and heads of department of public universities, and to put in place an open and competitive recruitment process based on merit. The amendments will lead to the abolition of the direct recruitment process based on traditional and institutional politics. 

In handling the Bill, the committee interfaced with the ministry and other stakeholders as listed on page 1 and page 2. The committee also looked at the Visitation Committee report on public universities, the Government White Paper and the report that was presented to this House in the Eighth Parliament by the same committee. 

Background 
The University and Other Tertiary Institutions Act was enacted in 2001 and has been amended twice, in 2003 and 2006, to fill some gaps. Despite the amendments, it was realised that there were a lot of gaps and inadequacies, which led His Excellency the President in March 2006 to come up with a proposal and appoint a visitation committee led by Prof. McGregor. The Visitation Committee was tasked with visiting, studying and making a situational analysis of public universities in Uganda and coming up with recommendations. 

The Visitation Committee completed its work in 2007 and Government subsequently issued a White Paper with key recommendations. The White Paper was presented to Parliament in 2008 and referred to the social services committee of the Eighth Parliament. The committee carried out extensive stakeholder consultations on the recommendations of the White Paper and further undertook a benchmarking exercise to universities and related institutions in Kenya, Ghana, South Africa and the United States of America. The list of the universities visited is attached as Appendix No.1. The committee later on presented its report in 2010.

The committee has analysed the White Paper and submissions of the stakeholders and also considered submissions by the public universities. The committee has come to the conclusion that there is need to amend the Act holistically to accommodate the following proposals: There are several proposals - up to about 12 - that in the view of the committee should be amended. Because of time, I am not going to go into the details. 

On the stalemate at Makerere University, which this Bill is supposed to resolve, the committee had the following observations: 

1. 	The university successfully had the last Vice-Chancellor, Prof. Livingstone Luboobi, who served from 2004 to 2009 under the current legal framework. As the university was bracing itself to search for a new vice-chancellor at the end of 2009, the Ministry of Education and Sports wrote stopping the search process for a vice-chancellor, awaiting reforms in the administration and management of public universities which were going to stem from the recommendations of the Visitation Committee. 
2. 	The suspension of the search process resulted into the appointment of a vice-chancellor and deputies in acting capacities. This appointment was meant to last not more than six months, during which time the process of reforms was to be fast tracked and implemented. 

3. 	It is now approximately three years but the fast tracking of the reform process is yet to be completed. As a result, the Vice-Chancellor and his deputies have been in acting positions. This state of affairs has caused unnecessary tension and uncertainty at the university on the part of the persons occupying the offices, those intending to occupy these offices and other stakeholders. 

4. 	The provisions of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act had been viewed by the Ministry of Education and Sports as insufficient to cater for appointment of the Vice-Chancellor of Makerere University. This explains why all public universities have vice-chancellors except Makerere, on the advice of the ministry. Subsequently, this Bill was presented. While the minister wanted the Bill to be passed, the committee has also learnt that the search process had commenced. 

5. 	Legal interpretation has since been provided by the office of the Solicitor-General to the effect that the Vice-Chancellor of Makerere University can be selected under the existing legal regime just like the case of other public universities. 

6. 	The Minister of Education and Sports informed the committee that she had given Makerere University a go-ahead to commence the search process for the Vice-Chancellor. 

7. 	Stakeholders at Makerere University concur with the legal interpretation of the Solicitor-General that the positions of vice-chancellor, deputies and heads of department can be adequately dealt with using the current legal regime just like other public universities. 

8. 	In the opinion of the stakeholders, the involvement of the minister in the search process amounts to overstepping the powers of the minister, and halting the search process may attract litigation.

9. 	The committee has analysed the intervention by the minister and tends to agree with the stakeholders that this intervention by the minister in September 2009 appears to have sparked the stalemate at the university. Correspondences and extracts of minutes arising out of the intervention are attached as Appendix 2. The committee is of the view that even if the Government had issues with the processes at Makerere, there were several proactive options the minister could have utilised to pursue Government interest. 

General Observations on the Bill

The Bill attempts to cater majorly for only one recommendation out of 46 in the Government White Paper - that was a typing error - specifically recommendation 15, which states as follows:
“Posts for officials and top academics will be advertised, instead of the current elective systems and the proposed search team approach, the council will present the Chancellor with two names from which to appoint a vice-chancellor.” 

Moreover, this is a departure from the recommendation of the Visitation Committee. The Visitation Committee had instead recommended as follows:  

“To improve the current elective systems of officials and top academics which has been prescribed by law, public universities should consider a system which combines the search team approach and the election approach. In such a system, the electorate would vote for a candidate they want from a list of names presented by the search team.” The explanation by the minister for the proposed departure from the current form of election and that proposed by the visitation committee is that such elections usually breed factionalism and in some instances are hinged largely on vested interests as opposed to the ability of the individuals to offer strategic leadership. 

The committee was not convinced that the Senate search committee and Council, which are involved in one way or another in the identification of a vice-chancellor, lack the capabilities of understanding/comprehending the strategic direction of a university. As a consequence, they may fail to appoint a vice-chancellor or head of department who fits within the strategic thinking/plan of the university.

Moreover, the minister could not provide information to the effect that the former vice-chancellor who served Makerere from 2004 to 2009 under the current legal regime or those of the other public universities who, by the way are appointed under the existing law, are wanting in the execution of their duties or were appointed along factionalism and other vested interests. In any case, by the time candidates are subjected to a vote, they will have gone through a process, including the search, through which they will have met certain minimum requirements.

Additionally, the Bill fails to take note of the seriousness and urgency of the other recommendations in the White Paper and indeed, the report of the Committee on Social Services. Just to quote the conclusion of the report of the committee, it says: “In as much as the committee generally appreciates the recommendations in the Government White Paper on the report of the Visitation Committee to Public Universities, it is imperative that the reform process should not be a one-off ritualistic event, but rather an institutionalised, periodic and participatory tool for response to policy challenges in pursuit of sustainable national development. Key to such reforms is the need for a comprehensive amendment of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act 2001 as amended in 2003 and 2006.”

The committee notes that a lot of resources and time were committed in coming up with these very good and useful reports. It is important that any amendments to the current Act take care of the proposals contained therein. Even if we are to agree in principle that not all the recommendations/amendments can be undertaken at a go, the most logical approach would be to start with those which are more critical. 

The committee observed that if this approach was to be taken, the manner of appointing the vice-chancellors and heads of department is not the most critical gap in the law. The critical areas which should be priority include: 
•	Streamlining the roles and responsibilities of the various management organs in universities and other tertiary institutions to mitigate the existing administrative conflicts;
 
•	Reforming the administrative structure of the respective public universities and other tertiary institutions; 

•	Providing for efficient and effective financial controls, to mention but a few.

The other public universities, namely, Kyambogo, Busitema and Mbarara, view this Bill as tailored for Makerere University. According to the heads of these universities, the mischief the Bill tries to address does not exist in their respective universities. Even then, the other stakeholders at Makerere University are of the view that the proposed Bill does not address the mischief at Makerere and in any case, if passed in the current form it may worsen the situation. Views of the stakeholders are attached as Appendix 3.   

In conclusion, the Bill is grossly inadequate and fails to bring on board all the necessary adjustments, which are required to improve the systems and functioning of public universities. The scenario, which the Bill attempts to cure, namely, the stalemate at Makerere, is being addressed under the existing legal framework. So, the committee does not agree that the proposed Bill, in its current form, is the solution. 

It is the committee’s view that we need more comprehensive amendments to the current law to fill the gaps in the Act as already identified by the report of the Visitation Committee, the Government White Paper on the report of the Visitation Committee, and the Social Services Committee report on the White Paper. Consequently, a comprehensive Bill should urgently be tabled.

In conclusion, the committee does not support the motion for second reading of the Bill. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the report of our committee, that we should not spend time on this Bill because it is not comprehensive enough to cover the subject, which has been raised in its recommendation. The committee is saying that the motion for second reading should be rejected. That is the substance. The minister wants the motion approved and the committee wants the motion for second reading rejected. I will allow debate. I should be suspending the House at exactly 2 O’clock so that we can go for lunch. So, we will conclude debate by that time. Can we do two minutes each? Let us see how far we go and we take a break.

1.41
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman and his committee for being very succinct. The Ministry of Education has added confusion at Makerere University. When we are legislating, we should not be target-specific. The legislation should cover all universities and tertiary institutions. This particular Bill was targeting a university. 

How could the Ministry of Education depart from a legal framework which had been passed by this Parliament and they go ahead to initially stop the search process? According to No.1, page 4, they stopped the search process in 2009 and went ahead to recommend – page 5, observation number 6 - that the search process commences. In a nutshell, they are the ones who caused a stalemate or confusion. The Ministry of Education should actually apologise to this House. We did not give you the authority to start departing from a legal framework which had been laid down for a search process for a vice-chancellor in any public university.  

So, I entirely agree with the recommendation of the committee that this was not the most critical problem that we had in the amendment of the parent Act of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions. There are other issues to do with the mechanism of reporting. A number of times, the ministry is also kept in the dark because most university councils say that the Act guarantees their independence. 

Honourable members, you have seen such a situation here. When the Minister of Education is asked to comment on any issue in any public university, their hands are tied because they lack the requisite information because of the over-independence that the Act has guaranteed the university councils. So, in my view the search process was not the most critical thing. In fact, the Ministry of Education owes us an apology in causing this confusion at Makerere University. I beg to submit. 

1.44
MR WILLIAM KWEMARA (NRM, Kyaka County, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is the considered view of the committee that we should have a holistic approach to the Bill, and I do support the committee. 

I went through the Bill and it tries to address the management of the university. World over, universities are now‘ transforming into college systems, but this Bill does not address the issue of the college systems in public universities. While we are moving into the college systems, the assumption is that these universities are growing big and we need to create semi-autonomous institutions in form of colleges headed by principals. This Bill does not talk about the office of the principals at all. 

When you go to Makerere now, you find that the college system is already bringing problems even if it is still in its formative stage. There is the office of the principal that we are not legislating about. There is the office of the dean, which has become more or less ceremonial. As we talk, the office of the dean is being under-subscribed. That makes me believe that there are several other problems that we need to look at.

Also, I do not agree with the idea of subjecting the leaders of the university to external advertising, especially at department level. The core business of the university is teaching and learning. These leaders at departmental level are academic managers, not administrative managers. Every university has got an ideology, a philosophy. When you start importing people from everywhere, then you are killing the ideology and culture of the university. (Member timed out.)

1.46
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kaborole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is unfortunate that the Minister of Education is not here, although she is represented. We respect education and we expect much more organised material from the Ministry of Education. For the Ministry of Education to present such an inadequate Bill makes us worry so much. I think it is high time the ministry woke up to this reality because we are suffering as a nation. 

Makerere University has become a laughing stock and it has become a shame for this country. We who were in Makerere during our times feel very sorry about it. So, when the Ministry of Education comes up with such a minute and lame Bill, this makes us even much more worried. I am of the view that we need a comprehensive – (Interruption)

MS ASAMO: Thank you. I call upon my colleague not to use the word “lame” because you insult some of us – (Interjections) – So, is he in order, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are enjoined by the Rules of Procedure to use words that are appropriate for the House, that are sensitive to the courtesy of the House, that are respectful and courteous to the rest of the members of the House. The use of the word “lame” therefore is inappropriate and the honourable member should withdraw it. 

MR RUHUNDA: I withdraw the word and I apologise. In fact, I did not intend to use that word. The word “abysmal” somehow got replaced by “lame”. So I really apologise and withdraw the word.

I support the position of the committee that this second Bill be withdrawn and a comprehensive one that addresses our university needs in totality be brought to this august House.

1.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Mr Speaker, as I indicated earlier, I read the report and I knew that the debate would be biased on one side. The members who have so far debated are not saying that the amendments are irrelevant but they are saying that it is not comprehensive. That being the case, without wasting the time of this honourable House, I beg to withdraw the Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Bill withdrawn and it saves our time.

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, this is a very strange situation in the history of this Parliament. For those of you who are good at reading, if you go and read our parliamentary records, it is very difficult to find a statement concluded like this one: “In conclusion, Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee does not support the motion for the second reading”.

Now, the problem in this country is that either we do not have the truth at all or we never want to lose. So, Mr Speaker, I request you to guide both the chairperson and the minister. Under normal circumstances, before we come to a stage like this one, to this level of embarrassment, the committee should have internally sorted out this matter. Now they came here just to waste our time. They actually have no work for us; they came here for embarrassment. The chairman knows that because he has been here for a long time. 

Therefore, I urge you, chairperson, that in future, whenever you have a motion of this nature, you sort out the matter with the responsible minister. You, hon. Bakabulindi, know that; why are you wasting your time? Do not do it again. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill has been withdrawn. However, the honourable minister should have been fair to the House because we have spent time on it. He should have said something about the time the committee has spent on the Bill and these so many minutes we have spent on the Bill. Say something, honourable minister; you are not going to get away with this like that. You should also advise us on when you are revisiting the amendment and bringing it back so that our efforts are not in vain. 

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I thank you for guiding the House. I am looking forward to seeing my honourable minister standing up. However, the minister had already, in the eyes of the public outside there, said that the House is biased when as Parliament we enjoy giving our balanced view and we are not biased only towards his Bill. I think that it would be procedurally right for the minister to make the record right, because even the matters debated by a few members was their view but not being biased towards the Bill he is presenting. He should not have gone away without putting this on record, that we, Members of Parliament, have goodwill for his Bill and that we are trying to make our submission, which we enjoy as a House, rather than presenting Parliament as being already biased against his Bill which is about to come back again.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the word “bias” is not necessarily negative. The honourable minister has said that from the debate, this thing is now one-sided. That is bias. For all purposes, the debate from the chair and the people who contributed were on one side and nobody balanced it; the House was already biased, in his assessment. I think it is not an irregular word to use in terms of an assessment of this. It is recognition actually.

1.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakabulindi): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I cannot go without appreciating the role the committee played. I recall that we visited the committee twice and we had a feeling that they were going to invite us again so that we react to most of the points that had been raised. That is why from the word go, I said that looking at the trend of the report and the way it has been structured, I really read that the members would be convinced by those sweet words.

Now that we have agreed that I withdraw the Bill, immediately we arrive in the committee we shall harmonise most of the points that they have raised. We knew that the two issues that were delayed were so crucial but according to them, they said we even put the others on board. In fact, they are appreciating our amendments but they said that they will not get another chance to – (Interjection) - We are going to do that one very quickly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the only problem is that you insisted on moving your motion for second reading. You should have come and said that you would not move this motion for second reading because you will need to go back and do this thing. You came and insisted on moving the motion for second reading. The House is suspended until 3.30 p.m. Have lunch.

(The House was suspended at 1.55 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.33 p.m., the Deputy Speaker, presiding_)

BILLS
SECOND READING

the Transfer of Convicted Offenders Bill, 2007

3.33
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER  (LT GEN. (RTD) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Transfer of Convicted Offenders Bill, 2007 be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Would you like to speak to your Bill or should we go straight to the committee?

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, I think we should go straight to the committee so that we save time. 

3.34
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Baka Mugabi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. This is the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Transfer of Convicted Offenders Bill, 2007 – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, try to summarise in seven minutes. 

MR BAKA: The Bill was read for the first time on 23 March 2012 and was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in accordance with rules 112 and 113 of the Rules of Procedure.

Background

A conference of law Ministers from Commonwealth countries was held in 1986 in the Zimbabwean capital, Harare. At this meeting, a scheme providing for the transfer of convicted offenders amongst Commonwealth countries was debated and adopted. Uganda as a Commonwealth country has an obligation to enact the present piece of legislation to accord with the provisions of the Harare Scheme. Article 19 of the said Scheme states as follows: 

“Any country which enacts legislation to give effect to this Scheme shall notify the Commonwealth Secretary-General of the fact and shall inform him of the proper channel of communication and deposit with him a copy of the legislation.” 

In addition to the above stated international obligation, many Ugandan nationals convicted and sentenced in foreign countries have continued to express their desire to serve their sentences at home to no avail. This is because of lack of the requisite domestic legislation to regulate their transfer and subsequent handling.

Methodology

In the process of analysing the Bill, the committee discussed the Bill and received memoranda from the following stakeholders: 

•	Uganda Prisons Service 
•	Uganda Law Reform Commission 
•	Directorate of Public Prosecutions 
•	United Nations Office of the High Commission for Human Rights 
•	Uganda Law Society 
•	Law Development Centre.

Object of the Bill

The object of the Bill is to give legal effect to the Scheme for transfer of convicted offenders within the Commonwealth. The provisions of the Bill, even when enacted, will empower the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs to approve and facilitate the repatriation and transfer of convicted prisoners between Uganda and any other Commonwealth country of which they are citizens or nationals, or with which they have close ties like permanent residence or domicile, and which countries have substantially similar legal arrangements as those embodied in this Bill. 

The principle object of this mutual arrangement within the Commonwealth is that a person convicted of an offence in a foreign country should be given an opportunity, with his or her consent and that of the countries concerned, to serve his or her sentence of imprisonment in his or her home country. This would promote the rehabilitation of the offender and the offender’s eventual integration into the community to which he or she belongs.

The Bill further empowers the minister to apply the provisions of the Act to a country which, though not in the Commonwealth, the minister is satisfied that it has enforced a law providing for the transfer of convicted offenders from its territory to Uganda on substantially similar terms as are provided in this Act. In that case, the transfer scheme will apply only between that country and Uganda. 

In addition, paragraphs 3 and 4 of clause 23 also empower the minister, by statutory instrument, to apply the provisions of the Act to countries which do not have an equivalent law but with which Uganda has entered into arrangements for transfer of convicted offenders from Uganda to any such country or from any such country to Uganda. This will be subject to such modifications as may be specified in the arrangement. These provisions will obviously be convenient if Uganda wishes to apply the Act to neighbouring countries. 

General Observations

The committee observed that: 

The scheme for the transfer of convicted offenders within the Commonwealth is designed for persons convicted and sentenced to a term of imprisonment. It is for this reason that a convicted offender is defined as a person upon whom a sentence has been imposed. The implication is that not only must the person have been convicted but also a sentence must have been imposed on him or her. The scheme envisages finality of the decision in the sentencing country before a convicted offender can be eligible for transfer to the administering country. 

However, clause 3 of the same Bill defines “convicted offender” as a person who has been found guilty of an offence or upon whom a sentence has been imposed. This formulation, which includes the disjunctive “or”, renders the requirement, that the sentence has been imposed, an alternative consideration rather than a mandatory requirement for triggering the provisions of the Act, contrary to the declared principle of the scheme and as further reflected in its definition. 

The definition further contradicts clause 6(b) of the Bill, which requires that the judgment in respect of the offence committed is final as a precondition for the transfer of a convicted prisoner. A finding of guilty does not bring finality to a criminal trial. The definition of a convicted prisoner should therefore not include a person who has been found guilty but rather be restricted to persons upon whom a sentence has been imposed. 

Considering that the scheme targets convicted offenders, the only facilities in which such persons may be lawfully kept in Uganda are prisons, mental health facilities if the person is of unsound mind, or rehabilitation centres if the person is under the age of 18. There ought not to be any possibility of the minister designating any other place for serving one’s sentence upon transfer into Uganda for completion of that sentence as envisaged in clause 16. 

Where the transfer of a convicted offender is based on a request from an administering country, there is need for stronger safeguards against potential abuse by the requesting country. Due regard should be placed on its human rights record and the operation and condition of its prison system, existence of an inspection mechanism etc. This is with a view to assess its observance of human rights standards, to ensure that the convicted offender will not be placed in a situation where he or she is particularly vulnerable to possible abuse as a result of such transfer, and to adhere to the principle of non-refoulement.

Principle 16(1) of the Body of Principles for the Protection of all Persons under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment obligates competent authorities, immediately after transfer of an imprisoned person from one place of imprisonment to another, to notify members of his or her family or other appropriate persons of his or her choice of the transfer. If the imprisoned person is a juvenile or is incapable of understanding his entitlement, the competent authority shall, on its own initiative, undertake the notification. Special attention shall be given to notifying parents or guardians. There is no such provision currently in the Bill. Consideration should be made to include similar obligations under clause 10 of the Bill. 

Article 6(4) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) provides that anyone sentenced to death shall have the right to seek pardon or commutation of the sentence. However, in terms of amnesty, clarity should be made on the fact that amnesty is granted to those who are excluded from facing trial rather than convicted offenders. According to Uganda’s legal regime, for one to qualify for amnesty they must not have been tried yet the Bill applies to persons who have been tried, convicted and sentenced.

Similarly, amnesties that prevent the prosecution of individuals who may be legally responsible for war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity and other gross violations of human rights, including torture, are inconsistent with the state’s human rights obligation. To that extent, perpetrators of such crimes should be excluded from such privileges under the Bill particularly in clauses 19.

Provisions of the reports under clause 21 should be made mandatory. In addition, the administering country should guarantee access to a convicted person’s place of detention for independent inspection mechanisms. On this account, the Bill should integrate rule 55 of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners of 1977. It states that there shall be a regular inspection of penal institutions and services by qualified and experienced inspectors appointed by a competent authority. Their task shall be, in particular, to ensure that these institutions are administered in accordance with the existing laws and regulations, with a view to bringing about the objectives of penal and correctional services.

Clause 22 of the Bill envisages that the costs of transfer are to be met by the Government of Uganda and that of the sentencing country in such proportions as may be agreed upon, either generally or in respect to any particular case. Considering that there could be cases where by reason or the nature of the offence committed, such as the white-collar crimes, it would be inequitable to apply public resources to the repatriation of the convicted prisoner back to Uganda. It should therefore be a requirement that in case of a transfer of an offender to Uganda, the proportion of expenses of such a transfer agreed to be met by the Government of Uganda will be borne by such offender or by someone on their behalf. In the alternative, the minister should have the powers to require a person, with or without a surety, to give an undertaking to pay part of the expenses to the minister. Such expenses shall be regarded as a debt owed to the State. Only when the offender is indigent or for any other good reason should the costs be met by the Government of Uganda.

Under of the Magistrate’s Court Act and the Trial on Indictment Act, committal to a prison or a mental health facility pursuant to a finding of guilty is by court only and not administrative order. Committal to a mental health facility pursuant to a finding of inability to stand trial is the only situation in which an administrative order may form the basis of such detention. In that situation, committal is effected by the way of the minister, upon consideration of the court record, issuing a warrant direct to the court, ordering that the accused may be confined as a criminal lunatic in a mental hospital or other place suitable for custody. In that case, the court gives directions necessary to carry out that order. 

Since the Bill concerns convicted prisoners rather than those found not fit to stand trial by reason of insanity, the possibility of continuation to serve a sentence on the basis of an administrative order therefore ought to be excluded by deletion of that phrase. This is in order to maintain procedural consistency between the relevant legislations mentioned above and the Bill.

Clause 23 of the Bill specifically deals with the ministerial power to apply this Act to other countries outside those envisioned under the Harare Scheme. The above provisions notwithstanding, clauses 2 and 4 of this same Bill narrow down its application to only convicted offenders within the Commonwealth member states. This is contrary to the provisions of both the memorandum and the preamble to the Bill alluded to herein above.

Finally, clause 23 of the Bill provides for the ministerial power to apply provisions of the Act to countries beyond those envisaged under the Harare Scheme. The need to incorporate these is, in our view, justified, given the fact that many of our neighbours are not members of the Commonwealth.

The clause further stipulates that in exercise of the said power, the minister may, by statutory instrument with the approval of Parliament, apply the provisions of this Act to a country not in the Commonwealth. Granting the minister power to apply the Act through issuance of the statutory instrument and at the same time requiring the minister to seek parliamentary approval is, in our view, unnecessarily restrictive and likely to result into red tape and inordinate delays.

On the other hand, section 121 of the Prisons Act has a provision pertaining to the detention of convicted offenders sentenced abroad. In light of the fact that both provisions - clause 23 of the Bill and section 121 (2) of the Prisons Act - are substantially dealing with the same matter, we recommend that these two provisions be reconciled.

The committee recommends that the Transfer of Convicted Offenders Bill, 2007 be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the minutes of the committee’s meetings with the stakeholders. Attached are appendages of their memoranda to the committee. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us have that on record. Thank you, chairman of the committee. 

Honourable members, in the gallery today we have Mass Communication students from the Uganda Christian University with their lecturers. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

The motion is that the Transfer of Convicted Offenders Bill, 2007 be read the second time. The report that has been presented by the chairman of the committee confirms the necessity of this Bill. It also confirms the lack of controversy in it. That is why they agree that the Bill be passed with some amendments.

Honourable members, with your indulgence, I would like to ask you to reserve any discussions only to specific issues that the committee has raised in regard to the provisions of the Bill itself. Are there any members who disagree with the general principles of the Bill? If not, I would like to propose a question for debate. In the case that we all agree to the principle of the Bill, we can adopt it at second reading before we get to discuss the specific clauses. Is that proper?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I now put the question to the motion that the Bill entitled, “The Transfer of Convicted Offenders Bill, 2007” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE TRANSFER OF CONVICTED OFFENDERS BILL, 2007

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR BAKA MUGABI: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that in the definition of “convicted offender”, we substitute the word “or” with the word “and”. The justification is that the finding of guilt as presented in the current definition does not bring finality to a criminal trial. It also contradicts the spirit in clause 6 of the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There being no objection, I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I beg to propose an amendment to the definition of the sentencing country. I beg to move that we delete the words, “who may be or is transferred”. So, it should read, “Sentencing country means the country in which the sentence is imposed on the convicted offender”. This is to avoid confusing it with the definition of the administering country. The purpose is for clarity. I beg to move. 

MR BAKA: It is agreeable, Mr Chairman.

MR TASHOBYA: “Sentencing country means the country in which the sentence is imposed on the convicted offender who may be or is transferred.” My understanding of the provision as it is is that the person may serve the sentence in the country in which the sentence is imposed or may be transferred. To that extent, I do not see the –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Does it, therefore, refer to two countries, both the sentencing country and the country that is receiving the transferred offender?

MR TASHOBYA: That is why there is the word “may”. He may not be transferred. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No. This is about the sentencing country. Are there two sentencing countries?

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the “may be” is referring to the offender. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, the definition is in relation to the sentencing country not the offender. 

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also support the amendment as brought by my colleague. It is trying to define the sentencing country and not an offender. So, by leaving this other part, “who may be”, then we are confusing the definition of the sentencing country to include the offending person. That is why I stand to support the amendment as brought by my colleague. 

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, it is not my duty but I think we concede. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment proposed by Dr Epetait in the terms proposed by him that sentencing country’s definition should be limited to the country and not include the convicted offenders.  I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR BAKA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes an amendment by inserting immediately after paragraph (c) a new paragraph (d) to read as follows: “(d) is a person to whom section 23 applies.” The justification is to align the clause with the powers given to the minister in clause 23.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, a straight forward amendment there. Any comment? I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I have two proposed amendments. In clause 4(a), I beg to delete the word, “or national” so that it should read, “Subject to this Act, a convicted offender who is in Uganda and is a citizen of another Commonwealth country…” I see that “or national” as redundant.

Secondly, in 4(c), I beg to delete the last words starting from “to which the offender is transferred” and instead insert the word, “administering” between “the” and “country”. So that (c) should read, “…is a person to whom section 6(a) (ii) applies, may be transferred to that country or to Uganda as the case may be, as provided by this Act so that the offender may serve the remainder of his or her sentence in the administering country.”

The justification is for clarity; instead of attempting to describe the administering country again and yet it is already defined in the definition clause. I beg to propose.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, have you addressed your mind to the issue of dual citizenship in (a)? Also, usually it is by declaration of the person; they only ask for nationality and country of residence and things like that but they never ask for citizenship in those declaration forms. I do not know whether you want to look at it again. Mr Chairman, those are the proposed amendments. 

MR BAKA: If you look at the introduction to the Bill and the preamble, as the Chairman has explained, “citizen” is okay but for you to suggest that we omit “national of another Commonwealth country”, I do not know what exactly you want to achieve, especially if you are talking of clarity. The second proposal is agreeable because the country to which the offender is transferred and the administering country are basically the same. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, my understanding is that a citizen is a national of a country. If we want to be that repetitive, then you would have to amend (b) as well and say, “and is a citizen or a national of Uganda.” I see it as bad phrasing. My proposal even takes care of dual citizenship.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Dr Epetait, “national” is wider. Take the case where somebody is not even holding a passport but claims to be a Kenyan citizen. The basis for proving that somebody is a citizen of a country is if they hold legal documents to show proof that they are a citizen of a country. However, if they caught me in Nairobi without any papers and I say I am a citizen of Uganda, I cannot be called a citizen of Uganda without proof of that but I can be called a national of Uganda. So, it might be wider than restricting it to “citizen” because it would require legal proof of citizenship. 

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, if we remove the word “national”, it would defeat the spirit of the Bill because when we look at the memorandum of the Bill, it stresses the issue of the citizen and the national. So, by removing it from clause 4, as proposed by Dr Epetait, I think we shall lose the spirit of the Bill. 

For the first amendment, I request Dr Epetait to consider the spirit of the Bill and withdraw but for the second one, I support him. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, arising from your explanation that “national” may be broad, I think if we are to maintain that as in (a), then we would have to introduce it in (b) and say, “In another Commonwealth country and is a citizen or a national of Uganda.” That is how I would now look at it. If we want to make it broad as per your guidance, we would then have to add “or a national of Uganda” after “citizen”, which would make the whole thing complete. 

MR BAKA: Mr Chairman, it is okay; we could also add in (b) “citizen or national.” We will have maintained the spirit of the Bill, and since you are saying it is only being repetitive, there is no problem. Let them be there. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We amend (b) as well? 

MR BAKA: Yes, to include “citizen or national.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment proposed by hon. Epetait to the effect pronounced clearly. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR BAKA: Mr Chairman, in clause 5, the committee proposes an amendment by inserting a new sub-clause (3) to read as follows: “A convicted offender shall not be transferred to a country where he is at a risk of being tortured or subjected to other human rights abuses.” 

The justification is that the UN Committee against Torture, in Tapia Paez v. Sweden (Communication No. 39/ 1996), on 28 April 1997 noted that: “The test of Article 3 of the Convention against Torture is absolute. Whenever substantial grounds exist for believing that an individual would be in danger of being subjected to torture upon expulsion to another State, the State party is under obligation not to return the person concerned to that State. The nature of activities in which the person concerned engaged cannot be a material consideration when making a determination under Article 3 of the Convention.” 
It is also to comply with the UN Human Rights Committee General Comment No. 31. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I would surely need a law that would secure me from being taken to a country where I would be tortured. 

MR BIRAARO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Within that amendment of clause 5 that has been inserted, I would propose that we insert another qualifying phrase that says, “A convicted offender shall not be transferred to a country where there is sufficient proof that…” How would we know if a person just wants to go to another country or they have certain feelings and then allege that they are going to be tortured? With this we would subject it to proof that they are likely to be tortured in that country where they have been transferred. Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Torture can be psychological; how do you prove that? The proposal they are making would make it subject to a trial on which the court needs to convince itself with evidence that there is bound to be torture.   

MR BIRAARO: Mr Chairman, there are countries which are known to be notorious for torturing people. So, what I am looking at is that someone can stubbornly want to stay away and not be transferred and yet we are looking at instances where we may have our countrymen, Ugandans, being convicted in other countries but may be stubborn and want to stay away claiming that Uganda is a risky home for them to be. So, that is the situation I am looking at. Even if it is psychological, it should be internationally known that such and such a country tortures people. But there are those which do not. So, how do we know? There should be glaring proof that the person if transferred will be subject to ill treatment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What I asked was, if I say I am likely to be psychologically tortured, how do you prove it? What you are proposing is that the court to which this application or the organ to which this application is made must receive evidence first before it can allow or reject the transfer. 

MR BIRAARO: That was my proposal but it is subject to debate and discussion; otherwise, I am not stuck on it.

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I stand to seek guidance again on the same issue. The committee has alluded to the fact that some of our neighbouring countries are not members of the Commonwealth. Now, in the event that the prisoner or the convicted offender does not want to be tried from a country where he thinks –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Here trial is finished. 

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you. 

MR MUJUNI KYAMADIDI: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. I stand to seek guidance. The principal object of the Bill, especially No. 3, is to the effect that a person convicted of an offence in a foreign country should be given an opportunity with his or her consent. Does this now mean that the prisoner can be transferred without his or her consent? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No; actually, the transfer is on whose request? 

MR BAKA MUGABI: It is on the request of the convicted offender. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes; it is on your own request. 

MR MUJUNI KYAMADIDI: So, Mr Chairman, it means the torture is to the effect that a person thinks he will be tortured and so he may not even seek for this. 

MR MUGABI: Mr Chairman, I disagree with the proposal of the honourable member who moved the amendment because sufficient proof is very subjective. You will be giving the sentencing country another burden of having to research to find out whether there is sufficient proof. I think the provision as it is is sufficient enough. Once the sentencing country thinks that the convicted offender will be at a risk of being abused even when he has requested to be transferred, I think that is enough for the transfer not to be effected.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, the point raised by hon. Kyamadidi is, if it is the convicted offender asking for this transfer, why would the issue of torture arise? 

 MR BAKA: That is what I have just explained, Mr Chairman. Even when a convicted offender seeks for a transfer to their own country, if the sentencing country has proof in their own way that they will be tortured, they do not do the transfer because they are supposed to initiate the process of the transfer. That is what this means. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The problem with the chairman’s explanation is that we are making the transfer of a convicted offender subject to the approval of the other country you are mentioning. If it is on my own volition that I am transferred from England to Uganda, what you are explaining is that Uganda has to accept that I will not be tortured when I arrive here. That can be abused, because you can be requested to be brought home but they will notify them that you will be tortured. I think we should leave it as it is - at the volition of the person who wants to be transferred. If we leave it to a third party, most likely it may be more abused than what we are seeing now. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is also possible that by refusing to transfer this person to the country they desire, you are torturing them. So, would you like to speak to your amendment, Mr Chairman? 

MR BAKA: Mr Chairman, does that mean that the House is proposing that we drop the amendment?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Clearly, you are the one to tell us your assessment; otherwise, we will take a vote on it.

MR BAKA: Unless a member from the House proposes that we drop it - I have not got such a proposal. There has only been an amendment to the proposal by the honourable member from Buhweju.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member from Buhweju, should we put the question to your amendment or you have reconsidered? But you see, he cannot propose. You are the one who has proposed the amendment and Members are responding that no, this amendment might not be proper. So who should propose it for you again?

MR BAKA: I thought they would propose and I concede but Mr Chairman, I concede and withdraw the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 5 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR BAKA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes an amendment to clause 6 at the beginning of the provision by inserting the words “Notwithstanding the provisions of section 122 of the Prisons Act.” The justification is to bring the provision in consonance with the Harare Scheme for the Transfer of Convicted Offenders within the Commonwealth.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What does the section say? Now you are leaving the House in - We are going to rely on the judgement of the committee on this matter that it is consistent. Honourable members, any debate on this? I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee - (Dr Epetait rose_) - Do you have the provision of the Prisons Act?

DR EPETAIT: No, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you are not going to be helpful to the House if you do not have the provision.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I just want to say that before we get the actual quotation of the provision in section 122 of the Prisons Act, I am inclined to suggest that we first stand over this until we get the phrasing of section 122.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, I think the committee has not -

MR BAKA MUGABI: Mr Chairman, I agree that we stand over it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Clause 6 stood over.

Clause 7

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I beg to propose an amendment in clause 7(g) to delete the word “prisoner” - actually it appears twice in 7(g) - and substitute it with “convicted offender”. The justification is in order to have a uniform phraseology. We do not have a definition of “prisoner” in the definition clause so let us use “convicted offender” for clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, legislation language must be consistent; it is a rule of drafting. Any comment on this?

MR BAKA: It is agreeable, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment proposed by Dr Epetait.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Members, you are not voting. I cannot hear you properly. Was it a deficiency? We adjourned for one and a half hours to have lunch so there is no excuse.

Clause 10

MR BAKA MUGABI: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes an amendment to clause 10, first of all by re-numbering the current provision as (1), and then immediately after the newly created sub-clause (1) by inserting a new sub-clause (2) to read as follows: “The proper authority shall, after the transfer of any convicted offender, notify the members of his or her family or other appropriate persons of the convicted offender’s choice of his or her transfer and of the place where he or she shall be kept in custody.”

The justification is to comply with Principle 16 of the Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is the proposal from the committee. I put the question to - Yes, Dr Epetait? He is giving it some surgery.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, the proposal is beautiful but I want the chairman to reconsider deleting “after” in that amendment and instead use “before”. So it would read, “The proper authority shall, before the transfer…” This is so that there is uniformity, rather than doing a post-mortem by notifying the relatives or immediate family members after a transfer has already occurred. I think it would be better that they get notified before the transfer. Mr Chairman, I think it would be better that way.

MR BAKA: Mr Chairman, if you say “before the transfer”, if, for example, this convicted offender is in China or the UK and the two countries are negotiating and making arrangements for the transfer, it would be too early and unnecessary for you to go and inform the relatives. It is only possible after the convict has been transferred to Uganda, maybe he is at Entebbe or in Luzira, and then you do the necessary modifications. That is what this provision means.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Otto, on what point do you rise?

MR ODONGA OTTO: On the same. My only concern is, if you are transferred from London and for six months your family is not aware -

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. My friend, hon. Otto, is a member of this committee. He had all the opportunity -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, he is not debating.

MR TASHOBYA: He is. He had the opportunity to raise whatever concerns, and this is precedential.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think we are not debating now but trying to improve on the final text.

MR TASHOBYA: But, Mr Chairman, precedence has been set. This is a member who had all the opportunity and who reads the report. Are we going to allow members of the committee to come and improve the reports when they had full opportunity? I am raising this matter because we are also looking at the future and whether members are going to be allowed to come and improve reports to which they had an opportunity to participate and even improve in their committees.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there has been a proposal for an amendment to the amendment from the committee. So, the hon. Otto is only looking at this proposed amendment for the first time. It was not before the committee - this one of “before” not “after”. Was it looked at by the committee?

MR BAKA: That is the committee position, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That?

MR BAKA: That our amendment reads -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That one I agree, but now there is an amendment that you say “before” not “after”. Did the committee consider that?

MR BAKA: Mr Chairman, a member of the committee should only come to buttress the position of the committee because I am here on behalf of the committee. So, anyone from the committee who makes a contribution – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That amendment has been proposed by hon. Epetait; is he a member of the committee as well? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] Both of them? (Laughter)

MR BAKABULINDI: Mr Chairman, my understanding is, even though hon. Odonga Otto is a member of the committee, it is like the chairman getting convinced and saying, “I concede”. In the process, hon. Odonga Otto can assist his chairman before he concedes by saying, “When we were in the committee, we did not take that angle into consideration.” I do not see any harm in that because he has not come to oppose his chairman but is just trying to assist him to streamline the position.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is my understanding too.

MR CHEMASWET: Mr Chairman, I think the procedure is that - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You are already making a ruling on it. (Laughter)

MR CHEMASWET: Hon. Odonga Otto was giving his suggestion depending on the fact that he did not append his signature to the committee report. (Interjection) It is there; he has not appended his signature - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no. Anyway, you have already ruled on your procedure so I cannot. Please, the situation is this - an amendment has been proposed at this stage on whether we should use the word “before” to comply with the committee proposal of after the transfer. The suggestion from hon. Epetait is that we say “before the transfer” and another person says both before and after. That is what is here now; it was not considered by the committee. 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We are just raising a matter of principle. My colleague, hon. Odonga Otto, chairs a committee; will you allow members who do not attend committee meetings to come here and enrich the report on the Floor of the House? It is a matter of principle. What I am saying is that on many occasions, the Speaker has ruled that members have the opportunity to raise this. When we are considering “after”, if you are in the committee, you actually have an opportunity to say “before”; you cannot buttress the report - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Committee chairperson, we are at committee stage and are proceeding to look at the best form the provision should take. It has been suggested to the House that the words “before” or “after” be interchanged or removed. That is the debate that is going on. Do you want to say that nobody should speak on this, including committee chairpersons? I think this is beyond the principle that is prohibited. What the rule prohibits is a committee member to stand after the chair has made a presentation and start debating the committee position. If he had a contrary opinion, he should have written a minority report. However, the matter at hand has come from here, at the committee stage. This is different and the issues are distinguishable. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I actually feel that when transferring the convicted offender, the notification of his or her family or the appropriate persons of the convicted offender’s choice should be done before and after. This is because when you are moving a convicted offender from one point to another, there are certain risks involved. For the family members to track where their person has gone and has been is very important. Mr Chairman, you recall that in Uganda, for example, and even outside, the means of transporting a convicted offender from one point to another could be by road or by air. So you cannot skirt around those risks assuming that the offender will reach safely. That is why it is important to inform the family before and after. Thank you.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, I think it is only logical that we add the word “before” because on page 6 of the report, the chairperson is telling us that the costs of bringing the prisoner will have to be borne by someone or his relatives. So how do you bring him here and the tax payer pays and then you go and inform the relatives after he is here. So, it is only logical that you involve them in the process before and after the person is transferred here. Clause 22 says that the cost will be borne by someone, including relatives of the prisoner.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think let us look at the initial provision and the head note to the proposal. “Notification of decisions to convicted offenders”. This is the part that the committee is seeking to add. Maybe we could look at that provision again and see whether what the committee is proposing is within that context. 

The duty being imposed under clause 10 is on the government and the authorities in Uganda. Can we legislate for another country, say China? So, is this provision still necessary? If it is only in relation to Uganda, I am looking at the chairperson’s suggestion of bringing somebody from China and others. We are not legislating for China or the United States, are we? Let us first understand that part because it says, “The proper authority shall, in writing and as occasion arises, inform a convicted offender convicted in Uganda of any relevant action taken or of any decision made by the proper authority in Uganda and the administering country or either of them in respect of a request of his or her transfer.” So, if a request is made by another country to Uganda, Uganda passes on the information. The request cannot be made by that person to Uganda; it is made to the Chinese authority and the correspondences between the Chinese authority and Uganda – it is now imposing the duty on Uganda to notify the family. Is that clear now? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think the amendment by the committee should remain because the notification comes after a request has been made. So it is like the board sits and then they notify you that your request has been accepted. So, there is no way the proper authority can notify you before. So as the heading is “notification of decisions to convicted offenders”, it means that someone has made a decision and they are just giving you notice that this is what we have decided. So such decisions cannot be before. It has to be after.

However, what I wanted to say is that there should be a period, other than just leaving it as “after” because even ten years can be after. We need to put a threshold so that if I have applied to be taken to Sudan, for example, I should be notified after one week or within six months. But if we say “after”, it can also mean 10 years, which amounts to denial. This is what the committee had not focussed on during our sitting.  I just wanted to reinforce that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is what you, the committee - (Laughter)

MR BAKA: In that case, Mr Chairman, to put in the element of time, we could say, “The proper authority shall, within reasonable time...” (Interjections) - Six months? Supposing someone is coming to serve four months only? So, it should read, “The proper authority shall, within reasonable time, after the transfer of any convicted offender, notify the members if his or her family or other appropriate persons of the convicted offender’s choice, of his or her transfer and of the place where he or she shall be kept in custody.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. Honourable members, the issue is if you put six months and the person has been convicted to serve one month, by the time you are going to send a notification, the man is at home with his family. (Laughter) Is it still relevant? So, “reasonable” would be responsive to the period of detention. Isn’t that fair? Certainly, if I am convicted for ten years and you give notification after four years, it is not reasonable anymore. So, “reasonable” then becomes a case by case situation. Are we okay with this? 

I put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR BAKA MUGABI: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes an amendment to clause 12 by deletion of the words, “or administrative order.” That is in the second last line of the first paragraph. 

The justification is that in Uganda, the only authority clothed with the power to commit a person to a mental facility, whether convicted offender or not, is the court and not any administrative body as envisaged by the clause. Refer to Section 113(5) of the Magistrates Court Act, Cap 16 of the Laws of Uganda, and section 45(5) of the Trial on Indictments Act, Cap 23 of the Laws of Uganda.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is a straightforward proposal. I put the question to the amendment of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR BAKA MUGABI: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes an amendment to clause 15 by deleting the words “or administrative order” in the third line of the second paragraph. The justification is that in Uganda, the only authority with the power to issue punishment in criminal matters is a court of law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We have already taken a decision that in the previous clause we take out “administrative order”. So, it is consequential. I put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16

MR BAKA: Mr Chairman, there is no amendment in our report but we realised later, after the report had been printed, that there was an omission. If you look at our observation (b) - I will read it for you - it is the origin of the amendment I am going to move. Observation (b) on page 4: “Considering that the scheme targets convicted prisoners, the only facilities in which such persons may be lawfully kept in Uganda are prisons; mental health facilities if the person is of unsound mind; or rehabilitation centres if the person is under the age of 18. There ought not to be any possibility of the minister designating any other place for serving one’s sentence upon transfer into Uganda for completion of that sentence as envisaged in clause 16.”

Now, if you read Clause 16, it says, “Except as otherwise provided in this Act, a convicted offender who has been sentenced to imprisonment in another country and transferred to Uganda shall be detained in prison or any other institution as the minister may, in writing, direct.”

So, we are moving an amendment to delete all that and we end at “detained in prison”. So we delete, “or in such other institution as the minister may, in writing, direct”. The justification is to avoid a situation where the minister may take convicted offenders to ungazetted places of detention.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I draw your attention to the Community Service Act passed by this Parliament. Suppose it is a jail sentence for a certain kind of offence in a foreign country and the sentence is for three months, and in Uganda an equivalent conduct of a person is regulated by an offence that could be subject to community service orders; what would be the situation? If you stole a chicken and in Uganda you would be subjected to community service under our laws, but there you are convicted for ten months and you are transferred here, should you serve ten months when your colleagues are busy slashing compounds as community service, your colleagues who stole chicken in the same way? I do not know.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. That is quite inviting, and the guidance you are giving is quite provocative to our minds. I am wondering whether by considering that, if it is ten months elsewhere and here it is community service, would anybody here be able to vary the sentence?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No. We would not vary the sentence. 

MS ALASO: I thought hon. Oboth would have finished what he wanted because my question, while related, is not exactly that. I have been wondering all along - first of all, I do not have my copy of the Bill so I am not following very well. You will excuse my lack of knowledge in legal matters, but what I have been thinking is, what if the person we are talking about is a drug trafficker caught in China, sentenced to death, and then the person applies to be brought back to Uganda? As of now we have the weakest laws on drug trafficking in the whole world. That is why we are the hub for everybody to pass with their drugs. So, would we carry out the death sentence in that case? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think in all the provisions you will recall that “sentenced to imprisonment” keeps recurring everywhere. If you are sentenced to death, that is not being sentenced to imprisonment I suppose. Mr Chairman, did you look at this?

MR MUGABI: Mr Chairman, the death sentence is not catered for here. I just want to clarify what hon. Jacob Oboth has just stated and also to clarify further on what you said. Clause 16 is strictly on a person who should be put either in prison or in any other place as decided by the minister. We are rejecting that other place in preference for the gazetted places in our laws of Uganda.

Clause 15, which we have passed, provides for, if you read the heading, effect of continued enforcement and remission of sentence. This is where sentences can be brought in tandem with our laws, for example, if you look at clause 2 – “If the sentence is by its nature or duration incompatible with the law of Uganda or if the law of Uganda requires, the proper authority may, by court, adapt the sentence to a punishment or other measure prescribed by the law of Uganda which corresponds with the sentence imposed by the other country and shall not be more erroneous in its nature or regulation.” So, if it is community service at that juncture, it is okay because the person will not be confined, he will be going back to the community. Our concern here is that the other place. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: I would like just to reinforce the chairman’s position that we delete “or in any other such institution as the minister directs.” We are trying to avoid a situation where you are to serve your sentence in Luzira then the minister directs that you be taken to a safe house. In other words, you will have gotten out of prison and maybe taken to another comfortable residential area. The heading is saying, “The convicted offender to be detained in prison.” We should not give that power to the minister to direct otherwise, or for the offender to be detained in places which no one knows. It should be in prison, which is regulated by the Prisons Act, and clause 15, which we have just passed, already caters for that.

MR KYEWALABYE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The reason I have risen is because in the observations of the committee, they have told us that persons can lawfully be kept in prisons, mental health facilities if the person is of unsound mind and rehabilitation centres if the person is under 18 years. But then, the chairman is proposing that the person who is transferred to Uganda be detained in prison and he is not providing for these other possibilities which they had already pointed out in their notes. That is the clarification I want from the chairman. What about these other options, which you had observed? Thank you, Mr Chairman.

DR EPETAIT: I want to thank my colleague for that observation. Arising from the observations in paragraph (b) on page 4, I would like to propose an amendment first of all to the title of clause 16. I propose that we delete “prisoner” and substitute it with “convicted offender”. It is consequential. We then add, “to be detained in prison or mental health facility or rehabilitation centre.” 

The amendment, which the chairman had proposed, is that that we delete from the words “or in such other institution as the minister may in writing direct”. So, we should add immediately after “prison”, the following, “or mental health facility if the person is of unsound mind or rehabilitation centre if the person is under the age of 18.” That will make it whole, so that we identify the detention centres: prison, or a mental health facility or a rehabilitation centre for the under-age. I think that will cater for everything. I beg to propose. 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I know you are aware of the principle of legislative drafting. I find the word “or...or” - (Laughter) - unless you are intending to write “or both”. However, with due respect, I think the committee should reconsider the observation of the honourable member from Kiboga and adopt what they said in the earlier section, and bring it here. This is to avoid providing specifically for mental under 18 or – I think it will not only sound well but also it would avoid misunderstanding. 

I appreciate the concern of the committee, especially where the minister is given that authority to determine and that could be misunderstood. However, the intention of the framers is quite clear that there are other facilities that could be used for this. 

MR BAKA: It is very clear in clause 17 on child offenders and persons of unsound mind. The provisions are very clear, and we have laws to regulate all those others. So, take ours and you drop your -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Suppose you say, “shall be detained in prison or other appropriate detention facilities.” “Appropriate” relates to whether it is a child or a person of unsound mind. Just think through it. 

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. When we clause 16 read carefully, it says, “Except as otherwise provided in this Act, a convicted offender who has been sentenced to imprisonment in another country...” So, I wonder because the other one was suggesting that we bring in the rehabilitation centre, mental facility, but I do not see how it comes out when the person has been convicted. Where does a mentally ill person get convicted from in another country? I do not think that it can appear here well.

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I do not see any problem with the amendment moved by hon. Epetait –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The one of “or” and - 

MR SSIMBWA: No, I mean the general one he first moved; instead of “prisoner”, we use “convicted offender” -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, that one is fine.

MR SSIMBWA: Now I am talking about what hon. Katoto talked about. When you have already brought out the words “convicted offender”, even these people, the children and people of unsound mind, at that time when they have been convicted they are part of the whole lot of convicted offenders. When they have been brought here, we should have several options of imprisoning them at this level. 

In clause 17, the chairman is talking about those other options being catered for. However, for clarity and for good interpretation, we should have these options in clause 16 so that we do not leave a gap which will cause difficulty in interpretation of the law. 

So, I support his stand but we change the legislative language. Let us find other words to use but maintain his ideas in the clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think hon. Katoto has raised an important point. The opening paragraph of clause 16 says: “Except as otherwise provided in this Act...” The other provisions in this Act are in clause 17, relating to child offenders, and in clause 18 relating to persons of unsound mind. So, where a person is not a child offender and is not a person of sound mind and that person had been sentenced to imprisonment in another country and transferred in Uganda, they shall be detained in prison.  So I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, in clause 17, if one read both sub clause (1) and (2), sub clause (1) is referring to sub section (2) while sub section (2) is referring to sub clause (1). In my experience in Parliament, sub clause (2) is the longest sentence I have ever come across, and it is talking mainly about what would happen in sub clause (1). 

So, I would like to propose that we amend sub clause (1) by deleting the last words, “Sub section (2)”, and inserting the words, “the laws of Uganda regarding child offenders”. So, it would read: “A convicted offender transferred to Uganda and sentenced to imprisonment, who would, if he or she had been convicted in Uganda, have been treated by reason of his or her age as a child and sentenced accordingly, shall be dealt with as his or her age dictates in accordance with the laws of Uganda regarding child offenders”. 

In that case, sub clause (2) would be redundant because we know our laws on how to treat child offenders. I look at sub clause (2) as suggesting a retrial of a child offender in High Court or a lower court. So I do not think the intent is to have a retrial but upon transfer of a convicted child offender, he should be treated as a convicted child offender according to our laws. I think that is what should be catered for in (1). 

MR BAKA: I have also been scrutinizing sub clause (2) of clause 17. Actually, at the end it also winds up by talking of the laws of Uganda after a lot of sentences. So, I think our laws are very clear on how to treat child offenders. So I agree with his proposal. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, we leave the last part of sub clause (2) and bring it up. So, the last part would be, “in accordance with the law for the time being enforced in Uganda relating to the treatment of child offenders”. 

The honourable member feared that this is the longest sentence he has seen in the history of drafting. I do not know if hon. Oboth came across this, but we have seen a British legislation with a sentence that runs five pages without a full stop. But they are trying to discourage that kind of drafting because it even gives nightmares to lawyers. So, I put the question to Clause 17 as amended in the terms proposed by hon. Epetait.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I beg to propose an amendment to clause 18(2), in the second line of sub clause (2), to delete the words “or similar institution as the minister may direct”. The justification is that it is consequential. We do not have to give the minister all the authority to decide in which institution to detain a person of unsound mind. So, sub clause (2) should read: “A person transferred by virtue of sub section (1) shall be detained in a mental asylum and he or she shall be taken, for all purposes, to be a person ordered to be detained by a court in Uganda in similar circumstances.” I beg to propose.

MR BAKA: I think this one is a consequential amendment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19

MR BAKA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes the following amendment to clause 19: first of all, in the head note delete the word, “amnesty”. Secondly, in sub clause (1) delete the comma after the word “pardon”. That is in the fourth line. 
The justification is that amnesty does not require conviction under the laws of Uganda and yet to qualify under this Bill, the offender must be convicted. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is straightforward, honourable members; a convicted person can never get amnesty. They can get something else but not amnesty. So I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR BAKA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes an amendment immediately after sub clause (2) by inserting a new sub clause (3) to read as follows: “There shall be a regular inspection of penal institutions and services of the administering country by qualified and experienced inspectors appointed by a proper authority whose primary objective shall be to ensure that these institutions are administered in accordance with existing laws and regulations and to bringing about the objectives of penal and correctional services.” 

The justification is to provide for routine inspections of correctional or penal institutions where the sentences are to be served by the transferred convicted offender in compliance with rule 55 of the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, 1997.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable chairman, why would you need to put, “whose primary objective shall be”? Is it necessary? Before you look at the whole drafting, I think - “Inspectors appointed by a proper authority to ensure that those institutions are administered…” Is that okay? 

MR OBOTH: I thought that was brilliant. Also, just for uniformity in the proposed amendment, the last words, “correctional services” should also appear before in the sentence: “There shall be a regular inspection of penal institutions and correctional services...” It should not just be “services” because it could be misconstrued to mean among others; you leave it to imagination. But “correctional”, I thought was a brilliant contribution from the committee and we could maintain the same right from the beginning to the end. I was just thinking aloud.

MR BAKA: It is agreeable. I also agree with your guidance on the matter.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, can you now read the amendment in the last form so that it can be captured properly.

MR BAKA: “There shall be a regular inspection of penal institutions and services of the administering country by….”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, you have not conformed to the proposal by hon. Oboth to which you agreed to – correctional.

MR BAKA: Oh! “There shall be a regular inspection of penal institutions and correctional services of the administering country by qualified and experienced inspectors appointed by the proper authority to ensure that these institutions are administered in accordance with existing laws and regulations and to bring about the objectives of penal and correctional services.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: For the purposes of the persons doing the editing of this provision, it is now in the following form: “There shall be a regular inspection of penal institutions and correctional services of the administering country by qualified and experienced inspectors appointed by proper authority to ensure that these institutions are administered in accordance with existing laws and regulations and to bringing about the objectives of penal and correctional services.” That is what has now been proposed.

MR MULONGO: I thank you, Mr Chairman. I was just wondering about the qualifying adjectives “qualified” and “experienced” and then “proper authority”. When you say that the listed countries should have qualified and experienced inspectors, we are not even providing a measure for the experience. We then go on to say “proper authority”, as if there could be an improper authority. So, I do not know the usage of those expressions.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The usage of “proper authority” is in the Act and appears everywhere. I think it is even defined. 

MR WADRI: The proposal that is contained in this Bill is not something new as far as I am concerned. Under the present system, there is a provision for “board of visitors” to prisons and places of detention. What are we going to have in this law that is going to make it extremely mandatory that the authorities who are responsible for the management of these places of detention are able to operationalise this provision? 

As far as I know, and as a former civil servant who had much in common with places of detention – (Interjections) - Yes, because at one point I even served as a member of the board of visitors – (Interjections) - Yes, I know. So if it has not been happening, how well can we provide for it so that it really happens, so that there is this checking on the standards of these places of detention to be in tandem with the Commonwealth provisions?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I guess that you first start by appointing inspectors. 

MR OBOTH: I thought the Chair was on spot. I think the difference would be that the other ones were visitors with probably no benchmarks. Now for these are inspectors, I thought that the language is a little stronger. It is something that we can agree on because inspectors would really have a standard but for board of visitors, as you know from the title “visitor”, what would you expect from a visitor who comes to a prison with probably no benchmarks? I would appeal that we adopt the inspectors. For what hon. Simon Mulongo said, yes, I think that there are also improper authorities. I was just thinking.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment in the terms that have been proposed now by the chair.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23

MR BAKA: The committee proposes the following amendments to clause 23: first of all, in sub-clause (1) delete the words “with approval of Parliament” in the first line. The justification is that the requirement for parliamentary approval is unnecessarily strenuous and may result in inordinate delay.

Secondly, in sub-clause (3) delete the words “with approval of Parliament” in the first line. The justification is the same. 

The third amendment is to insert a new sub-clause (5) to read as follows: “A certificate under the hand of the minister certifying that from the documents laid before him or her, it appears that the person named in the certificate has been sentenced, the period of imprisonment specified in the certificate shall be accepted as proof during the continuity of such period, that that person is lawfully detained in accordance with the provisions of this section.” 

The justification is to align it with section 121 of the Prison’s Act of 2006. I have the Prison’s Act; I do not know if the members will want me to read it for them. That is the justification from the committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, did you discuss the issue of parliamentary approval? Was there consensus with the minister? You know that there are three kinds of instruments. Was it deliberate drafting that in this particular case there should be prior approval of Parliament?

MR BAKA: The drafting was deliberate in the Bill but in the wisdom of the committee – and we have been doing this for other Bills – to require parliamentary approval will most of the times attract debate and would unnecessarily delay the process. Like we have been doing in other Bills, we have been limiting approval of Parliament. What we have been providing for is the laying of the instrument on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, I think there are situations we might need to be advised on before we adopt this. There are three areas of statutory instruments or ministerial powers to pass subsidiary legislation. One is where they just pass for information; that means that they come and lay the instrument on the Floor of Parliament for information and the instrument starts operating immediately. 

There is a category that is subject to a negative vote by Parliament. That means the instrument starts operating immediately until Parliament sees how it is operating and then calls it back and says no, it should not go on. But it does not change what has been done under the authority of that instrument. 

The third category is the one subject to an affirmative vote of Parliament, which is being proposed here. That means it does not start operating until Parliament says “go ahead and do it”. Why? It is because there are scenarios. Yes, you give the functions - In this case it might be the view of the people who drafted this thing that the minister can go and indentify the specific countries who they can cooperate with. That one, Parliament cannot do. But to initiate the operations, Parliament has got to be informed and they need to agree to it. It might be the reason they drafted it this way, I do not know.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, I understand what you are saying and the committee considered this matter. First of all, we are domesticating a protocol. What the proposal is trying to do is to allow the minister to apply this Act to any other country with which there are reciprocal arrangements, and I think really this is an executive function. I do not think it should be subjected to parliamentary approval. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I am saying this because we need to be advised properly. I do not think that it was just by the slip of the pen that these words found themselves here. If you remember, for example, the Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Act, there were different levels of instruments. In the instrument that the minister wanted to pass that related to changing companies or institutions from one class to another, it was deliberately quiet that there should be parliamentary approval. It was deliberately quiet and yet some of the powers that were given to the minister did not require parliamentary approval in the same law. So, I just wanted to be satisfied that this was just a drafting issue that we can vote on it. 

MR BAKA: Mr Chairman, the honourable members may wish to pick this clause further to inform their decisions. This clause relates to empowering the minister to enter into a reciprocal arrangement with a country with which Uganda already has relations. Burundi, for example, is not in the Commonwealth but they are our neighbours and we have quite a number of bilateral arrangements with them, including being members of the East Africa Community. So, we are empowering the minister to proceed and have relations with Rwanda on the idea of transferring convicts without necessarily having to come and seek parliamentary approval. That is what we are talking about. 

MR SSIMBWA: Mr Chairman, I am standing on a point of procedure. We are discussing whether it was a slip of the pen for the minister who drafted this Bill to include the approval of Parliament. So, the procedural matter I want to raise is that the minister should explain whether the recommendation of the committee is in line with the proposal of the ministry. Is it procedurally right for us to continue discussing the Bill when the minister in charge of this Bill is not around? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, this motion was moved by the Deputy Leader of Government Business and the Bill is now the property of this House. This House must pass it but inform itself why it is passing it. That is why I am raising these issues, so that by the time we pass it, we are okay, we are on all fours with all the issues that involve legal matters. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I beg to implore the chairman of the committee to drop that amendment and leave the drafting as it is in the original Bill. Many times we empower our ministers perhaps to do certain things and when a decision is taken, you may find dissenting voices again within Parliament. Why don’t we own the whole process? You have quoted Burundi as an example of a non Commonwealth country with which Uganda has very cordial bilateral relations, but there could be other situations. 

In my opinion, I think it was not by error that the drafters of the Bill put “approval of Parliament”. I think let us also try to protect our ministers rather than subjecting them to being bashed for entering into statutory instruments which might offend the understanding of a number of Members of Parliament. I beg that you drop that amendment, Mr Chairman. 

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Considering the justification that has been made by the chairman as to why we need to remove Parliament approval, I believe that he has a reason to remove it. This is because Parliament sometimes is on recess or actually something may happen and Parliament is not sitting. So, I am wondering whether it is not proper for us to add a phrase, which will require a minister, after he has issued the instrument, to come and report to Parliament within a specified period of time, for instance maybe 60 days. That is the clarification I am seeking, Mr Chairman. Thank you. 

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Chairman, the purpose of Parliament passing a Bill and instruments to be given to ministers is to make the administration of the Bill easy and faster. If you keep the minister coming here every day, it is like asking a mother who has cooked food not to share the food because the man has not yet come back – (Laughter). This is making the work of the minister and the administration of the Act very impossible. It is the standard that all other instruments have been left to the minister possibly with the approval of Cabinet and not Parliament.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now that we have heard from the Deputy Leader of Government Business, I think we are okay. 

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, I wanted to support my leader too. In the sense that Parliament in its role of oversight has the power to summon ministers here and question them on their actions, you have that power of oversight. So, allow us to exercise the executive powers and also use yours to summon us if we do not exercise that power correctly. I think that is what the honourable Prime Minister is saying. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, it would have been very easy for us if after the chairman moved an amendment, the minister who drafted the Bill and included these provisions came and said, “No, it is okay, remove it.” We would not be here. But when they are quiet, and yet some of us know how this drafting is done and why they are drafted that way, that is why we raise these issues.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, the proposal by hon. Kenneth Lubogo from Bulamogi County should be taken as a middle position. I am saying this because as we talk about transferring convicted offenders within Commonwealth countries, it would be prudent that the minister informs Parliament of his addition of other countries that are not members of the Commonwealth. When we were passing the Anti-Terrorism Act, for example, we said that before another organisation is declared a terrorist organisation, the minister must inform Parliament before he adds that country to the list with the LRA and so on. 

I would like to think that this will help the lawyers to know that five other countries, for example, have been added to the list of Commonwealth countries. Otherwise, I might sleep over my rights if I do not know that Pakistan or Cuba have been added to that list because this message is only left to the minister. That is why I am saying that there must be a mechanism of informing Parliament. This will help us to know the list as it expands. 

Otherwise, one might serve ten years in a country you thought is not part of the Commonwealth yet the minister already concluded negotiations. There should be something similar to what was included in the Anti-Terrorism Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. Shall this instrument be passed and laid before Parliament within some specific time or we leave it to the discretion of the minister?

MR BAKA: Yes, it should be just reasonable time. Does that require us to create a separate clause?
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, would that take care of that? Is it six months or just reasonable time? We need to get that clear. If it is reasonable time, then can you propose the riding provision as a new sub clause?

MR BAKA: Yes, there should be a new sub clause (6) to read as follows: “For Avoidance of doubt, statutory instruments under this clause shall be laid before Parliament within a reasonable time.”

MR ODONGA OTTO: I think we should tie it to six months. I am saying this because if the minister has negotiated a good deal with a country like Cuba for transfer of convicted offenders, they should just bring the good news to Parliament. In the circumstances, let us give it six months. Otherwise, reasonable time may be more than six months. 
 
LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Chairman, I think “reasonable time” is more accommodating. If you tie it to six months, how about if I do it in less than six months, do I have to wait for the six months to end? “Reasonable time” is very reasonable. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, let us close this. Are you satisfied, hon. Karuhanga?

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, I am concerned about the ambiguity of the phrase, “reasonable time.” I recall that as a law student, I was encouraged that whenever there is a drafting of any law or Bill, we should be as specific as possible. For purposes of ensuring that the person supposed to effect the regulation or provision does not use it to their advantage or to the disadvantage of whomever it affects, I pray that we go with six months and not just reasonable time.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I seek guidance on this matter. In view of the previous clauses where we used the phrase “reasonable time”, are we finding a special reason to depart from that spontaneously or we can stick to “reasonable time”?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think the test to apply in this situation is: would it adversely affect the concerned person?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, supposing I am arrested and detained in a Cuban prison but the minister negotiates with Cuban authorities; they can sit and relax just to make sure I am kept there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The point is: how will you know if you are in prison when this arrangement is reached?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, you have been lecturing at the Law Development Centre and you will realise that these are some of the questions that lecturers take students through. You could be at the law school but you are not aware that Cuba has been added to the list by the minister – learning institutions always endeavour to keep their students abreast with the latest information on such issues. In this case, if the minister concludes negotiations with a country such as Cuba, such learning institutions will bring it to the attention of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But wouldn’t the instrument be gazetted?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, that even makes it a better case why the minister needs a timeframe. Gazetting means letting the whole world get to know. Since we now need the whole world to know, the minister must be time bound. He or she cannot take their time yet this is an issue of urgency to the whole nation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I am going to put this matter to vote so that we can get done with it. The issue is whether this instrument must be brought to Parliament by the minister within six months. I now put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR BAKA: The committee of the whole House wanted me to read for them the provisions of the Prisons Act, section 122. It is here. We are proposing an amendment to clause 6 to insert the following words: “Notwithstanding the provisions of section 122 of the Prisons Act...” Section 122 of the Prisons Act reads as follows:
“1) 	Subject to the provisions of the Extradition Act, or any other law or any reciprocal arrangement where a person who is not a citizen of Uganda is sentenced to a period of imprisonment by a competent court of law in Uganda, the Minister may by warrant authorise that such a person be transferred to the country of which he or she is a citizen to serve the rest of his or her term of imprisonment in accordance with the law of that country, provided that country and the prisoner concerned agree to that procedure.

2) 	A person who is being transferred under sub section (1) shall, while in Uganda, be deemed to be in lawful custody.”

3) 	The transfer of a person to another country under this section shall not affect that person’s right under any law to appeal against his or her conviction or sentence in a court of law in Uganda.”

You remember in our observations, we had said the two –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the issues were clear. It was just a matter of what is in that law. Honourable members, you have heard - notwithstanding the provisions of section 122.
 
MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, when the chairman of the legal committee read section 122 of the Prisons Act, that section stated, “Notwithstanding the Extradition Act”. So, we are making reference to a section which is also making reference to another section. Wouldn’t it be prudent that we would then say “Notwithstanding provisions of Section 122 of the Prisons Act and the Extradition Act…” This is because section 122 is also saying, “Subject to the Extradition Act”  For ease of reference, you read it yourself.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I have not got the point.

MR BAKA: Section 122 says, “Subject to the provision of the Extradition Act…” So, he is proposing that we say, “Notwithstanding the provisions of the Prisons Act and the Extradition Act…” –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, why don’t you just say, “Notwithstanding provisions of the Extradition Act…?” Do we have the relevant section? This is the implication of what you would be saying. Section 122 of the Prisons Act is excluding the whole of the Extradition Act. Now, you want to use your amendment to also exclude section 122 of the Prisons Act to exclude the Extradition Act. Why don’t you now exclude the Extradition Act directly? 

MR BAKA: Fine. Do we need a specific section? I think it is okay, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, “notwithstanding the Extradition Act”. Section 122 is excluding the whole Extradition Act, so why would you again bring in section 122 to exclude the whole Extradition Act when you can exclude it by your own reference?

MR BAKA: So notwithstanding the provisions of the Extradition Act.

MR ODONGA OTTO: But there are other things.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are there other provisions under the Prisons Act Section 122?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Yes, there are other provisions under 122 other than just the Extradition Act. So we could say, “Notwithstanding the provisions of section 122 of the Prisons Act and the Extradition Act.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In that case it would now be proper to leave it the way it is because that takes care of both that section and the Extradition Act.  So, I put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.39
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.


THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now put the question to the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.39
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali: Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Transfer of Convicted Offenders Bill, 2007” and passed it with amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.40
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali: I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE TRANSFER OF CONVICTED OFFENDERS BILL, 2007

5.40
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Transfer of Convicted Offenders Bill, 2007” be read a third time and do pass.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question to the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE TRANSFER OF CONVICTED OFFENDERS BILL, 2012”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations! (Applause) Thank you very much, chairman, and I thank you very much, Deputy Leader of Government Business now Leader of Government Business. (Applause) Those who know how he came to steer the Bill will understand why I am congratulating him in a special way. (Laughter) 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC ORDER MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will be closing at 6.00O’clock to allow other matters to take place. We will receive the motion and the report from the committee and we see how to move from there.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The committee presented the report. We are just going for debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh! The motion was justified and the committee presented its report. So, it was now for open debate.
 
MR TASHOBYA: But considering the timing you have mentioned, Mr Speaker - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We could do some brief debate up to 6.00 O’clock; would that be okay? 

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, we requested for minutes from the committee. 

MR TASHOBYA: I think the member must have left the House in the course of debate because the minutes were brought and laid on the Table together with the submissions received from different institutions. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition has just written now stating that we are not in possession of the minutes. So, with your permission, Mr Speaker, I do not know if you could direct that the minutes be availed to us to help guide the direction to take in the debate. Much as you laid them on the Table, the LOP has just written now that he is not in possession of the minutes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, once the matter is laid before Parliament, it is with the Clerk. So, you request for the minutes from the Clerk’s office and not by the direction of the House. So, just write a request and they will avail you with a copy. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much for your ruling. In the circumstances, therefore, Mr Speaker, we will request, since we have to write to the Clerk to get the minutes and peruse through, that you stand over this for now to give us time. We are not going to debate like we have woken up from a long dream. We shall need time to look through the minutes so that we can debate thoroughly. These are the instructions I have from the Leader of the Opposition. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the request from the Opposition. I was also faced with a request from the whip - 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Sorry, Mr Speaker. I would like to know whether hon. Odonga Otto can assure the House that they will get the minutes they are asking for so that we do not repeat the same story tomorrow when we are debating. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am adjourning the House to tomorrow and this will be the first matter on the Order Paper. So, they should take steps to look at the minutes and we proceed tomorrow. House adjourned to tomorrow 10.00 O’clock. Keep time.

(The House rose at 5.47 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 18 May 2012 at 10.00 a.m.)
