Tuesday, 13 May 2014

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting.  I would like to inform you of the sad news of the death of hon. Clement Obonyo Jabwor. He died in Mulago Hospital. He was a former Member of the Fourth Parliament, that is, from 1980 to 1985, representing Kotido South Constituency. He was also a CA delegate between 1994 and 1995. He was an accountant and worked in Uganda, Tanzania and the United Kingdom at different times.

We have agreed that the late Obonyo Jabwor be given an official burial. Therefore, Parliament will hold a special sitting on Friday, 16 May 2014. The body will arrive at 10.00 a.m. and lie in state for public viewing, and then the sitting will commence at 2.00 p.m. I appeal to Members to come and we do our duty in respect of our senior citizen.

Secondly, I would like to remind the Minister of Internal Affairs that they had undertaken to report about the progress of the ID registration on a weekly basis, but I did not see any report last week and there was no explanation. We want to know what happened.    

The residents in my village, Busobia, will not participate in the exercise because the name of our village has been changed. I already have a national identity card and it shows the name of the old village. So if things go on like that, I will have nowhere to belong to or to vote from. (Laughter) I want either the minister or the Electoral Commission to correct this because all the villagers say they will not register until they are given back their original name, which they know. This is a matter which I thought I should bring to your attention.

2.58
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the question of registration of Ugandans. For the sake of Members who may not have looked at the form, it also includes the name of your polling station. So, it is not merely registration per se but there are strong ramifications for those who may take this for granted. Once you are registered, they even ask for your polling station, so the likelihood is that this will be used for future purposes.

Madam Speaker, I rise to speak to that very fact. In Lwemiyaga County, Ntusi Sub-county, I raised the issue of some names - Rwembundu in Burongo, Lukyamuzi in Ntusi, amongst others. I raised this matter and the Electoral Commission said people with such a record, who were blacklisted by the EC, cannot be appointed. However, to my surprise, these are the same people who are managing this exercise.

I have with me photographic evidence of the person - this case was reported to the Police and they have been investigating this person – beating up the O/C Lwemiyaga Police Post then and beating up other people with sticks. I beg, Madam Speaker, to lay this on the Table. At an appropriate time, I beg that you allow us move a formal motion to debate the registration exercise. (Interruption)

MR HASSAN FUNGAROO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I wish to give is that this is not only happening in Lwemiyaga but also in Obongi. It seems to be the same pattern that the people who were put in charge are people associated with the kiboko squad, the military and the Police. We are therefore asking: What is the common denominator that allows for them to be selected for this exercise? 

Even the people who are on the ground are not given appointment letters; they do not know their terms and conditions of service and there is no pay. There are all kinds of irregularities. Thank you.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, this is to request for your indulgence to allow a formal motion because apparently, Government undertook to update us but that did not happen. I pray that you allow a formal motion to debate this critical and important exercise because it is nonpartisan, sensitive and it is for the benefit of this country. With your permission, by the end of next week –(Mr Kakoba rose_)

THE SPEAKER: But you are now making this a debate. Everybody has a problem? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] Okay, inform him.

MR ONYANGO KAKOBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Related to what hon. Ssekikubo has been saying, in my area I do not have the kiboko squad but the problem we have is that the materials are not adequate and even sometimes the supervisors are not there to sign the forms. This means that people cannot even be registered. So, the whole thing is a bit mixed up. 

The minister needs to take charge and make sure that the exercise moves on well. As we speak now, things are not moving well on the ground. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what we need to do is call upon the Minister to fulfil his obligation and bring a report here on Thursday. We shall give it one hour for debate so that Members can raise their complaints. (Applause) So, Minister of Internal Affairs, please come and present a report so that Members can update you, and I hope you can get the name of my village back.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the photographic evidence of the police officer being roughed up and the person caning people, Stephen Tandeka, who is now in charge of the registration exercise for two sub-counties. I beg to lay. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

3.04
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, I rise on an issue of national importance. 

The people of Kisoro are being denied service because there is a sit-down strike by medical workers who have not got their salaries for five months. This has raised a lot of concern in the district. We do not know if we really have a responsible ministry of public service responsible. We need to know what is happening, without apportioning blame that “this is a district matter” or “this is a decentralised system”. If we employ people, we must pay them. We cannot employ people and then say, “We, as central government, have now decentralised”. 

There should have been a transition period for migrating from the central government to the districts. We even have some districts that do not have the capacity to do this work. So, we need know when these people will be paid because some of our voters are due to take children to school next week. Thank you.

3.05
PROF. GILBERT BUKENYA (NRM, Busiro County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. About three weeks ago, there was a concern about salaries here and one minister, I do not remember who, was asked to come here and give us an update on the lack of payment of salaries especially for low cadres like primary school teachers, health workers, especially those dealing with primary healthcare, etc. 

We have heard that the people of Kasese who are managing a health centre in Bwera have not been paid for six months and also teachers in Wakiso have not been paid for five months. What is happening? (Interjection) I am told they are load shedding, but I really would like the ministers to take extra effort and discuss this either in Cabinet or somewhere else, so that they come up with a solution. 

The country is being put in suspense and we shall have more people dying because when you go to the primary healthcare centres, there is nobody. Teachers in our bonna basome primary schools (UPE) are not there because they are not paid. So, how can we keep quiet after all this time? Maybe they should suspend our salaries and then they will hear the noise we shall make.

Madam Speaker, it hurts me to see someone who earns Shs 200,000 being denied salary for more than three months and yet that is all they have to pay school fees, buy food and take care of other needs. This is quite too much and I would beg that you ask the minister to come here and tell us what the situation really is.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not want the impression to be given that this House has been insensitive to the plight of the teachers and other workers. One of the most recurrent subjects on this Floor is the salary of health workers, police officers, teachers and it almost comes up every week. 

3.08
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, there is something I want to bring up, which is critical as far as the salary of civil servants is concerned, especially those in the health sector to which I belong. 

In the Committee on Health, we detected that the human resource manager at the Ministry of Health was transferred to the Ministry of Trade but he has refused to go. I asked the Minister of Health, “How can a human resource manager at the ministry be told to go to another ministry and he refuses?” 

In the Ministry of Health alone, there were 35 ghosts. The Minister is there and if I am telling lies, I want him to get up and challenge me. In Mbarara Hospital alone, sometime back they sent 115 ghosts and the Auditor-General caught them. The issue here is that we must be in charge; surely, if this man who is denying people salaries and is submitting wrong names in the Ministry of Health can be transferred and he refuses to go! I asked him what he ate at the Ministry of Health that is stopping him from going to the Ministry of Trade but he failed to give me the answer.

Madam Speaker, I need the Minister of Health and the Minister of Public Service to tell me why they are not transferring Mr Ntara from the Ministry of Health. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me ask the First Deputy Prime Minister to explain to us because this is one of the most recurrent matters on this Floor.

3.10
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The salaries are paid by the Ministry of Finance to the accounting officers. That is the current position. It is no longer the Ministry of Public Service that pays salaries. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We need answers! We are at the end of the financial year and yet people have not been paid; what is going to happen?

MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I remember the Committee on Public Service and Local Government came up with findings on what is happening with salary payment – the double payments and so forth. They presented a report on this Floor and it was decided that a committee be put in place to harmonise a few things that we could not agree on as Parliament. Madam Speaker, maybe if that committee presented their position, we would be able to get a way forward.

3.12
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have called a meeting on Friday with my people who are not getting their salaries in Kaliro. This is because they have been told that it is Parliament which is delaying payment of their salaries. The information I got from the CAO is that the salary vote for my district was depleted in January and they were told that they are going to bring a supplementary budget for approval. I wonder how salary for a whole financial year can be depleted by January! 

About 250,000 workers have not been getting their salary; in fact, health workers are threatening to go on strike. So I have opted to talk to them on Friday. I hope between now and Friday, I shall have some answers to give to those people. However, I specifically want to ask the Ministry of Finance: What did you do with the money meant for Kaliro salaries? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.13
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. At least allow me to say this in Parliament: although some people are not getting their salaries, there are some sub-counties in my constituency where you cannot even find a health centre. I would like the Ministry of Health to at least put this into consideration. They should make sure that those sub-counties without health centres should get them and those who have not got their salaries should be paid in time. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the chairperson of the finance committee.

3.13
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule Ssebunya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There has been a perpetual situation in the Ministry of Public Service - there has been what we call “creative accounting” in paying salaries to the different sectors. The Ministry of Finance came up with a new directive to vest the accountability of salaries with the accounting officers in all sectors. 

The best way for us to interrogate this matter is, as hon. Mutyabule has mentioned, to cause a committee to investigate this matter and then Parliament will have a say in the debate and pass recommendations thereafter. This is because all sectors are affected; it is not only medical workers who have not got salaries but also public servants within the ministries. So, it is up to this Parliament to cause this committee –(Mr Fungaroo rose_)– Yes, are you helping me with the committee?

MR HASSAN FUNGAROO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to our Hansard, my sister, the woman Member of Parliament for Zombo and chairperson of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, investigated this matter with her committee and a report was brought to this House. This was just recently; the ink has not even dried. So, what kind of investigation are you now talking about? 

The best thing to do is to order that the public service ministry officials and the Ministry of Finance officials should not be paid for six months until this issue is sorted. If indeed Parliament has powers, this is the time to exercise them. Madam Speaker, if you have powers, order that no salaries for the Ministry of Finance staff and those of the Ministry of Public Service should be paid for six months until this issue is sorted out. This is an emergency. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will ask the Clerk to extract the record of the proceedings of that debate so that I can appoint the committee tomorrow so that we get a way forward.

3.16
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Parliament has been perpetually expressing itself over the issue of salaries; it is not only health workers who are affected but also teachers and police officers are not being paid. In my district, even LC III officials have not got payment over the last three months, including LC III and LC V councillors. What is going on? 

The ministers are all here – I can see the ministers of finance and those of public service; what is going on? This committee is not going to help us today; we just want the ministers to tell us where the money is. Can you tell us why our people are suffering? Children are reporting back to school next week; where do you expect people to get money for school fees?

3.17
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In Kanungu we have many problems, including no bridges, but our operational workforce in the health sector is at 32 per cent. All I want to say is that there is what we call a go-slow strike, which is even worse than an overt strike; in fact, health workers and teachers are not working. So there is a crisis, and the ministers, particularly those for public service and finance, should tell us whether they have failed to do their work. 

If the Minister of Public Service cannot tell this House why salaries are not being paid, then he should justify why he should remain a minister. When you go to the grassroots, the workers are told that it is Parliament that is withholding their pay and yet this is not true. So, can the Minister of Public Service and the Minister of Finance show cause as to why they should remain ministers if they cannot pay workers.

3.19
MRS ANNET OKWENYE (NRM Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas we have many civil servants out there going without salaries for months, we also have extravagant expenditure especially within these ministries. We have a lot of money going into allowances; there are seminars called in order to utilise balances because the financial year is ending. All this is wasteful expenditure, Madam Speaker. 

I would like to suggest that as a cure to the lack of resources, let us curtail some of these expenditures so that civil servants like health workers and teachers are able to also get something. (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we need to move on. We have already agreed that I will appoint this committee tomorrow. However, for the information of the whole country, Parliament has not delayed the salaries of anyone. We approved this Budget and appropriated the funds last year before the end of September. So no one can claim that Parliament is delaying salaries. I will appoint the committee tomorrow.

The Minister will come to tell us where the money is but I want you to first join me in welcoming the following members of the Public Accounts Committee of Nairobi City County Assembly: hon. Mutiso, hon. Mauti, hon. Rose Kula, hon. Stephen Kambi, hon. Ngare, and Mr Kevin Wasike and Mr Denis Musyoka who are clerk assistants. (Applause) They are scattered. I hope the others will be found. (Laughter) You are welcome. 

3.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, as you said, the issue of salaries is not new in this House. For a long time, salary payrolls were being managed by the Ministry of Public Service and even when the Ministry of Finance paid all the money, Ministry of Public Service always came with supplementary requests. That means they did not know the number of their employees. 

There was an audit carried out by the Auditor-General, which revealed that there were over 7,000 ghost workers and this matter was brought to this House – 

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members! You wanted answers and now the minister is responding.

MR KAJARA: The Ministry of Finance has introduced a system to change the mode of payment – it is now centralised at the Ministry of Finance – in order for us to be able to tell how many of the employees are not paid. Madam Speaker, this system entails that all accounting officers forward lists of their staff to the Ministry of Finance through the Ministry of Public Service. I want this to be on record that since that system was operationalised, all the accounting officers who have sent their lists to the Ministry of Finance have received their salaries.

Madam Speaker, the preliminary information which we have received from the office of the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury (PS/ST) is that some accounting officers are even reluctant to send lists of staff for fear of being penalised because they were including ghost employees. What has happened is that we have found a lot of discrepancies – 

THE SPEAKER: Order, please! Let the minister tell us.

MR KAJARA: We have found a lot of discrepancies between the lists that were being forwarded through the Ministry of Public Service when we used to pay through that ministry and the lists the accounting officers are now sending. The PS/ST has been on record urging the accounting officers to forward their lists to the ministry; in fact, for the latest release, we are threatening to discontinue accounting officers who have failed to forward their lists to us. Madam Speaker, what I want to add is that – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the Minister of Finance. Colleagues, hon. Kajara is saying that we have had this problem with the Ministry of Public Service together with the Ministry of Finance. There is an internal audit unit in the Ministry of Finance that works with the Ministry of Public Service. The reform is good, but why is the Ministry of Finance not taking action on the accounting officers who are delaying? Why are you handling them with kid’s gloves? 

The Constitution is clear and the Public Finance and Accountability Act is clear; you are the ones who appoint the accounting officers and so if they violate the law by not submitting the names, they are incompetent and should be immediately fired. Why are you wasting time with them?

MS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a point of procedure. The Minister of Finance has made serious statements against the Ministry of Public Service and the Minister of Public Service is here. We have been told that the Ministry of Public Service has been unscrupulously inflating records so that they retain – I suppose with connivance – some of the monies. So, what does the minister have to say regarding these serious allegations?

THE SPEAKER: Well, let the Minister of Finance complete his statement then we shall hear from the Minister of Public Service.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I have listened to the Minister of Finance and he has told this House that the problem is not with his ministry but with the Ministry of Public Service. Further to that, he says that the accounting officers are the problem in this case. 

I want him to clarify on this point: The workers at the grassroots do not know the dysfunctional state of affairs between public service and finance; so, for the minister to stand up and tell us their own shortcomings, it really falls short of the expectations of this House. We wanted to hear practical measures being taken to deliver salaries not the ping-pong between finance and public service and the accounting officers. Let the minister assure the House when the employees are going to be paid; we are not interested in who is responsible, who is wrong and who is right. What we want to hear is when the workers will be paid.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, when are the genuine workers going to be saved from this poverty?

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, I want to assure this House and the workers that Government, and in particular the Ministry of Finance, is making all efforts to pay all the workers whose names have been forwarded to our ministry by the accounting officers. What has happened in one instance –(Interruption) 

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, this issue of salary payment is perennial and has been coming here time and time again. The Ministry of Finance has always promised that they would pay our workers promptly and today, again, he is making the same statement, which I am aware he is not going to honour. Is it in order, therefore, for the minister to come here and again misinform Parliament and yet he is aware that he is not going to effect what he is telling Parliament? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I cannot read his mind. (Laughter) Minister, these are small people who earn little money; it has not come and yet children are going to school next week. What will happen? Will they get arrears? That is the kind of thing we want to hear.

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, I would like to raise a procedural issue. You guided this House by telling us that on Thursday we shall debate the issue of the salaries of public servants. The minister has told us that there are some districts that have submitted lists of staff and have already been paid. I request that the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Public Service come here with a full statement on Thursday, showing how many districts have submitted lists and have been paid and how many have not submitted. This will help us debate from an informed position. 

THE SPEAKER: What I said was that I will appoint a committee to follow up on the report. On Thursday, I want us to discuss the ID registration exercise. However, certainly if we could have information about the lists, because we do not now know, that would help.  

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Madam Speaker, when the committee reported here and debate ensued on the Floor, there was no minister who made a response on behalf of the Executive. I want to plead with you to let the Leader of Government Business come here on Thursday to give a full statement on this matter. It is not healthy for us, with our mis-coordination as the Executive –(Laughter)– Yes! It is not healthy for us to come here and begin blaming each other, offering no solution to the problem at hand. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, that is my prayer to you. We were given the responsibility by Ugandans and we should do our work for these five years.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I agree that this is a matter of great public importance, so on Thursday we shall have both the ID issue and this one. Since the financial year is ending and children are going back to school next week, teachers and other workers must have their money. So we need both statements on Thursday. Thank you and let us move to the next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DEGRADATION OF THE KINAWATAKA WETLAND

3.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Flavia Nabugere): Madam Speaker, colleagues may recall that the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, during the Fifth Sitting of the Third Meeting of the Third Session of the Ninth Parliament held on 26 February 2014, responded to the concerns you raised on the degradation of Kinawataka wetland. He directed the Ministry of Water and Environment to prepare and present to Parliament a comprehensive statement on this matter. I rise, therefore, to present to you this statement as directed by the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business.

Madam Speaker, I will start with a background. This statement has two accompanying documents; one is a brief from NEMA explaining what actions they have taken and another is a brief from the ministry explaining the directives that Cabinet has taken on wetlands. So it is a comprehensive statement. 

Wetlands are areas that are seasonally or permanently flooded with characteristic soils, plants and animals adapted to the waterlogged conditions. They include areas of seasonally flooded grasslands, forests, permanently flooded papyrus and grass, swamps and upland growth. 

Together wetlands represent considerable hydrological, ecological, social, cultural and economic values. They are therefore regarded as important eco-systems that contribute immensely to our national economy and rural livelihood; for instance, over five million Ugandans depend on water stored and released by wetlands for domestic and industrial performance. The 65 per cent target of Ugandans accessing safe drinking water is attributed to the recharge and discharge of water by wetlands over time and space. Over 2.7 million Ugandans are indirectly employed in wetland use through various enterprises. The filtration and purification function of the 2.9 kilometres of Nakivubo wetland is estimated at US$ 1.7 million per year. 

Despite all these valuable benefits and services, wetlands continue to come under immense pressure from rapid population growth, increased industrialisation, real estate expansion, poor land management, agricultural expansion and the impact of climate change and variability. As a result, the coverage of wetlands in Uganda has tremendously reduced from 15.6 per cent of the total land surface area since 1994 to 10.9 per cent in 2008, representing a loss of approximately 30 per cent –(Interruption) 

MS KAYAGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am looking for the document the minister is reading and I cannot find it on my iPad. 

THE SPEAKER: I have been told that it is there; please proceed. 

MS NABUGERE: Location of Kinawataka wetland system: the location of this wetland is well known; I may not have to go through that. I will move on to the next section, but the map of the Kinawataka Wetland as of 1994 and 2008 is indicated on page 4 of the document. 

I also need to mention the importance of the Kinawataka wetland system before I go to its degradation. Kinawataka wetland plays a very important role in regulating storm water runoff from the hills of Nakawa, Kyambogo, Banda, Mutungo, Kirombe, Biina, Mbuya and Luzira areas, thus abating flooding in these areas and the downstream siltation of Lake Victoria. The wetland also acts as a buffer by purifying the runoff water –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have accessed the text which the minister is reading on my iPad. My assumption is that what she is supposed to be reading is a ministerial statement but by and large, it does not appear to me like a ministerial statement; instead, what the minister is presenting is a briefing by NEMA.  I do not know whether a briefing by NEMA can constitute a ministerial statement. At least for the many years I have been here, I know that it is not the same thing. 

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, what is on the iPad? Is it different from this?

MS NABUGERE: Madam Speaker, there are three documents and the first two are just addendums to the main statement.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am equally saddened by the literature which the minister is reading because it is totally distanced from the ecology of Kinawataka, which we are supposed to revisit in terms of an explanation. So in terms of procedure, I propose that if the minster does not have the material relevant to the ecology of Kinawataka in particular, the speech she is giving should be discarded. 

THE SPEAKER: No, was the matter about the ecology? Honourable minister, leave out the NEMA issue and go to your ministerial statement. 

MS NABUGERE: I was on section 1.3, the importance of Kinawataka wetland system. The wetland also acts as a buffer by purifying the runoff water, domestic and industrial effluent from these catchment areas before emptying in the inner Murchison Bay. The inner Murchison Bay is a very important wetland area of the lake because that is where the National Water and Sewerage Corporation draw water for KCCA and its environs. 

The wetland extracts nutrients from waste water and effluent from both domestic and industrial establishments from all the surrounding areas and also provides habitant and breeding grounds for the crested crane –(Interruption) 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I want to thank the minister for what she is saying. This House is very aware of the value of the wetland and that is why they raised that issue of destruction of the wetland. 

Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance. I have looked through the statement on my iPad. The minister should be requested to go back and come back tomorrow with a land title of that place. This Parliament needs to take very serious action. By having the land title of Kinawataka wetland, which is being destroyed, laid on the Table, this House can take appropriate decisions to stay any action of destruction. Otherwise, if we only listen to this statement, the people that destroy the wetland will continue the whole night and within two weeks, we shall have the entire wetland destroyed. 

We need to know, who is holding the land title of Kinawataka wetland and in whose names it is by having that land title laid here. Madam Speaker, under the Parliamentary Power and Privileges Act, we have the power to access any document at any time. So I seek your guidance. 

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, the issue at hand was raised because the member who raised it was not happy with what was going on in that area. Let us receive the minister’s statement and discuss it and take decisions. If we insist that we want the land title here yet our wetland is going, what is going to happen?  That is not a solution. I really suggest, Madam Speaker, that we receive the minister’s statement and as Parliament, we take a decision. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the issue was that there was concern that Kinawataka was being degraded and the House wanted to know what your ministry is doing about it. So, tell us the efforts you are engaged in to halt the degradation. 

MS NABUGERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think going through the background, I need to highlight the threat to Kinawataka wetland –(Interjections)– If all of us knew, then there would be no degradation.

MS AKELLO: Madam Speaker, I know she is going to the statement, but she is talking about the efforts of the ministry – 

THE SPEAKER: But some members do not know what efforts the ministry has made. Let her tell us the efforts. Honourable members, degradation is very serious; we want to know what efforts the ministry is making to stop it. Please, proceed, honourable minister. 

MS NABUGERE: I will go to point No.3, which is on efforts by the Ministry of Water and Environment to protect Kinawataka. Since 2005 to date, the Ministry of Water and Environment and its predecessors have undertaken the following:

1. Conducted sensitisation and mobilisation meetings with all the stakeholders from resource users groups to councillors, veterans, technical, administrative, cultural and political leaders at all levels on the value of the wetland and the danger of degrading the wetland system. 

The political leaders however did not implement their role to guide the communities on the laws governing wetland management –(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I stand on a point of order, pursuant to Article 237(2)(b) of the Constitution, which briefly states that wetlands are held in public trust by the Government of Uganda. The issue at hand right now is that Kinawataka wetland is in danger of extinction. We expect the person holding Kinawataka wetland in trust to tell this House why that wetland is being degraded while Government is doing nothing. 

Instead of heeding to what I have prescribed, is the minister in order to meander around and tell us about general issues about the wetland?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are aware that you have some peripheral interest in the environment but the minister is explaining to you how she is protecting the environment. 

MS NABUGERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The ministry has issued letters to all the local councils around the wetland system, reminding them of their roles; and together with NEMA, issued restoration orders to the encroachers to restore the wetland to its original status, leading to eviction of veterans who had illegally established a market in the wetland. The restoration order was temporarily observed by the wetland encroachers but later disregarded, but right now there are new measures. 

    • The former Minister of Water and Environment, hon. Mutagamba, and representatives of National Water and Sewerage Cooperation, physical planning department, KCCA, NEMA, the New Vision and the wetland management department conducted a guided tour of Kinawataka wetland in 2009 to forge a way forward for urban wetland conservation. This resulted into the development of a detailed enforcement and restoration plan, which is in the process of being observed. 

    • They also conducted joint planning meetings with stakeholders to initiate boundary assessment and restoration and also debriefed all the local councillors on the pending eviction of encroachers. 

	The outcome of the joint meeting with those stakeholders and LCs was the marking of all the structures with wetlands as shown in photo  No.17; issuing of eviction letters to encroachers and subsequent eviction of encroachers; clearing of all crops; and unblocking of most of the drainage channels in the upper Kinawataka wetland. 

    • The ministry, supported by Environment Protection Police Unit, prepared a compliance monitoring and enforcement strategy to guide inspection and surveillance, and conducted intensified inspections and monitoring resulting into the issuing of improvement notices to degraders to stop further degradation of the wetland and prosecution of offenders in the courts of law to stop wetland degradation. 

    • The ministry has also prepared inspection reports indicating the degraded wetland and the degraders, and issued improvement notices and recommendations to NEMA to issue restoration orders and cancelation of environmental impact assessment certificates issued to the developers. 

	If we look at one of the documents, the brief to NEMA, it has a whole list of action taken against those people who are degrading it. It is on page 7. You will see that NEMA has been cancelling environmental impact assessment certificates and also taking some other necessary action. 

    • The Ministry of Water and Environment conducted comprehensive assessment to determine the status of Kinawataka wetland and developed maps of the key degraded sites in preparation for the demarcation and restoration of the degraded section and the development of a management plan. 

	Demarcation and restoration of the degraded section of the wetland has been planned. This will result into a wetland atlas, which will finally result into gazetting of the wetland and the land titles that are being requested. 

Further on-going efforts by the Ministry of Water and Environment are as follows: 
    • To reactivate the sensitisation and mobilisation of cultural, religious administrative and political leaders on their decentralised roles in wetland management as a means to soliciting their participation and commitment in the management of Kinawataka wetland.

    • Operationalising the National Wetland Information System. This will be developed to ensure the provision of timely and reliable information maps of the boundary and the composition of Kinawataka wetland to land administration and management authorities for guiding decisions on land allocation and survey of the land in and around the wetland system. 
    • Boundary demarcation with pillars and beacons will be done to allay the claims that people are ignorant of the boundary lines, and restoration of the degraded section of Kinawataka wetland including the eviction of unauthorised wetland users in the system. 

    • In collaboration with the relevant stakeholders, develop management plans as a means to nationalise the use of the resources by the different resource users for livelihood enhancement. 

    • Also, there is continuous compliance monitoring and enforcement of the legal regimes through surveillance, inspection, investigation and prosecution on the non-complying regulated communities. 

    • Joint technical review and evaluation of environmental impact assessment reports of projects near or in Kinawataka wetland to effectively guide the approval or disapproval process by NEMA. 

    • There is also formulation of a wetlands sector specific Bill to provide more deterrent penalties and strengthen enforcement. 

    • There is also compilation of land titles in Kinawataka wetland and recommendations for cancelation by relevant issuing authorities. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I need at this time to inform you that Cabinet has deliberated on issues of cancelation of land titles in the wetland and has taken a position, which is contained in one of the documents that is attached. Therefore, there are efforts right now to start putting into effect the decision of the Cabinet. I would like to read out what has been determined so that Members of Parliament may also join us in protecting the wetland –(Interjections)– Cancelation of land titled issued in wetlands as one of the measures to address the problem of wetland degradation- This is contained in a letter written from the ministry to the Executive Director of the National Environmental Management Authority and it reads as follows: 

“This is to inform you that Cabinet, under minute 114CT/2014, while deliberating on Cabinet minutes 84 and 173/2013 and Cabinet Memorandum CT2012/172, noted the steps the policy committee on environment had taken to address the issue of cancelation of land titles in wetlands referred to in the memorandum. 

It also noted the decisions and recommendations of the policy committee on environment and noted, with concern, the growing tendency whereby certain individuals claiming to be acting on orders from above usually use all methods to subvert the effective enforcement of the law and approved the following recommendations for action:
1. 	As a matter of principle, policy and law, all titles in wetlands, on public and acquired unlawfully after 1995 should be cancelled. 

2. 	Land titles on critical eco-systems especially those on the 200-metre lakeshore protection zone should be regulated and that proprietors should be required to apply for and obtain permits to undertake regulated activities as provided in the law and that in addition, the degraded wetlands whose ecological functions were recovered should be restored. 

3. 	Wetland potions on public land that had been reclaimed and converted for economic activities for public good and with approval from the controlling or regulating authorities such as NEMA and KCC, should be declared vanquished and land titles issued therein should not be cancelled. 

4. 	Clear operational procedures of handling cancelation of those titles in wetlands on public land should be developed and those procedures should be applied without discrimination. 

5. 	The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should commence cancelation of land titles issued after 1995 as soon as the wetland atlas is in place.  

6. 	The Ministry of Water and Environment and NEMA, in consultation with local governments and police, should take immediate steps to ensure that wetlands that were not yet degraded or encroached upon are fully protected and should produce a wetland atlas for the whole country. 

Also, Cabinet directed the Attorney-General to undertake further study on proposals to declare as vanquished wetland potions on public land that had been reclaimed and converted for economic activities for public good to facilitate appropriate decision making by Cabinet; 

Directed the Ministry of Water and Environment to put in place a period of sensitisation of the public on the measures that have been approved, given the magnitude of the problem and the possibility of precipitating a crisis through the cancelation of the titles; 

Noted that annex 1 containing the inventory of titles in Kampala, Wakiso, Mukono, Jinja and Kumi were not comprehensive enough and should be taken back for further verification by the ministry; 

Publish the Uganda wildlife policy 2014 for implementation.” 

Those were the decisions that were taken by Cabinet to cancel land titles in wetlands –(Interjections)- Cabinet has approved this. Cabinet approved this and we also now want Parliament to be part of this so that we avoid the resistance that normally follows. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to lay these papers on the Table. In conclusion, Kinawataka wetland system is critical and a vital wetland system in Kampala Capital City that cannot be drained for creating space for development, owing to its critical function of regulating the storm and runoff from the adjacent channels. 

Recommendations 

1. 	It is recommended that responsible institutions and agencies mandated with land administration and infrastructural development should stop issuance of land titles and approval of development plans in Kinawataka wetland and also cancel any titles issued to developers in the wetland in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution of 1995 and the Land Act, Cap 227 of 1998. 

2. 	The responsible institutions and agencies mandated with the regulation of development should stop issuing environmental impact assessment certificates and wetland users’ permits in Kinawataka wetland and also cancel any document issued to developers in or near the wetland in recognition of the Constitutional provisions, National Environment Management Act and the Land Act. 

3. 	They should fast-track the formulation of a wetlands sector specific Bill. The process has begun. 

4. 	They should complete the demarcation of the boundary, plant pillars and beacons and gazette Kinawataka wetland to guide land use. 

5. 	In collaboration with the relevant stakeholders, they should develop management plans to restore the degraded wetland and rationalise the use of the wetlands resources by the different resource users for livelihood enhancement. 

6. 	Re-activate the sensitisation and mobilisation of cultural, religious, administrative and political leaders as the means to solicit their participation and commitment in the management of Kinawataka wetland. 

7. 	Strengthen the capacity of Environment Police Protection Unit and the wetlands management department to inspect, investigate and prosecute the non-complying communities. 

8. 	Establish and operationalise an environment impact assessment technical review and evaluation team to effectively review and guide the approval or disapproval of environmental impact assessment reports by NEMA. 

Madam Speaker, I rest my case.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, let us have two minutes each. 

4.04
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for her comprehensive statement, but very confusing. We are supposed to look at Kinawataka wetland and in her opening remarks, the minister had said that Kinawataka wetland is formed by four rivers. She then jumped from there, with your permission, Madam Speaker, and she came to her statement. When she reached the statement, then she went back to the letters accompanying I do not know what. 

In her statement, on page No.7, under threats to Kinawataka wetland, she says, “due to the expansion of illegal settlements…” She is still confusing this august House that there is a wetland. I want to speak for the Naguru area. Honourable members, those of you who have been with me on the Committee of Natural Resources for the last 13 years know that we invited the minister and the technical people to visit Naguru, but they have persistently refused. There is no river called Vubyabirenge in Ntinda. There is no wetland in Ntinda. There are only houses on top of rivers, and I say this with authority. 

Madam Speaker, I would buy the idea that the minister comes here with a PowerPoint presentation to demonstrate where these wetlands are. I would be happy if the minister concentrated on showing us the problems of Kinawataka settlements as she was asked in the statement –(Member timed out)  

THE SPEAKER: Okay, take half a minute to conclude.

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, as I was saying, the issue of wetlands has been on my heart and I call upon this august House, if possible, to institute a select committee – We have tried to work as the Committee on Natural Resources and I am not saying we have failed, but the minister has frustrated us. That committee should deal with the matter of wetlands in this country, especially around Kinawataka. There is no wetland there; I have walked there on foot and I can take you there, Madam Speaker. You will not believe your eyes. The statement of the minister is contrary to what is on the ground. I thank you.

4.07
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance to realign the debate. 

I have listened to the minister very attentively and much as she gave issues generally on wetlands, she did not specifically handle the Kinawataka issue. I want to go straight to the recommendations. 

As hon. Geoffrey Ekanya suggested, we should start with the issue of the title. The minister should bring the title for Kinawataka wetland here because I see there are buildings all over. The committee that is concerned with wetlands should visit the site with a surveyor to demarcate where that wetland is. After that, the committee should bring a report here for us to debate and then we can get the way forward. Otherwise, just gazetting Kinawataka without demarcating its boundaries will be a waste of time. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.09
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the statement. I particularly want to raise my concern on the issue she just raised - the cancelation of titles in wetlands. 

Madam Speaker, I sit on the natural resources committee and these issues have often arisen before us because we provide an oversight role over them. However, we have been challenged especially when it comes to the reality of these issues. I want the minister to clarify to me, for example, the legal implications of the cancelation of these titles. Who gave these titles - how did they come up? Who gave away these titles and what implication does this have? Otherwise, we might find ourselves in hot issues of compensation. 

My other point is on those people who issued the land titles. What do we do; do we just look at it as a mistake and that is the end? That is a challenge that keeps coming up time and again. The minister should help me understand the implications of this move and what will happen to those people who have been doing this deliberately. (Member timed out) 

4.11
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want the minister to clarify - in fact, not the minister but the government. When we start blame games like we have seen with public service on the salaries, it shows that the people in Cabinet are very incompetent. 

There is only one government; if government has gazetted the wetlands in Uganda, we need laws on gazetting. If they were gazetted then who re-planned those wetlands? These land titles were issued for these wetlands, which the minister has failed to describe. The minister has failed to describe what a wetland is. If the minister has failed and NEMA has failed – NEMA is being challenged – it is now creating institutional conflict between the ministry and NEMA, which is its agency. The ministry is incompetent in as far as environment and NEMA are concerned. That is where we have a competent authority regarding wetlands, so why should the ministry conflict with NEMA? That shows that Government agencies are undermining each other. 

On the implications of cancelation of land titles, let the minister explain. The same Government has issued land titles and the same Government is cancelling the same land titles. These land titles are issued even on the influence of minister. So if the ministers are influencing the registrars, why don’t you start with them? 

We want to know how often you inspect wetlands. We even gave them environmental police, but nothing has been stopped. Also, are we talking about wetlands in Kampala or in Uganda? Is the minister in charge of Kampala only? In my place, there are also wetlands but there is nothing being done. How many wetlands do we have in Uganda, anyway, which are gazetted? (Member timed out) 

4.14
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would want the Minister of Environment to listen to me. Be specific and tell us who the owners of titles in the wetlands in Kinawataka are, as simple as that. Give us the names. Rt Hon. Speaker, you will find on these titles the names of some of us; if we are not there, it is our wives or our children who have only one tooth but own this land, or our companies. I hate pretence. We must save this country by apprehending ourselves if we are making mistakes. The moment we let the rich to encroach on wetlands just because we fear they will follow us, the wetlands are going to get finished.

Secondly, Ministry of Lands - I do not know whether they are here - tell us, why are you giving out titles in wetlands? Don’t you know wetlands? Honestly, someone from Ministry of Lands sees a wetland and for him it is a dry land –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, honourable member. The information I want to give to the House is that we have cadastral sheets in the country and we have also topos of areas in the country to show the extent of any feature in the country. So, when the district surveyor is issuing a print, if there is a wetland, he is supposed to mark and show that this is a wetland. So it is not that they do not know what they are doing.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Lastly, honourable minister, you are not a minister for Kampala only; you also have to be a minister for Mbarara, Kapchorwa, Kotido and Hoima. My problem is: are you aware that people in the rural areas are struggling? Are you aware that wetlands in the rural areas are being destroyed- (Member timed out.)

4.16
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Madam Speaker, I have listened to the minister and I thought we would have a strong and confident statement but it has failed to come. The minister is only pleading that we should hold sensitisation meetings, that they have written administrative letters to the LCs and that we should strengthen environmental protection police etc. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, to me and to any serious Member of Parliament, this could have been a mere presentation by any student of environment science or environment protection but not a minister. That is the fact. Can we demand for concrete measures, for instance, issuance of a deadline for the encroachers to vacate the wetlands? That would sound rational to us. 

We have taken measures to cancel illegally obtained land titles - that is within the purview of Government. That is why I even suspect that so called Cabinet extract; no wonder, it was not signed because it has no teeth at all. It is not presenting anything new – (Interruption)

MR KANGWAGYE: Thank you, honourable member. There is something I wanted to add and inform the whole House about. 

In my constituency, something happened. National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) came boldly telling people not to encroach on wetlands and they chased all the people away from the area. People had already planted crops but when those people were totally evacuated from the area, NEMA again recruited other members to come and encroach on what was already encroached upon. They are the very people who have occupied the land. 

I asked them, “what are you trying to solve; you chased people and you are the very people who are here? Did you protect the environment?” So those are the problems we have. Thank you, hon. Ssekikubo. We need to look for ways of solving all those problems that are killing our people.

MRS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, honourable colleague. When you look at the minister’s report under 20, they are talking about continuous surveying, allocation and issuing of titles in wetlands by Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and KCCA contrary to the Land Act. 

When you go to 3.5, she actually says it has been noted that the degraders no longer respect the improvement and administrative notices issued by the Ministry of Water and Environment, so they degrade with impunity. I wanted to give you information to support your argument that we need to come up with very punitive measures or a resolution because the ministry has failed on its own.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe we should employ Jennifer Musisi to remove the buildings. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Rt Hon. Speaker, the crux of the matter is that ideally, we are all equal before the law but day in, day out you see the poor, the wretched of the earth, being swept off the streets of Kampala – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You are a generous man; you donated your time.

4.20
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When the minister was giving us her statement, she tried to convince this House that it is the local people who are encroaching on the wetlands. However, from what is happening, it is not the locals who are encroaching; it is the wealthy people who are encroaching on the wetlands. That is why you find that at night, tonnes of murram are ferried to fill wetlands. It is the wealthy people who are doing this; it is not the locals. It is a few wealthy people in this country and those are the people we must look for.

Once murram has been used to fill a wetland, removing it has never happened. I just want to give you an example; when you go opposite Spear Motors, there was a fuel station which was being constructed there and it was stopped. Up to today, they have not removed what was dumped in that place. Now when it rains, the water floods that place. I grew up in Ntinda Police Barracks and that place had never flooded. This is happening because the wetlands the minister named – Ntinda, Kyambogo - are no longer there.

Madam Speaker, I wish you had the opportunity to pass near that area yesterday when it was raining; the water was almost crossing the road. That small channel, which the water from all swamps now is supposed to be drained, is overwhelmed. There is a lot of mud, sand, and all the garbage in this city goes there and it is blocking those areas. The water has nowhere to pass and it is getting worse as Kinawataka is being destroyed. You need to pass the other side of Kinawataka road when it is raining and see the dirt, which is going into Lake Victoria. Lake Victoria is going to die when we are still alive- (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute. Could you also tell us, in your view, who is responsible for removing those things?

MR OCHOLA: Madam Speaker, what we should be doing is first of all stopping any encroachment on the wetlands and Government has the powers to do that. It is a matter of stopping. Why does Government give the titles to these people? Who is giving them; isn’t it Government? It must stop.

Two, we have been stopping the encroachers but we should not only stop them but force the person who has been found dumping murram to remove the murram. That person must incur the expense of removing all the murram to wherever he or she brought it from so that the wetland is restored. We must restore the wetlands and not only stop encroachers. It must be done and we can enforce it. 

We have the Police on the ground and the ministers are here. Why are they here? They are not in charge, Madam Speaker. Some of these ministers should have resigned by now. If I was a minister on the other side and wetlands were being encroached on, I would resign. 

4.24
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will start from who is supposed to restore the wetlands. The person who destroyed the area is the one who is supposed to restore it.

Madam Speaker, you pass via Kyambogo every day. We have talked about where they removed soil on the road and now the poles are hanging in the air. The Prime Minister told us they are going to restore the place but up to now, they have not restored it. If it can be seen like that on the road, what happens away from the road? It is very dangerous.

I will tell you just a simple way about how a land title is got. You have the LCs who will bring a surveyor who surveys the area and submits this to government staff surveyors, the district etc. After that is approved, the land title is issued. Madam Speaker, Government, that is, Ministry of Lands, is the one that issues these titles and the person who surveys is from Ministry of Lands. So, the bodies responsible for destroying the wetlands are the Ministry of Lands and the Ministry of Environment. That is why we can say we are going to cancel the titles. Yes, they are going to be cancelled, but who issued them in the first place? That should be dealt with immediately.

Two, if a surveyor came and saw that that is a swamp - Of course, to go and survey a swamp you must be a serious man. How did the surveyor survey a swamp? Where did they pass? That surveyor must also be arrested.

Madam Speaker, I agree that the titles should be cancelled. They should have been cancelled yesterday. If you go to Kinawataka now, construction is going on. The minister is saying we have stopped but I can tell you that degradation in Kinawataka is continuing –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. If you go there, you will see that there is a problem. Whoever does not see the consequences of degrading swamps or wetlands does not see. The flooding on this road at Kyambogo has worsened. In fact, if you have a small car, you would have to wait for the water to subside before you crossed the road. Even the four-wheel-drive vehicles get stuck. In short, in less than a year if it continues raining, Jinja Road will be cut off.

Madam Speaker, the minister must tell us, in concrete terms, when she is going to enforce the restoration of the wetlands where they have stopped the encroaching and when they going to stop the remaining encroachers. Giving us stories that they are going to carry out workshops, train people - When will it end? 

I am so excited that all Members of Parliament agree that we need wetlands. If we need wetlands, we should direct that the restoration of the wetlands be done by the end of this month. If we cannot do that, then it will be a talking show. Madam Speaker, we are in complete danger. I thank you.

4.28
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka County, Luuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This environmental issue is more serious than most of us may think and we have two problems. 

I listened attentively to the minister’s statement and to Members who have been contributing on what they thought was the best thing to do. Everybody has been talking about cancellation of the land titles. However, when you get a title from the Uganda Land Board or the Ministry of Lands, the person who issues the land titles signs at the bottom. Why can’t we go for those people who sign the land titles? The word should be “prosecution” and not just cancellation of the title.

Honourable members, this is very serious. A poor man like me or like some other poor men in Uganda cannot afford to put up a structure in a wetland. Rich men in this country, day and night, are ferrying building materials to put up structures at night. When we wake up in the morning, we only find that a structure has come up in a certain place. 

There was a time when I was moving around Wankulukuku and somebody showed me a structure saying, “You see that structure there, it is for one of the rich men around here”, and that man is a very prominent man in this country –(Interjections)– and then I wondered. Not hon. Lukyamuzi, it was a different person. Just like that side of Kinawataka- (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I stand on a point of order. The honourable member holding the Floor said it was not hon. Lukyamuzi but why mention hon. Lukyamuzi? Was it by coincidence? Do you have data to justify that I own that structure? If so, state it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, maybe you are now confirming that it is yours because he was saying it is not yours. Now you have confirmed. Please conclude. (Laughter)

MR BAGOOLE: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. The Ministry of Environment also has another problem of poor sensitisation. Some scientists, those that I have interacted with, have got a saying that when we take care of the environment, the environment will take care of us- (Member timed out.)

4.31
MS JOY ATIM ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I want to thank the minister for her statement but I have a few queries. 

In her statement and also in the letter written by the permanent secretary about the resolution of Cabinet, it was stated that land titles that have been issued by KCCA and also approved by NEMA should not be cancelled if they have been issued for economic activities. I think KCCA only applies to Kampala but we have our areas where KCCA is not present. Why should it be restricted to KCCA only yet you know that wetlands are everywhere in this country? That needs to be taken into account.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I think this is a blame game. When we talk of ministries, we know that these people sit together and they are headed by the Prime Minister. I see a situation where Ministry of Lands knows what transpires in Ministry of Water but they continue to issue land titles against the will of Ministry of Water. If you check some of those land titles, they are approved by NEMA and an EIA certificate is also given to prove that Ministry of Water is aware. 

This is a situation where we are saying we are going to cancel some of those land titles and I know for sure that Government is going to get into problems. It is the same ministers, who subscribed to this government, who issued these land titles and they are ones going to cancel them. If somebody has already constructed, how are we going to pay them as Government? That is food for thought and we have to think about it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, regarding payment, in Rwanda if you build in a wetland, they allow you to build but just as you are about to enter, they break it down and you cannot complain. That is what happens in Rwanda.

4.33
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I have a few questions for the minister and if she fails to answer the questions in the affirmative, I would request her to resign with immediate effect.

Madam Speaker, in her report, the minister has given us a list of on-going projects - efforts by her ministry. Under bullet No.3 she says by June next year, they should have erected pillars and beacons to demarcate the boundary between wetlands and other areas where people can be allowed to settle. So, how many pillars has your ministry erected? Can you give us that information?

Two, she has also told us that by June next year, they are going to carry out evictions of unauthorised wetland users. To date, how many people have been evicted and if there are still people settled on the wetlands, doesn’t that tell us that you have failed in what you pronounced to undertake? Are you not taking this country for a ride by presenting this report before Parliament well knowing that you are telling lies? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.35
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think I am more confused than I was before the minister’s statement. 

When the minister talks about government agencies, I would like to find out whether she has sat down with the government agencies to find out where things are going wrong. This is because I am sure there is only one Government and the ministers coordinate these agencies. If there is a problem in one agency and if ministers are in control, they can be able to solve that problem.

Madam Speaker, sometime back a house was demolished in Bugolobi. It was owned by one of the political leaders, the then chairperson of LCIII Central Division, Mr Godfrey Nyakana. When that house was demolished, we thought that sanity was going to come. What is happening right now is that where they demolished the house, many other houses have been constructed and they are very big houses. So, one wonders whether it is personal and whether some people are being crucified and others are left to move on.

We have just witnessed drama today on the Floor where government ministers are accusing one another; the one of finance is accusing the one of public service. I wonder whether Government is taking this country for a ride, whether they are taking us for granted and whether they are doing what they are supposed to do. I want to find out from the minister whether these titles you are talking about are known- (Member timed out.)

4.37
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start from the background where the Government Chief Whip has told us that there is confusion in Cabinet. When the minister was presenting her statement, she was actually adducing evidence to that effect because in her statement –(Interruption)

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Kasule Lumumba): Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable members, I made a statement here and I have not even left where I was seated. The statement I made was in good faith based on what my colleagues were saying here. I said it is an issue of mis-coordination - that was what I said - not confusion. Is he in order to misquote me when I am still here?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think she was talking about poor coordination. Please conclude.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The point I was making is that when you look at the location of the Kinawataka wetland system, – this is scientific - the wetland is known and they even show it on the UTM scale; they know where it is. You did say that the wetland is about to be gazetted. Actually, Kinawataka wetland is gazetted. So, that was just exemplifying the mis-coordination.

I want to say for the record that the law provides that in order for you to call a place a wetland, it must be gazetted. This means that Kinawataka is known as a gazetted wetland. What we need the honourable minister to account for is 2.3 square kilometres of land in that wetland. Where is it? 

As I stated earlier, everybody who has any knowledge about land law knows that there are cadastral sheets for the entire country, even for Kamuli where I hail from. Even when you go to Entebbe, there are cadastral sheets. When you come to KCCA, there are topos, which show where we have a road reserve and where there is a wetland. This means that when you coordinate properly, you will know that even before the district sub surveyor issues a title to anybody, even if there is some other part which is not a wetland they would indicate on the print that you can only use this land to this extent and the rest is a wetland.

There is an environmental committee in Government; I do not know whether the minister is aware about it. It is supposed to be headed by the Prime Minister. What does this mean? This committee is supposed to help in enforcement of any environmental standard. When there are authorities like KCCA, they control land use. Even when I have a private mailo title, I cannot just put anything there; I must draw a plan and it must be approved, and this means that they have to visit the site. So –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi comes up, I want you to join me in welcoming our colleague, hon. Baryayanga. He has returned after he was away for health reasons. You are welcome.

4.41
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for granting me an opportunity to say something. The minister’s statement lacked a number of ingredients and, therefore, it is insufficient. Parliament wanted the minister to state why the ministry has ignored the protection of Kinawataka wetland.

It is a known fact that Uganda signed the international protocol protecting wetlands - the Ramsar Convention. As if that is not enough, under Article 237(2)(b) of the Constitution, the Government of Uganda holds in public trust the existence of the wetland but that wetland is about to become extinct. I have been a member of the natural resources committee for some time and I will bring data to that effect. Kinawataka wetland was sold to a muyindi and the muyindi has got a land title. I am breaking real news here, subject to challenge. I will not name the muyindi but it is a known fact.

In the presentation of the minister, she read a statement from Cabinet on wetlands. She said that Government and the Police shall ensure that wetlands, which are not yet degraded, are protected. Are you aware that Nakayiba wetland in Masaka was once degraded and it regained its glory when NEMA intervened? By making such a statement, well knowing that for the last 27 years or so you have been party to the destruction of the wetlands, you are making us lose hope in the renovation and resurrection of wetlands. If you have no capacity to protect the wetlands, on which we greatly depend economically, you better pack up and go and we come to power, and I am very serious about this.

The way forward: We are not going to have any mercy in fighting to ensure that we regain the glory of wetlands because you have now invested heavily in electricity generation –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we cannot conclude this matter today. However, I want to direct the minister to present to us a title deed for Kinawataka wetlands, the cadastral sheets for that area and the topographical surveys for that area. I direct the Committee on Natural resources to visit those wetlands so that we have a report together with the minister. When she brings her report, you also bring your report. Thank you very much. She cannot do it tomorrow, no. You will answer when you bring those other things.

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, in accordance with Article 154 of the Constitution and rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to lay on the Table the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.2 for the Financial Year 2013/2014. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the relevant committee for scrutiny and report back.

4.46
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Kenneth Omona): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report of the delegation of the Committee on Health on its findings from a study visit to Zambia on mobile health services. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: The Clerk is directed to upload the document on the iPads and a date for debate will be appointed.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE HIV AND AIDS PREVENTION AND CONTROL BILL, 2010

THE CHAIRPERSON: When we last met, we had instructed the chairperson of the Committee on Health and a few Members to discuss the domicile and the sources.

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson and honourable colleagues. The last time we handled this Bill, you directed that a small committee that you had proposed looks at the domicile of this fund and also the sources of the fund.

Madam Chairperson, I am pleased to report that the small committee did some work and this is what we came up with on the HIV AND AIDS Trust Fund: 

“30. (1) The monies of the fund shall consist of - 
(a) 	Two per cent of the tax revenue collected from levies on beers, spirits, waragi, soft drinks and bottled water.
(b) 	Tax revenue from any other taxable item as may be identified by the minister responsible for finance from time to time.
(c) 	Grants, monies or assets donated to the fund through the ministry responsible for finance, or assets donated to the fund by any foreign government, international agency or other external body of persons, corporate or unincorporated; or
(d) 	Money received by the fund by way of voluntary contribution.

(2) 	The tax revenue referred to in subsection 1(a) shall be remitted directly to the fund on a monthly basis.

31. 	Administration of the Fund
(1) 	The fund shall be administered by the minister responsible for health in consultation with the minister responsible for finance.

(2) 	The minister shall, within six months of commencement of this Act, make regulations to provide for the management of the fund.

(3) 	The regulations made under subsection (2) shall be laid before Parliament for approval.”

Madam Chairperson and honourable colleagues, this is what we could do within this period of time as far as this is concerned. I beg to report.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, those are the proposals. Are you giving the responsibility to the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Finance?

MS KABAALE: Madam Chairperson, the chairperson of the committee was very particular. He was explaining to us that Ministry of Finance will collect the money but Ministry of Health will be in charge of how the money should be used. We feel that we should support this since we gave them a good assignment and they have come back with results. Thank you.

MR KAFUDA: Madam Chairperson, thank you. I have a concern about the source of funds. I do not know why the chairperson and the select committee decided to specify on the source of funds. I thought this was going to be a general thing so that we get those funds from the general pool of the government and not specify where they come from.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There are several sources of that money; the first one is just one of the channels through which the money could be raised.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, my senior colleague is consulting, so I would suggest that we stand over this until she comes back. She is still consulting. Yes, we stood over it but you see when you begin to tax beers, spirits, waragi and soft drinks, it has an impact not only on the economy but also on the resources that Government is going to be looking at.

Also, to say that this is to be remitted directly to the fund- Government needs to know what resource envelope is available through taxation. So, Madam Chairperson, could you give us two minutes?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, it is the conduct of your ministry which has brought distrust in this country. You have taken the money for the Road Fund as well as other funds and you are holding on to it. We do not trust you as a ministry.

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, maybe I could try and allay the fears of the minister. We have also considered his opinion. Government also has the time to either inform the House or let the country know after passing of this when it will come into effect. I think this will give Government time. We are not proposing any new tax; this is two per cent of what is already collected. So this is not something new.

For any others that Government can think of, we have made provision in (b) - tax revenue from any other taxable item as may be identified by the minister responsible for finance from time to time. What we are proposing here is already what is available; we are not proposing any new tax. Madam Chairperson, we need to start to move. I think the minister is afraid for nothing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The minister also has an opportunity when he brings the Finance Bill to address this issue. 

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair and honourable colleagues, when you prescribe that you are going to levy two per cent of the total revenue, that is quite a substantial amount. The VAT of 18 per cent is very substantial and now if you are going to add another two per cent on top, that will take us to about 20 per cent. Issues of competitiveness will then come in and my investors will be concerned about it. 

I think as we suggested, the Ministry of Finance need to look at this particular clause as we are just receiving it for the first time. 

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you. I see a challenge on the proposed clause 30(2), which provides that tax revenue referred to in subsection (1) (a) shall be remitted directly to the fund on a monthly basis. I see a problem on remitting on a monthly basis since the ministry releases funds on a quarterly basis.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, can we adjust to quarterly?

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, it is not the Ministry of Finance to collect the money but URA. Even monies for other funds are collected by URA and transferred – (Interjections) - What I am saying is that the Ministry of Finance does not collect taxes; it is URA –(Interjection)– Even if it is under Ministry of Finance, URA collects the taxes and we are saying that any money collected under the fund should just be transferred on a monthly basis.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Chair, URA collects the taxes on behalf of the Ministry of Finance and remits this money to the Consolidated Fund. So, the responsibility of getting that money and remitting it to the fund is the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance. 

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, even if we agree to this issue of monthly basis, companies submit reruns on quarterly basis and so to try and suggest that we need to remit this money on monthly basis is going to create an administrative burden on URA. So, I think that we need to look at that. I think it should be on a quarterly basis. However, we still have an issue with the two per cent.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You will adjust that one with the Finance Bill. Honourable members, the proposal is that clause 30(2) be amended to read “quarterly” instead of “monthly”. I now put the question that clause 30(2) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the fund be established as proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are there any amendments to the interpretation?

DR OMONA: Thank you. There are some amendments on clause 2. Madam Chair, if you could allow, we could first look at clause 29, as there was an amendment that we were supposed to redraft, before we come to clause 2.

Clause 29

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, under clause 29 (3), there was supposed to be some amendment that you directed that we redraft properly. With amendments now, clause 29 (3) would read as follows: “A person who is the subject of the research shall be provided with research facilitations in conformity with the provisions in the Uganda National Health Research Organisation Act and the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology Act.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that your amendment for clause 29?

DR OMONA: Yes, for clause 29 (3).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it a new one?

DR OMONA: No. It was debated here and we were supposed to redraft.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 29 (3) be amended as proposed by the chair.

(Question out and agreed to.)

Clause 29, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

DR OMONA: Thank you. Clause 2 is the definition clause and we have a few amendments on definitions.

We had proposed to amend the definition of anonymous testing but our amendment as proposed did not go through and so we leave that out.

The next amendment was on the definition of ARVs. We wish to rephrase this to read as follows: “ARVs means anti-retroviral drugs that suppress HIV multiplication in the body of a person living with HIV resulting in improved immunity.” The justification is that this is for clarity.

We also wish to amend the definition of “health unit” by rephrasing the original definition to read as follows –(Interruption)

DR TUMWESIGYE: Madam Chair, I want to propose that maybe we do not include the aspect of improving immunity in defining ARVs. This is because we know very well that there are people on ARVs but who may not respond to treatment because the virus strain that they have may not respond or they may be resistant to the ARVs. So, it does not necessarily mean that when you use ARVs, you automatically have improved immunity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, do you want to leave it as it is?

DR TUMWESIGYE: We can take what he has suggested but not include that aspect of improving immunity.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Again, from a clinical perspective, ideally anti-retroviral drugs are meant to suppress the virus so that your immunity is improved. That is exactly what they are supposed to do. Now that is medicine. 

However, there are some scenarios where somebody’s immunity does has not improve, and we have three failures: it could be virological failure, where the viral load has failed to go down; and then we have got clinical failure, where somebody clinically does not respond; and then there is another failure when your CD4s have failed to go up. However, ultimately, Dr Eloida Tumwesigye, I want you to concede that the ARVs are meant to boost somebody’s immunity. I entirely agree with this as the vice-chairperson of this committee and as a clinician. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, are there any other amendments? Go through them quickly.

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Chair. If you would allow, I think that I would concede to the proposal by Dr Tumwesigye that the definition of ARVs reads as follows: “ARVs means anti-retroviral drugs that suppress HIV multiplication in the body of a person living with HIV”.  It should remain like that.

Madam Chair, We propose to rephrase the definition of a health unit to read as follows: “Health unit includes a public or private hospital, clinic, nursing home, maternity centre or other specialised establishment of the same nature.” This is for purposes of clarity. The other one in the Bill did not provide for public facilities.

DR TUMWESIGYE: I would also like to improve on the formulation by the committee chairperson. I want to make sure that we cater for people who are able to go and test not necessarily in health facilities as we know them, especially as we move on to home based testing, outreach testing and even in the future we may also have people test themselves using simple tests. 

In order to avoid changing other clauses, for purposes of this Bill we could define a health unit as follows: “a healthcare provider such as a hospital, health centre, nursing home, maternity home or other institution whether, facility or non-facility based, private or public, which provides healthcare services and includes persons rendering healthcare services in these institutions.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you mean the persons can be health units?

DR TUMWESIGYE: For purposes of this Act. This is because when you look at clause 9, for example, it gives the impression that HIV testing can only be carried out by a health unit and we also continue to refer to health units even later. 

Clause 9 (1) says, “A health unit providing common healthcare services, antenatal care, family planning service or special general treatment, may offer HIV testing services to persons.” This would tend to indicate that unless you are this health unit as prescribed or as interpreted here, you may not offer HIV testing services. However, Madam Chair, you know very well that we have organisations that do not necessarily conform to this definition of a health unit but they provide services, including HIV testing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can’t they fall under “specialised establishment” as has been provided for in the Bill? It may be a hospice or some other establishment. 

DR TUMWESIGYE: Maybe we can add something, because a specialty in medicine means that you are really specialised to do that. Possibly, maybe we can say, “or other established institution.” However, we also need to include persons. What I wanted to cure or to provide for is a situation where you have a trained counsellor belonging to Aids Information Centre or TASO going out to a home of a person and carrying out HIV testing. Would he or she be covered under the current clause 9?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Isn’t that person covered under “counsellor”, which we had already discussed? I thought that we really discussed –

DR TUMWESIGYE: Actually, we talked about a counsellor providing counselling services but we did not talk about a counsellor providing the testing service. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: I just want to give information to the minister. Maybe what he is raising is covered in clause 9(3), which says, “The performance of a test shall be carried out by a medical practitioner or other qualified officer.” 

Maybe in light of the facts that he is giving us, that science is moving towards allowing individuals to carry out testing, you may need to recommit that section so that we amend that provision to go away from the issue of a practitioner and qualified officer and add individuals who are allowed to do that kind of testing. However, for the health unit, you cannot make an individual a health unit and the definition there should remain.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I see 9 (3) as sufficient. If the person is qualified and is sitting under a tree, what is the problem? I think it is catered for.

DR OMONA: Madam Chair, I do understand the concern of the honourable minister. I think this is catered for when we talked about specialised establishments. This can also be an outreach service of a health unit. If there are outreach services, those are all services of a health unit and they are covered here. I think that putting individuals into a health unit does not go well with the other parts already passed.

MRS ALUM: Madam Chairperson, I think the honourable minister has some point there. When we look at diabetes, for example, you can be given the equipment and you can test yourself from home. I think that is the perspective through which the minister is bringing up his point and I think that it needs some kind of consideration. In three or five years from now, we could have advanced to a stage where we can even test ourselves from home. I could test myself from home like the diabetes patients do. Does this cover such a scenario?

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, honourable members, an individual cannot become a health unit.  

DR BARYOMUNSI: I think in answer to what is being raised, 9 (3) says, “The performance of a test shall be carried out by a medical practitioner or other qualified officer.” When you go to the definition of “other qualified officer”, it includes an allied health professional registered under the Allied Health Professionals Act, nurse or midwife registered or enrolled under the Nurses and Midwives Act or any other person as the Minister may by statutory instrument prescribe. 

That means that if the Ministry of Health provides policy guidelines that individuals can test themselves, then that will be covered under “any other person as a minister may by statutory instrument prescribe”. So, individuals will be captured under that.   

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there any other amendment, honourable chairman?

DR OMONA: Thank you. There is an amendment on the definition of “other qualified officer”. We propose to delete the word “other” appearing before the word “qualified” because it appears redundant here. This is because “qualified officer” is defined and “other” makes it redundant -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is it?

DR OMONA: It is on Page 6, line three of the definitions.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay.

DR OMONA: We also propose to amend the definition of “sexual offence” by rephrasing it to read as follows –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chairperson, although I am a member of the committee, I look at the amendment that the chairperson is proposing - to delete the word “other” – and I think we should maintain it because that would be the best English. When you say, “medical practitioner or other qualified officer”, that is the right language because a medical practitioner is a qualified officer. So, we are bringing out a medical practitioner and other qualified officers. 

Now when you delete the word “other”, it means that a medical practitioner is one entity and qualified officers are a different entity, which is not the proper situation. So, it should be “medical practitioner and other qualified officer”, meaning that the medical practitioners are also qualified officers. This is the best English, which we should maintain.

DR OMONA: Madam Chairperson, I have no problem with this amendment. It should apply everywhere in the Bill where we have used “qualified officer”. If it sounds grammatically well, I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is more inclusive - 

DR TUMWESIGYE: Madam Chair, I am really sorry to take you back to “health unit”. Whereas I do concede to take into consideration the amendment as proposed by the chairman, I just want to add “health centre” in the categories that he is listing. This is because we know very well that in government establishments, apart from hospitals we have health centres II, health centres III and health centres IV, which do not appear like clinics, nursing or maternity homes. Leaving them as “other specialised establishment” may not work. I would rather that we insert “health centre” in there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: “Public or private hospital, health centre, clinic, nursing home, maternity centre or other specialised establishment.” 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I would want the minister to clarify on how we should include outreaches. Currently, especially during testing, most of the work is done in the field where we do not have health units or centres; how can that be included?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister you can answer, but I thought it is covered under 9 (3).

DR TUMWESIGYE: I think that most of those outreaches are carried out by health units or even other institutions, but I can appreciate your point. This is because you can have a counselling association that has its counsellors who are able to go and carry outreaches and they do not necessarily come from a health unit. However, we have been convinced that once you use the word “specialised establishment” it can cater for other institutions and organisations that carry out this work. 

Of course, clause 9 (3) also takes care of other qualified persons, although now it looks like 9 (3) is related to 9 (1). In 9 (1), you are saying that a health unit may do this but in that health unit, the actual testing should be performed by a qualified person or officer. However, I think that by and large, by including “establishment”, it should be able to cater for organisations that would have sent those people who go to do outreach testing. Going forward, as I said, people will be even able to test without necessarily having to rely on any health unit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you have any further amendment?

DR OMONA: Yes. We would like to define “health practitioner” as it appears in clause 40, which we already passed. If I could invite you again to look at clause 40 (1), we referred to a health practitioner and we propose to define a health practitioner as follows: “Health practitioner includes medical practitioner, other qualified officers or counsellor.” This includes all those that are involved in the counselling and testing of HIV. It was not defined earlier and I think that there is need to define it. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR OMONA: I am sorry to take you back to clause 2 again. There are other definitions that are not used anywhere and we propose that they are deleted. If you look at skin penetration instrument, for example, it is not used anywhere in the Bill and then also essential and non-essential drugs. These are not used anywhere in the Bill and we think that they are redundant in clause 2, so we propose deleting them.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why? What harm will it do if they remain in the Bill? Suppose a skin penetration instrument becomes a question of evidence about what was used - Did you use a razorblade or blunt instrument?

DR OMONA: It may not add value to the Bill currently but we also lose nothing if it remains in the Bill because it is not used anywhere in the Bill apart from just the definition clause.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You cannot close the doors on everything and say that these are the parameters, do not go beyond this. You never know what could happen. If there is no problem or it is not excess baggage, I think that you leave it.

DR OMONA: I agree. We can leave it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to

The Title agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.20
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Medard Bitekyerezo): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)
 
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.21
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Medard Bitekyerezo): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The HIV and AIDS Prevention and Control Bill, 2010” and has passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.22
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Medard Bitekyerezo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE HIV AND AIDS PREVENTION AND CONTROL BILL, 2010

5.22
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Medard Bitekyerezo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The HIV and AIDS Prevention and Control Bill, 2010” be read the third time and do pass.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, I just want to beg that you allow me to recommit clause 30, which is on anonymous testing. The technical definition for anonymous testing actually means that somebody does not disclose his or her age only as the committee had argued in the report. From the scientific information we have checked, the committee was correct in saying that in anonymous testing, the person who is being tested does not identify himself only in terms of the name but the other parameters like age, address and others can be revealed. So, if we maintain that clause the way we passed it, then it would become a little bit useless to researchers in HIV/AIDS.

Secondly, I also want to request that you allow me to recommit clause 44 (4), which was actually an amendment that was introduced by the Minister for Health. It says, “A medical practitioner or any other qualified officer who falsifies HIV/AIDS test results to a client, commits an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine of 500 currency points or not less than five years imprisonment.” 

I just want to improve it to read, “A medical practitioner or any other qualified officer who deliberately falsifies…” The reason is that, and I speak as a medical person, sometimes a person being tested can actually test a false positive because of an existing condition. Therefore, if we maintain it the way it is, you may accuse a medical practitioner for giving a false result when actually there is an existing condition. So, we wanted to qualify it to say, somebody who deliberately falsifies. 

There are autoimmune diseases such as Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE); when somebody has it, you cannot test HIV positive because the antibody or antigenic reactions may mimic HIV.  The doctor at that point may not know and may give you a false result, not out of his making but because of the condition. There are also other conditions. I just want to request the House to allow that we just improve that formulation. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Dr Baryomunsi, there is also another condition known as hypergammaglobulinemia, which can also give you a false positive. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Yes, that is true. The condition is actually non-specific reaction called hypergammaglobulinemia. If you have it, you can test positive falsely when actually you do not have HIV. So, my improvement of the provision will actually accommodate those conditions. 

THE SPEAKER: Which clause 30 are you seeking to recommit?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Clause 30 on anonymous testing. The initial formulation says, “Any person who consents to anonymous HIV testing shall not be required to provide a name, age, address or any other information that may potentially identify him or her.” Actually, what is not required is the name but for purposes of biomedical research, the other parameters like age, address and the others are necessary. So, what I want –

THE SPEAKER: What is the meaning of the word, “anonymous”? That is what the Bill says; why are you running away from it? We have debated this.  Honourable members, what is the meaning of “anonymous”, in English and not in Rukiga? (Laughter)

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, if you recall, when we debated this issue I said there were three parameters which should not identify this anonymous person. I made it very clear that if I give you age - I am 50 years old, I live in Arua and I am a male - without giving my address and name, I remain anonymous. You cannot trace me because there are so many people in Arua who are 50 years old and are males. So, I go to a testing centre and say that I want to remain anonymous, however this is the information that I want to give you: my location - not address – and secondly, my age and that I am male.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ajedra, did you read the Bill? Read the Bill and stick to the exact text of the Bill. I do not want you to just guess but get the Bill and read the provisions.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, I read the Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: No, read it out so that we can hear. 

MR AJEDRA: Clause 30(1) in the Bill reads as follows: “Any person…” -

THE SPEAKER: No, start from the headnote and read everything. What is the headnote of that clause?

MR AJEDRA: The headnote in the Bill is “Anonymous testing.”

THE SPEAKER: Now read the provision.

MR AJEDRA: Clause 30 (1) says, “Any person who consents to anonymous HIV testing shall not be required to provide a name, age, address or any other information that may potentially identify him or her.” Now, my argument is that I do not want to give my address because if I say that I live on Plot 10, Kyadondo, you will know that this person lives at that area –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, that clause is saying that you do not give the name, address, age or anything; that is what it is saying.

MR AJEDRA: I am totally in support of the argument of Dr Baryomunsi.

THE SPEAKER: It is either anonymous or not. That is why I asked what the word “anonymous” means. What is anonymous?

MR AJEDRA: Anonymous means that whoever is providing information should not be identified.

THE SPEAKER: That is what the provision is saying. That is what the Bill says.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, kindly listen to the argument coming from Dr Baryomunsi. 

THE SPEAKER: This is not about medicine but English.

MR AJEDRA: Yes, it is but, Madam Speaker, his argument is that what would be the point – (Interruption)

MS ALUM: Thank you so much. I rise on a point of order. When you look at clause 30, the title is “Anonymous testing” and sub clause (1) says, “Any person who consents to anonymous HIV testing shall not be required to provide a name, age, address or any other information that may potentially identify him or her.” 

If I give my address as Oyam District and allow many other people to say where they come from, isn’t that identification of the area or stigmatising my district, Oyam? I think that clause 30 is very clear about the name, age, address and any other information that may potentially identify that person or a group of people in that very community. Is it in order for the minister to insist even after we debated this very intensively?

THE SPEAKER: Unless there is another definition of “anonymous” that I do not know, to me “anonymous” is what is prescribed there - no name, no identification, no nothing.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Anonymous testing is not only English but is also technical in terms of HIV science. We usually use two terminologies: confidential testing and anonymous testing. 

In confidential testing, the name is given by the person testing you and you who has been tested; that is confidential. Anonymous testing - if I can refer to the definition - means that absolutely no one, other than you, has access to your test results since your name is never recorded at the test site. This is the technical definition. That is why we are arguing that in anonymous testing, it is only the name that is withheld but we need the address like Kawempe or Kanungu or age for purposes of our –

THE SPEAKER: Then it is no longer ‘anonymous’ but ‘confidential’ because the exceptions are all there - name, age, address.

MR OBOTH: We debated this matter and the interpretation or definition being offered by Dr Chris Baryomunsi is neither technical nor practical. We are making a legal provision. The dilemma we could be having is: technically, from which field are we going to employ this law – is it a medical issue or a legal question? 

Anonymous testing, from the site that you are giving, is not exclusive. It is not saying that this is the only definition because I also have one and you can goggle from your iPads to get that. You want me to give you what I am goggling? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

MR OBOTH: I can give you as I have it here. The difference between confidential testing and anonymous testing is clearly that one has the details of the person and one has a unique identifier. In anonymous testing, you only have a unique identifier; when you put “address”, we have to bring this back home. 

The honourable Minister of State for Investment was talking about an address. For those who know, and the matter is here - residential address - we are talking about people whose residential address is a name of a village, a name of a district, a region. Now, why should we have that tagged in here? The moment you put that name and the village, you are no longer anonymous; you have identified yourself. This is clear; you can Google right now and see, whether technical or whatever.
 
MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, clause 30 is very clear and I beg to move that the question be put.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 30 be recommitted.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR ASTON KAJARA: Madam Speaker, in this House we have passed part IV of the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund and we have passed that the monies of the fund shall consist of two per cent of the total tax revenue collected from levies on beers, spirits, soft drinks and bottled water. After thorough consultation as a ministry, we feel we need to recommit this provision. 

The reason we want to recommit is: first of all, as a country, every year we have budget priorities. We prioritise Government expenditure and this is based on the National Development Plan (NDP) for every two to five years. We decide on priority areas, which we need to fund, and this process passes through this Parliament at every level. The issue of levies, Madam Speaker, has the resultant effect of distorting priority funding identified by Government for each financial year. This is because some laws have included levies - for example, the fish levy, the training levy, the fuel levy, the skilling levy etc. - and we have found it difficult to implement these levies just because of the reasons I have just mentioned. 

We need at every time to examine how much money is collected, identify revenue sources and allocate that money through the Consolidated Fund. If we bypass the Consolidated Fund by passing laws that will access collected revenue from source, it has the effect of distorting government priorities. We should avoid bypassing the Consolidated Fund.

Madam Speaker, we are supposed to have consulted with the Ministry of Finance and this committee that was selected to do so never consulted. As a ministry, therefore, we never agreed to this. I therefore beg that this matter be recommitted so that a proper decision is taken. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am only wondering whether it is procedurally right for the honourable minister to appear in this Parliament on different days and give different reasons for the same issue. 

One time the honourable minister was in this House and he said that the reason why they have not implemented the Road Fund - he is on record – is because section 14 of the URA Act needs to be amended. The Speaker then ruled that within two weeks, he produces a Bill to amend section 14. He abandoned that and today, he is here telling us very different reasons from what he said the other time. So, I am only wondering whether he is procedurally right to keep on making different statements on different days on the same subject matter in this House. 

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE HIV AND AIDS PREVENTION AND CONTROL BILL, 2010

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill be read for a third time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE HIV AND AIDS PREVENTION AND CONTROL ACT, 2014”

THE SPEAKER: Bill is passed and title is settled. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP BILL, 2012

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, we completed the debate on the Public Private Partnership Bill, 2012. I now put the question that the Bill be read for a second time.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP BILL, 2012

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause, 1 agreed to.

Clause 3

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, clause 3 is about principles to govern implementation of PPP partnerships.

Under clause 3(c), the committee proposes that we insert the words, “transparency by” immediately before the word “ensuring”. Clause 3(c) would therefore read: “Transparency by ensuring that the procurement of a public private partnership does not restrict competition among the bidders and that it is conducted on equal terms and uses objective criteria.”

Madam Chair, the justification is: there is need to improve on the action of ensuring transparency in the PPP process and not restrict it to only bidding but include the whole process of bidding, evaluation, development and implementation stages of the PPPs. 

Under clause 3, the committee proposes that we delete paragraph (d). The justification is that it is covered in paragraph (c). 

Insert a new paragraph to read as follows: “(i) Stimulating growth and development through harnessing private sector innovation and efficiency. 
(j) 	Providing policy stability in order to reduce private sector uncertainty on investment returns.
(k) 	Developing institutional capacities for technical analysis, negotiation, monitoring and management of public private partnerships’ contracts.” 

The justification is that the enhancement of the principles would create an enabling environment of PPPs and set standards against which they are processed, procured, developed and evaluated. 

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am not in agreement with deleting paragraph (d) because we are talking about public private partnerships, which involve a lot of money and I feel that the law should be very detailed and avoid some assumptions. 

When you look at (d), it is about adverts. Sincerely, if we delete (d), we shall be giving room for somebody to hide. Someone can say, for example, “I talked to him or her verbally” or “I notified him through telephone calls”. Honestly speaking, that person will hide when he or she wants to really help the company which they support to get this kind of bid. So, I strongly believe that we should leave (d) the way it is so that the notices should be open to everybody rather than somebody hiding under many other means. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you still very strong on your proposal to delete? What harm would it do if it remained in the Bill?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, you realise that we have improved (c) by adding the words “transparency by”. However, if it is the opinion of this House that we retain (d) the way it is, I have no objection and I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 3 be amended by the introduction of those three provisions. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think let us skip clause 4 and go to clause 5.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, before we go to clause 5, the committee proposes to insert new clauses immediately after clause 4 to read as follows: 
“Establishment of the Public Private Partnership Committee
(1) 	There is established a committee to be known as the Public Private Partnership Committee which shall consists of- 
(a) 	the Permanent Secretary or his or her representative in the ministry responsible for finance, who shall be the chairperson to the committee;

(b) 	the Permanent Secretary or his or her representative in the Office of the Prime Minister;
(c) 	a representative of the National Planning Authority;
(d) 	the Permanent Secretary or his or her representative in the ministry responsible for lands;
(e) 	the Permanent Secretary or his or her representative in the ministry responsible for local governments;
(f) 	the Attorney-General or a person deputised by him in writing;
(g) 	four persons not being public officers; and 
(h) 	the director appointed under section 10, who shall be the secretary to the committee.

(2)	The persons under subsection (1)(g) shall-
(a) 	be appointed by the minister who shall ensure that at least one-third of the people are of either gender;
(b) 	hold office for a term of five years renewable for only one further term.

Terms and conditions of the service

The members of the Committee shall hold office on such terms and conditions as the minister shall, in consultation with the Public Service Commission, determine.

Functions of the Committee 
(1) 	The functions of the committee are to-
(a) 	ensure that each project agreement is consistent with the provisions of this Act;
(b) 	formulate policy guidelines on public private partnerships;
(c) 	ensure that all projects are consistent with the national priorities specified in the national policy on public private partnerships;
(d) 	approve project proposals submitted to it by a contracting authority;
(e) 	authorise allocations from the fund;
(f) formulate standards, guidelines and procedures for awarding contracts and standardised bid documents;
(g) 	examine and approve the feasibility study conducted by a contracting authority under this Act;
(h) 	review the legal, institutional and regulatory framework of public private partnerships;
(i) 	approve the organisational structure of the unit;
(j) 	oversee the monitoring and evaluation by contracting authorities of a public private partnership from the commencement to the completion stage;
(k) 	ensure approval of, and fiscal accountability in, the management of financial and any other form of support granted by the government in the implementation of projects under this Act;
(l) 	ensure the efficient implementation of any project agreement entered into by contracting authorities; and 
(m) 	perform any other function as may be conferred on it by this Act or any other written law.


Powers of the Committee

The Committee shall have all the powers necessary for the proper discharge of its functions under this Act and specifically- 
(a) 	oversee the implementation of policies formulated under section 7(b);
(b) 	require any information from any party to a project on any matter relating to a public private partnership; 
(c) 	take custody of a project agreement made under this Act; and
(d) 	monitor compliance with the terms and conditions of the public private partnership agreement.

Delegation by the Committee

(1) The Committee may establish such subcommittees as it may consider necessary for the better performance of its functions and the exercise of its powers under this Act.

(2) 	The Committee may co-opt into the membership of a subcommittee established under subsection (1) such persons whose knowledge and skills are found necessary for the performance of the functions of the subcommittee.

(3) 	The Committee may, in writing, delegate to any subcommittee or to any member, officer, employee or agent of the Committee the exercise of any of the powers or the performance of any of the functions of the Committee under this Act.

(4) 	The business of the Committee shall be regulated under regulations made under this Act.

Establishment of the Public Private Partnership Unit

(1) 	There is established, within the ministry responsible for finance, a unit to be known as the Public Private Partnerships Unit.
(2) 	The Public Private Partnerships Unit shall consist of -
(a) 	a director; and 
(b) 	such staff as the Secretary to the Treasury may in consultation with the director consider necessary for the performance of the functions.
(3) The director and staff of the unit shall be competitively recruited and appointed on such terms and conditions as the minister shall, in consultation with the Public Service Commission, determine.

Functions of the unit

(1) 	The functions of the unit are to-
(a) 	serve as the secretariat and technical arm of the committee; and 
(b) 	provide technical, financial and legal expertise to the Committee and any project team established under this Act.
(2) 	In the performance of its functions under subsection (1), the unit shall-
(a) 	serve as a resource centre on matters relating to public private partnerships;
(b) 	conduct civic education to promote the awareness and understanding of the public private partnerships process amongst stakeholders…” – 

MR OTADA: I hesitated to rise on a point of procedure but then again, Madam Chairperson, you realise that this proposal is quite elaborate and heavily endowed; I think that most of my colleagues surely are not even following it. I personally do not have it–

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is on your iPad.

MR OTADA: Most obliged, Madam Chairperson.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, this information was posted onto the iPads over 25 days ago. If you check the details in your iPad, you will be able to see it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Proceed.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you very much, madam chair. I am on (c).
“(c) provide capacity building to, and advise contracting authorities or other parties involved in the planning, coordinating, undertaking or monitoring of projects under this Act;

(d) 	rate, compile and maintain an inventory of public private partnership projects that are highly rated and which are likely to attract private sector investment;

(e) 	develop an open, transparent, efficient and equitable process for managing the identification, screening, prioritisation, development, procurement, implementation and monitoring of projects and ensure that the process is applied consistently to all projects; 

(f) conduct research and gap analysis to ensure continuous performance improvement in the implementation of public private partnerships;

(g) 	collate, analyse and disseminate information including data on the contingent liabilities of the government in relation to a project; 

(h) 	make recommendations on the approval or rejection of projects prior to submission to the Committee for approval;

(i) 	assist contracting authorities, where the unit considers it necessary, to design, identify, select, prioritise, appraise, evaluate and negotiate projects;

(j) 	maintain a record of all project documentation;

(k) 	review and assess requests for government support in relation to a project and advise the Committee on the support that should be accorded in relation to the project;

(l) 	assist the Committee in formulating guidelines and standard documentation required under this Act; 

(m) 	liaise with, and assist, the contracting authorities in their roles in the various stages of a project circle;

(n) 	ensure that the procurement process relating to a project conforms to the Act and to procurement best practices;

(o) 	put in place measures to eliminate constraints limiting the realisation of benefits expected from a public private partnership;

(p) 	monitor contingent liabilities and accounting and budgetary issues related to public private partnerships with the relevant offices within the ministry; and 

(q) 	carry out such other functions as may be conferred on it by the Committee under this Act. 

(4) 	The unit shall prepare financial accounts and an inventory of any monies allocated to it, any financial support received by it and any fees received by it from a private party or a project company as the case may be under this Act.

(5) 	The Permanent Secretary of the ministry shall make rules for the administrative and financial framework of the unit as well as relationship of the unit with other departments in the ministry…” – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think you can stop there for now. Honourable members, that proposal relates to the Public Private Partnership Unit and the objectives and the functions. Honourable minister, do you have something to say before I say what I want to say?

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, in principle we do not have a problem except that we have just a few amendments to the proposal by the committee. 

The first one relates to that new clause on establishment of the PPP committee. Under sub clause (1) paragraph (f), we wish to propose that we amend it to read, “Attorney-General or any other person appointed by him or her in writing, who shall attend the committee meetings on advisory capacity with no right to vote.” The justification is that the Attorney-General is the advisor to Government in terms of the Constitution. So at the end of the day, it is the same Attorney-General who will look at the document and who will have custody of all the documents that are signed under the PPP. We therefore propose that the Attorney-General be a member of the committee but in capacity of an advisory role as opposed to having full voting rights.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairman, do you have any problem with saying “appointed by the Attorney-General in writing”?

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I am a member of the committee and we left out that clause because that unit has to get legal advice before they go into all those agreements. The people who are there are experts in that area and before that whole unit does anything mainstream, there is somebody who advises them. Secondly, it does not mean the Attorney-General himself; like any other accounting body, anybody from that office can be designated to be there. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, he does not want to delete. He is just saying that instead of saying “deputise” we say “appointed in writing”. He wants it to say, “appointed by the Attorney-General in writing”. That is what the minister wants to include. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I think that is agreeable but Parliament must decide.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The other one would mean that only the Attorney-General and his deputies can appear. It means nobody else can appear. That is what the minister is proposing by saying, “appointed in writing.” 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I think that is agreeable because the Attorney-General or his deputy may not be around and we have had examples - was it Umeme or something - where none of the two were around and the delegated person was the Solicitor-General and people were disputing it here in Parliament. So, we have to use that qualification. I think his submission is agreeable. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. For (1)(g), I propose that maybe we could say, “Four persons from the Private Sector Foundation” although the minister was proceeding – (Interruption)

MR AJEDRA: I think we wanted to finish that issue of the Attorney-General first before going to (g). I have an issue with (g) too. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Isn’t “appointed in writing” agreeable? I think that is what you wanted to capture. Now let us go to (g).

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, I think we have a problem with that particular element. When you talk about PPPs, it is parties that are coming together. Now if you are going to appoint people from the private sector, what is going to happen is that they may use that information to their own advantage. So, we will want to restrict this committee to be entirely government, not necessarily within the contracting authority but within government. 

The moment you start having information that is later going to be advertised, they will have had prior knowledge of that information and they can use it definitely to their own benefit or to the benefit of their colleagues. So, we have very strong reservations having parties from the private sector being involved in that committee because it is still being developed at that stage. It is a filter body to say, “Yes, this process here can be implemented” or “this one cannot be implemented”. So, that information needs to be kept within government circles.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, are you suggesting that out of the 35 million people in Uganda you cannot get four people of integrity? Actually, my problem was that there were no qualifications attached to the proposal, that you will just send four persons whether they are from Kalungu or all of them from Arua; that was my problem.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to invite the minister to amend (g) by maybe restricting this to the Private Sector Foundation. The justification is simple: we have been dealing with tax incentives; you have been giving out tax holidays and the Private Sector Foundation has appeared before PAC and said they were never even consulted. They actually said they have better investors than those you are hobnobbing with - the people with whom you have been having public private partnerships. Once they receive the money, they close shop. So, that is why maybe we should take this to the Private Sector Foundation because it is an umbrella body for most of the investors within the country. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Also, honourable minister, if it is public-private, how can it be entirely Government and there is no input entirely from the private partner yet they are working together? Where is the other part of the programme?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, we are all aware that PPPs are about private sector participation and I think it is not true that they cannot be members of a government body. When you look at other boards that were previously constituted, like those of NSSF, UNRA, you will find a lot of private sector participation. So, it is against this background that the committee thought that because public private partnerships are about private sector participation, we should have members from the private sector also constituting part of this committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is why I want some qualifications attached to these four persons. How do we identify them? Do we go to the border at Malaba or pick up somebody from Tororo? They should be identified. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. One, I think the minister should probably abandon his suggestion and we maintain the four people. To improve on what the honourable members have said, I do not agree that all the four should be from the Private Sector Foundation. We can have a representative from the Private Sector Foundation and then other three eminent Ugandans of high integrity because there are people who are not in businesses and not in Government but they add value to the process. 

The other point, Madam Chairperson, is that there is an important body that we have not included. I know we cannot include everybody in this representation but if you include the National Planning Authority and leave out the Uganda Investment Authority when actually PPPs are about investment, then I think we are leaving out an important body that should be represented on this committee. So, I want to suggest that the Uganda Investment Authority be included here because actually, that is the core of the bodies that should be included.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairman, did you have an opportunity to consider the Uganda Investment Authority?

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I happen to be associated with Private Sector Foundation (PSF). The PSF is composed of members of the business community. It includes members of the Uganda Manufacturers Association, the Export Promotion Board, the banks, members of UTL and the business community. They sit and elect and constitute their board; the last board was chaired by the late Mulwana and now the current chairperson is former Member of Parliament, Onapito. 

The Private Sector Foundation is therefore an organisation of business people who include manufacturers, the National Chamber of Commerce and all these promotion boards and they discuss and come up with policies to advise Government. So, it should not be the Private Sector Foundation; it should be a representative from the Private Sector Foundation board members. They will then sit and nominate one of their members to come to the organization. The Private Sector Foundation itself is an administrative organisation that implements this organisation. They have an executive director and they have staff. So, the –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it some kind of umbrella body?

MR EKANYA: Yes, it is an umbrella organization. I do agree also with the proposal by hon. Bahati to bring in the academia, eminent persons, even retired judges because PPPs, as you are aware, can create permanent liability – debts! So, you need respected people like retired judges and professors from universities to join in, people with integrity. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we then divide and say that the Private Sector Foundation brings in two and then academia one or something?

MS ASAMO: Madam Speaker, I wanted to propose the Private Sector Foundation and also the academia but from the experts in that field. I know Uganda Women Entrepreneurs Association Limited (UWEAL) is a member of the private sector but I was interested in the women as well, so that we have an eye for gender within the four people. That is what I propose.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, I think the proposal by the Members is reasonable. Representation from the Uganda Investment Authority is important and also representation from the academia, particularly those who have business experience and knowledge, I think will enrich the committee. A representative from the Private Sector Foundation, probably one, will also be very good. We can then look at one other members so that we make it four - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: One from UIA, one from the academia and one from the Private Sector Foundation - 

MR AJEDRA: Maybe the other from the Judiciary because there are going to be legal issues there; maybe retired judges.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think those would give a good image and public participation from outside the government. Honourable members, I put the question that the new clause be introduced as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR AJEDRA: There is that new clause on the terms and conditions –

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have not yet gone there. We are dealing with the composition first. Let us go to terms and conditions. 

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, initially we had thought this should be representatives from Government. So, we were going to propose that we probably delete “in consultation with the Public Service Commission” because they were initially meant to be government employees. However, I think then we can have it the way the committee had suggested.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the clause on the terms and conditions be introduced into the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, we interacted with the minister and we had a general consensus. However, these are now new amendments that the committee did not discuss; we do not know their implications and they are being introduced now. I find it uncomfortable that the minister is bringing them now. Why didn’t he bring them for discussion in the committee?

THE CHAIRPERSON: He has abandoned the one on terms and conditions. Do you want to foreclose his right to speak? (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: Madam Chair, I do not know at what point the minister will respond to the issues that we raised the other day in the debate because some have a bearing on this. We did not get a response from the chairman or the minister because I think we jumped. They should possibly have responded earlier on before we moved to this stage. I am just - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: When you identify areas of concern, you raise them and the minister will respond.

I put the question that a new section on functions of the committee be introduced into the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us go to powers of the committee. 

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, if you look at the powers of the committee, those powers are largely covered in the functions. I think those powers of the committee will be redundant because what the committee is supposed to do is really covered under the functions. I will give you a few examples: “Oversee the implementation of the policies formulated under section 7(b).” In the functions of the committee, this is actually there - to formulate policy guidelines on PPPs. They are the ones to formulate that policy, so it could not be a power of the committee to do that. 

Another one is: “Require any information from any party…” Those are all contained within there. Also, oversee the monitoring – If you go to the functions of the committee, paragraph (j) says, “Oversee the monitoring and evaluation by contracting authorities of a public private partnership…” It is all covered there.

I also think that the power in paragraph (c) is misplaced because as you know, the Attorney-General is the custodian of all contracts and agreements. So, I do not think it is the committee to have possession or to be in possession of those documents. Those will be catered for by the Attorney-General.

Also on monitoring compliance with the terms and conditions of the PPP agreements, the monitoring is a delegated function to the project committee because the project committee is hands-on. They will do the monitoring but the reporting will be done to the committee, which is a higher body. So, theirs, in my view, is about looking at things from a bird’s eye view but the implementation is at the lower level, which will be at the project committee. 

We therefore do not believe that the powers of the committee should be here. What we are saying with this is that these are the only four areas where they can exercise their powers; otherwise, outside this they cannot exercise their powers. Also, these powers are largely covered under the functions because that is what they are supposed to do - the functions of the committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chair, what was the rationale for your proposals?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, the committee looked at the PPPs committee as an oversight body or a governing body of the PPPs arrangement and we thought it is best practice to clearly spell out the powers of the committee. Just like the minister stated, they may be related but are not exactly the same.

Like we did with the other clause previously, I think there may be no harm in retaining the powers of the committee as stated here by the committee. I do not see any harm; it is just for clarity. This PPPs committee is supposed to do oversight and also act as a governing body of the PPPs agreement. Thank you.

MR SEMPIJJA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I agree with the chairman that we should retain the powers of the committee. Under the powers of the committee, it is stated here that, “The committee shall have all the powers necessary for the proper discharge of its functions…” It is not outside the functions we have given this committee. Therefore, I think the chairman and his committee wanted to provide these maybe to avoid overlap with other powers that be – like the minister and others who have powers. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, why do you want the agreement to be held in the Attorney-General’s Office?

MR AJEDRA: Not really. When you say that the committee shall have all the powers necessary for the proper discharge of its functions under this Act, you have talked about the functions above. So it has all the powers to do what it is mandated to do under the functions. Now, when you begin to say, “specifically” I know they are trying to give emphasis but then (c) falls away because it is not the committee that will be in custody of these documents. Documents for PPPs are largely held by the Attorney-General and the Solicitor-General.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why?

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would like to give information to the honourable minister. Whereas it is a procedural requirement that every signed copy of the agreement is given to the Attorney-General, it may not be right to say that it is the duty of the Attorney-General to keep all documents, but for every signed agreement, the Attorney-General should have a copy for their further reference. So, it is not a constitutional duty for the Attorney-General to keep all the agreements but they need to have a copy where they have had an input.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am a member of the committee and we went together with the minister on several benchmarking visits. In countries where PPPs have had challenges and problems, the committee in charge – the contracts committee – is not independent enough. Such committees do not have adequate powers to the extent that the ministry overrides and over influences the activities or the arrangements, which are being carried out.

When we went to Malaysia, that was one of their greatest inputs to us during our benchmark visit. So, the principle behind giving those powers to the committee is to make it very independent, with authority to the extent that the political powers or the ministry cannot bulldoze it because they could be challenged. 

Using the lower committees, the ministry jumps these other contracts committee and uses a small or subcommittee under that and they say these are not powers of the big contracts committee. It was in that same spirit, Mr Minister, and I believe we agreed on this, that we let the committee have those powers for the execution of their functions.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, I do not know what the minister is trying to do. At first, I had undermined the point raised by hon. Kakooza but the minister seems to be, in a subtle way, bringing a lot of amendments. He is trying to shoot up to defeat the committee report.

I therefore rise on a procedural point. Is this how we are supposed to operate at committee stage or was the minister supposed to appear before the committee and make his input there? He now seems to have a bundle of amendments with him, which are going to derail this committee.

I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, I do not think he has presented any amendment. He was objecting to the proposals by the committee. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Chair. Given the arguments put forward now and those in which the minister is trying to bring the Attorney-General in, instead of having a committee, why didn’t we have a board. The board would have the authority. Hon. Oboth was talking about the issue of legal documents; in such a situation if you had a board, those documents would be in the custody of the secretary to the board. I do not know why we did not provide for a board instead of the committee as a policy making body in this case here. 

We know that most authorities have a board and some time back, when we were making the law for the Auditor-General, we did again make a mistake of leaving out a board. Now there are some issues that are coming up where people are regretting and wishing we had a board to oversee the Auditor-General’s office. So, I think we needed a board, in this case, to cure some of the things we are trying to raise here. In most of the authorities, we have had a board unless there has been a paradigm shift so that we do not need the board and we would rather have the committee. I just want to know why. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, the committee is a working committee; we did not want to make it very bureaucratic and at the same time we wanted it to be under the ambit of the minister. 

About the powers, maybe if the minister suggested that this power is too much, then we could say maybe the committee does not deserve it. I do not want him to use an omnibus argument that, “We do not want the powers”; maybe if he could knock out one or two powers, then we could continue. If this power will interfere with his authority then we would agree with that but not just throw all of them out. These are control measures; we want them to have a specific kind of assignment. We do not want to go overboard, but at the same time we want them to make decisions that will enable PPPs to work.

MR BAHATI: The chair has to convince this House why we have a committee and not a proper board to oversee this function. I thought if we had a board - We are institutionalizing this and I do not understand the working committee, which has a legal basis. I think we would rather create a good institution that has a board on top of the unit, making serious decisions. When you talk about a committee, it is like a temporary thing. So, I want to support hon. Okupa so that instead of a committee we can call it a board.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, I just want to inform Members that these are benchmarked positions. We benchmarked this Bill in Malaysia, South Africa, and we also consulted with the legal provisions in Kenya. However, we would like to benefit from the wisdom of this House. If you feel that the committee is not strong enough, we want to benefit from the opinion that the House will give.

Whether it is called a committee or board, we would like to see some bit of freedom for it to exercise its functions. We know the bureaucracies that exist in government institutions. This is why we have these provisions to give it some powers so that it is able to exercise its functions. However, we shall be grateful to benefit from this House in as far as calling it either a committee or a board is concerned. 

MR OTADA: Thank you, Madam Chair. When you look at the functions of the committee, paragraph (b) says, “to formulate policy guidelines on public private partnerships”. On the one hand you are formulating policies and then on the other hand you are endowed with powers to monitor compliance of probably the policies that you have formulated yourself. 

I would therefore agree with hon. Okupa and hon. Bahati that we can have the committee but we create a board as well of a few members so that we create checks and balances in this whole powerful institution that we are trying to create.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I am sometimes uncomfortable when amendments of such a nature just come from the Floor. Can we defer this and then you really sit and agree if you want a committee or a board and what is the rationale for either?

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I remember in the Bill there was nothing like a governing body. It was the wisdom of we, the members of the committee, to include one here. However, we are also conscious of the cost. In this country, from privatisation we now go to creating authorities and boards and this board will put high costs on the organisation. So, we said we need to have a committee but with the same power and as strong as a board would be. If you put a board, when they are demanding for remuneration, they will demand for a standard level of remuneration like other boards of other organisations. So – (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA:  Thank you, Madam Chair. I think what is important is that with the function and discharge of the unit, we should think outside the box. These are people you are going to deal with as business people. The moment you go for bureaucracy and that strength of the board to take decisions - This is a committee which is the expert for bid documents and they internalise and advise the other committee so that a decision is taken. If I enter into agreement for business transactions, then you wait for me to go to seek for another board, it will cause encumbrances. 

Public private partnerships are between government and the interested party. The best way for decisions to be taken is for me, the interested party, to quickly start the project and see it take off. However, when you create these other bodies, it will be an encumbrance to what the interested party wants to do and some projects will not take off.

I can give you an example; in Sydney, where we did not go for benchmarking visits, they have committees which advise. That is why the function and the discharge are made with expertise, so that the moment you conclude, you do not wait for the other body to take a decision, you take it there and then, the agreement is signed and you start a project. The moment you establish this, you will have problems.

MR BAHATI:  Madam Chair, I think we all agree that we need this institutional framework and the benchmarking is very good, but the important thing about benchmarking is to pick the best and customise it within our situation. Creation of a board has nothing really to do with hindering the progress and implementation of this; it has everything to do with a governing of this process. 

If we create a board, it is better than a committee because under the board you can even have sub-committees of particular expertise. So, I think it is an institution that we should really look at. On whether this can create a cost, we have non-executive boards, which are working without any cost.

THE CHAIRPERSON:  How often does this committee sit?

MR OTADA: Madam Chair, just a brief information to support hon. Bahati - even institutions such as banks, when you apply for a loan, they go through a contracts committee. Depending on the amount of money in the threshold, usually at a certain threshold, and I believe a PPP arrangement is of a high threshold such as that, it goes to a board for control. 

My colleague is talking about speed of doing things, but speed without control sometimes can cause very serious accidents. So, I just want to agree with my friend and I propose that we stand over this and discuss it more.

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, can we utilise our brains and energies to get the pros and cons on a committee or a board or both?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Chairperson, I am reading here that this is a department. The ministry meant to create a department in this ministry and now, we have said we want to set up a committee to help the department but the Members are developing this to become something different from just a department. I think we are talking about an authority, thinking about an elaborate body different from what the ministry or the minister wanted.

I will find it difficult to create a board for a department. So, as you said, we should stand over this and think about it afresh because this House wants it different from what the minister wanted.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, we need to understand where the unit is situated. The unit is situated in the Ministry of Finance and the unit is the one that will profile all PPPs from all sectors. When they come to Ministry of Finance, we propose a committee below the minister because the minister is one man and cannot make decisions on Umeme, for example. Just as you said in earlier debates, away from this debate, “Why did the minister sign?”

So, we want a working committee that would help the minister to synthesise the information, find that PPP that is wanted so badly, consider it in our National Development Plan - is it following all government pledges; is it within the manifesto of the government in power? So, this working committee is the one to make the final decision such that the minister assents to the contract. This working committee should therefore not be as big as the board which is again below the minister in order to help the unit. That is why we do not want a board –(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: I would like to give the chairman some information. I want us to look at this body as an important body. You are talking about a public private partnership of say, tarmacking a road from here to Kamuli and you are talking about billions of money. So, as much as the Leader of the Opposition looks at it as a unit in the Ministry of Finance, the body should be governed in a proper way because you are talking about billions of dollars which would be creating, in some cases, liabilities for this country and also creating opportunities for this country. So, it is important that we look at that.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I really want it to be big but the minister wants a small thing to control. That is the difference. I want it to be big, to be an authority or something like that, not just a small department, which the minister calls in his office to meet.

MR KIYINGI: Madam Chair, I wonder when Members talk about creating a board because under public private partnerships, it is a private sector partnering with a government body and this government body has already got a board in place. When you look at Kalangala Infrastructure Services, for example, the board which is under UDC is the one which is in control. I do not see why we are creating another board in place. I do not know whether you understand that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, what was your intention? Let us hear from the minister.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, we did a lot of benchmarking and I have also had the opportunity to work on a number of PPP projects. In my experience, you do not create a board. The moment you create a board, when you go through the Bill you will see what we are getting into. The Minister of Finance needs to have that control because you may create what we call a contingent liability, which will have an impact on the economy. These are some of the questions, which hon. Okupa was talking about.

When you have a PPP, it may be purely a commercial venture, where Government does not in any way contribute any payment, maybe apart from just land; that will be government contribution. It will finance itself without any commitments from the Treasury; Parliament will not appropriate money. However, in it all, should we have a situation where we have a financial meltdown, as it happened in the world, what is going to happen is that it creates a contingency liability to make that project succeed. In other words, government may at some point have to step in. So, you do not want to put it outside the ambit of the Minister of Finance.

Our intention, therefore, was to create a unit within the Ministry of Finance and we have this body that is going to be there to give policy direction and filter. Not all projects are going lend themselves to PPPs, no. This body should be able to say, “I think Kampala- Jinja Road qualifies under a PPP arrangement based on the feasibility study because we do not believe that there will be any recourse to the Treasury for purposes of funding that project.” 

So, our initial idea was that we need to create a unit within the ministry and this project committee will be the one to advise the minister to say, “Yes, I think we have reviewed the submission from the unit, please, proceed or give access to implement this project under a PPP arrangement.” By creating such an authority, I think we are taking this a little bit too far and that is where the bureaucracy that hon. Kakooza was talking about comes in.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we decide?

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, from what the minister is saying, he does not mind what the name would be but he minds a lot about the powers given to this committee or the board. I do not think that the minister would be afraid of it being called a board; other countries call it a committee. You actually have another provision down-proposing creation of a unit within the Ministry of Finance. You have another proposal in the Bill to create a project team. Now, you call this one a committee, another one a unit, another one a team and then there will be another whatever - Looking at the powers and at the functions, we would baptise this as a “board” and there will be no other additional financial obligations to this board because it is not working under an authority. 

Where the minister was raising the issue of powers, I think the chairman needed to clarify why we have functions differently and powers differently. I think this is the fear of the honourable minister, who wants to be the most powerful person within that ministry; giving another committee power is what is creating fear in him. (Laughter) So, honourable minister, is it about the name or the powers, or the substance of the proposal? You may clarify.

MR AJEDRA: That you very much hon. Oboth Oboth. In terms of the powers, I think as we go through the Bill, you will come to see what the powers of the minister are and what the powers of the Cabinet are and those are clearly spelt out in this document here.

This body we are talking about is called the “project committee” and the idea was that it serves as an advisory body to set policies, give guidelines, filter projects and approve all contractual documents that are going to be used by the unit to undertake PPPs. So, Madam Chair, my proposal is that probably, we should stand over this and we do some consultations. We can then come back and give it a name that Members are very comfortable with. 

With regard to powers, I did not say that the powers, which are listed here, are not okay or they are overstepping their bounds. Mine was that what is contained in the functions are actually here in the powers. That is all. Otherwise, they can stay as they are; I do not have a problem as far as the powers are concerned. 

I only thought that we were being too restrictive when we say, “specifically”; it is as if we are just narrowing the powers to few areas as opposed to those listed up to (m). Those are all functions that the committee has to perform, but now when it comes to powers, we are just saying specifically these ones. I thought that would be restrictive. It is not that I did not want those powers to be there; I thought it was a duplication of the functions.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I propose that we stand over this particular provision. You are free to Google anywhere in the world, even beyond where the committee benchmarked, and see where there is aboard or where it is a committee so that we satisfy ourselves on what we really want to create.

Let us now go to the proposal on the PPP unit. Are they related? Is it related to the committee? Okay, let us leave the whole of the new proposal; we shall come back to it. Let us go back to clause 5. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, before we go to clause 5, you remember there was establishment of a public private partnership project team –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, that is what we want Members to study – the committee, the unit, the project team. You have your iPads; you can Google the whole night.

Clause 5

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Under clause 5, the committee proposes to delete sub-clauses (5) and (6). The justification is that these have been handled in detail under new clauses establishing the PPP project teams.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That would mean you are deleting based on the new clause 4 -

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: That is correct. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then we have to stand over it. Let us stand over the new proposal for clause 5.

Clause 6

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, clause 6 is about functions of accounting officer. In sub-clause (1), we propose to rephrase paragraph (a) to read as follows: “(a) to appoint the project team and any other person required for the implementation of the project”.  

MR OKUPA: Madam Chair, I think this has a bearing on what we have left out because if we are going to have the board, then it will be the board to appoint the staff but here, we are limiting the board and we are saying it is the accounting officer. So, I think even this has a bearing, depending on what we shall decide, on what we have left or what we have stood over. So, I think even this part here - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, but the committee had no problem with the accounting officer even if they had made arrangements in the other part.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chair, I am saying this because in most cases, it is the board to appoint the staff not the accounting officer. (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: You know PPP -

MR OKUPA: I am taking information from hon. Oboth not you, hon. Ekanya. (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chair, and I thank hon. Okupa for giving way. The other word mentioned here is “project team” and just preceding that we have left out the committee, the PPP unit, the PPP project team; this might give us - I do not want to sound like am tired now but I think the other clause has a lot of bearing on all these others. That is what I was trying to say to hon. Okupa.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you are not willing to proceed until we resolve –

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I think we are standing over many of these clauses. This Bill was brought to the House in 2012. I would like to encourage Members that we need the committee chair to go and come up with some kind of a structure – the process of how PPP starts and where it ends. Unless Members have that kind of line-up, a graph, you may not understand. You see now, when you are talking about contracting authority, project team, committee, private party and all this, you need to have a graph. Without a graph, you are going to get lost, because –

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Ekanya, you are a member of the committee; why are you introducing new things?

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, this is to help non-members because I see Members are saying, “stand over that, it has relation; stand over that”. We are going to stand over the entire Bill. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, let us go to clause 11 on private party.

Clause 11

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, under clause 11 (2) on private party, we propose to delete the words, “and the Minister of the contracting authority” and insert “in consultation with the Minister of the contracting authority.” 

The justification is that two approvals make the process laborious and time consuming. In a world where time is of essence, the projects will become non bankable.
 
Under clause 11 (4), replace the sub-clause with the following: “(4) the private party shall, prior to signing the agreement, furnish the accounting officer with evidence of the funding available to the private party for the performance of the obligations to be undertaken by the private party under the project.”

The justification –

MR AJEDRA: I want to make a correction here -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t you let him finish? He is moving amendments; let him finish, then you can speak to them.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: The justification is that it is not practical to request for evidence of funding, that is, credit facilities from banks, before contract awards.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, I think Members need to study that clause 11(2) very carefully: “Any transfer of shares, increase in share capital or changes in the corporate status of a special purpose company shall be with written approval of the Minister and the Minister of the contracting authority.” 

Why that control is put in place is because of Umeme. We are saying this because we do not want somebody to form a special purpose vehicle and then a month or two or three months later, sell the interests in that special purpose vehicle.

Remember, this marriage is for a very long period of time - 10, 15, 20 years. So, we want to avoid a situation like that of Umeme where a company is formed and three months later, the shares are sold and bought by a totally different company. That is the reason we need that to be in place.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chair, why do you want to give a licence to somebody to just come and say, “I will get money.” For us, we want a commitment. We want to drain you because you are able, you have the capacity. If you say that this is too hard, then what is the point? We are not on a fishing expedition.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Just one comment; I do not know whether Parliament will buy it. Banks always, like big institutions, give money on signed contracts. When people are forming, like you said, a special purpose vehicle, they are anticipating that when they get this contract, that is when the banks will come in to say, “We shall sponsor you based on the contract you have signed”, because they will evaluate the contract you have signed not the document that is not yet signed. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chair, is that really what you want to do?  I get you a document then you start shopping? (Laughter) You start shopping with my document?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, it is not in order for the government to sign a contract with somebody who has no money and then afterwards - Look at this case in Naguru; these fellows are following the President every day, everywhere because they have a contract but they have no money and we are stuck with this group. So, it is dangerous, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What about my late school here – Shimoni Demonstration School?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Exactly! So, there must be proof of funds – who is going –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we are not going to facilitate people to go shopping with our agreements. I do not think it is fair for this country.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Yes, without money, we do not want anybody. You must put money on the table before you come here. 

I also want to say that we should add technical expertise because we do not want these fake investors that coming here, going to the President and getting licenses to masquerade as investors.
 
MR MAWANDA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I totally agree to the fact that people who are going to get these contracts must show evidence of financial capacity. The Ministry of Energy is now stuck with licenses it has issued to investors to explore minerals in anticipation that they have the money when they are actually bankrupt.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, chairperson of the committee, the House is not with you on that one.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, having studied the mood in the House, I concede. (Laughter)

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Chair, under 11 (4), apart from giving us evidence on their financial and technical stand we also need to know that the company had capacity to implement the project.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, allow me seek clarification from the Minister of Finance. This clarification is very important because worldwide, it is upon an agreement that one will go to a bank. Even in Uganda, it is after parliamentary approval that the World Bank will release the money for us and the Minister of Finance will go and sign –(Interruption)

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Chair. Is hon. Geoffrey Ekanya in order to confuse this House? Much as it is true that they will give you physical cash on presentation of the contract, the banks can give you a commitment letter to go and get the contract. So, before a commitment letter is produced, nobody should be given the contract. Is he in order to confuse the House that one needs to first get the contract before they get the money?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Shadow Minister of Finance, these bids will be advertised, one will express their interest and they will go to their banks and tell them how they have intentions. To first give you, then you start looking around at our expense and our time - No.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, hon. Michael Mawanda made a very good proposal, that at least an investor should have some level of commitment from Government. If we passed this law like this, we will block ourselves completely. The Minister of Finance will go to the World Bank with some commitment documents or will take them to the African Development Bank – no financing institution will give you approval saying that you will refund unless you have minimal arrangements with it. Therefore, I would like to propose that we re-word this clause so that the private investors can have some kind of intention of offer. Otherwise, if we lock it out like this, we are not going to – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, we have not locked. If you read sub clause (4) as it is, it says, “The private party shall furnish the accounting officer with evidence of the funding available to the private party for the performance of the obligations to be undertaken by the private party…” It is all about evidence.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chair. The situation he is referring to – and as a shadow minister of finance – makes me get worried. He has just said we have problems in Tororo – (Interjections) – not even just about phosphates alone. We have the other investor who came – hon. Ajedra, you know they blackmailed some of us saying we were stopping them - and they did not have the money. They were just brokers coming to this country to get free deals and go to sell them at goodwill. They get a corporation at US$ 1! 

So, hon. Ekanya, what you are referring to is not the evidence we are talking about. First, we have to know that the company has existed and has the financial ability – (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, it is important that we get companies that can show capacity to perform the jobs they will be vying for. However, it is also equally important that as we move on, we scrutinize this clause very carefully. I am saying this because if you look at (5)(b), it says, “The evidence of funding shall indicate - (b) the capital secured by the private party in form of credit or loan…”  I do not think one can easily secure a loan before they are very engaged. So we might need to look at some of these –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, but have you read (c)?

MR BAHATI: Sub-clause (5) (c) is okay, but I am concerned with paragraph (b). I also want to move that – what the Leader of Opposition said is very important - we include technical or/and funding available because sometimes, you may not be talking about money but technical expertise only.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ssasaga, member of the committee, give us your opinion. (Laughter)

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to inform the House that apart from the financial capacity, which we are talking about, we discovered that there are some contracts that may not require the company to demonstrate their financial capacity but to demonstrate expertise. If we wanted to put up a heart institute or hospital, for example, we might just need an expert who has the skills - the expert may not have the money - and Government, under this arrangement, might just provide resources. 


If we now tie this by requiring these investors to demonstrate financial capacity, then that one – What is happening in China is that very many experts are coming from the US but China provides resources. Those people just come with their expertise, with new technology, under this arrangement of PPPs. What I am saying is that we should deliberate in light of that. We should not only look at the financial bit but also the expertise.

Madam Chair, we were also told, as I conclude, that if we over insist on financial expertise, a company could borrow money from anywhere, put it on their account, get a bank statement and come to show the financial capacity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable member, don’t you think the committee would have benefited from your advice on technical expertise? You are now shinning here yet you are also a member of this very committee. Why did you withhold that knowledge?

MR AJEDRA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I think the suggestion by one of the colleagues for us to look at how a PPP works would be very good. Madam, Chair, with your permission - I don’t know whether my technical people are still here – before we have discussions on this Bill, I would wish to project to you a model or typical PPP on the screen.

Madam Chair –

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable minister, we started discussions of this Bill last week, so don’t say “before we discuss it”. We have already started and we are at committee stage.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, with your indulgence, the way some of the Members are arguing about these PPPs is not the way –(Interjections)– No, I said, with due respect, some of the Members are making it look a simple thing; it is not. 

You see, when you get into a partnership with a private party for the reasons I gave initially, this private party will have the expertise that Government does not have, which is what the chairman of the committee was talking about. Two, the private party has access to capital within a very short period, which Government may not. Those are the two critical elements before the special purpose vehicle is formed. So, when you talk about the evidence or proof of financial resources being there, that is where it comes from. Yes, you have the expertise to do the job but also you are able to secure funding. 

Usually, as you know, the funders will normally take a greater stake in the partnership, mostly about 80 per cent. Hence there must be proof about the availability of funding to such and such a tune. The company that will do the technical work will contribute to some of the finances plus the expertise to form what is called a special purpose vehicle, which is a legal entity, owned by the private party and Government. So, that model is what is missing in our discussions here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, but we are flogging a dead horse because the committee has already conceded and abandoned their proposal. I think there was no problem there. So, I put the question that clause 11(2) be amended as proposed by the chairperson of the committee –(Interjections)– No, he added the words, “in consultation” and that is what we are doing now. Look at 11 (2) - the words “and the minister in consultation…”

MR AJEDRA: Yes, that is correct. However, I think there is some element that was missed, which is about the technical capability we are talking about.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, no, that is sub-clause (4), but we are looking at clause 11(2), which I want us to first vote on. Okay, I now put the question that clause 11 (2) –(Mr James Kakooza: rose_)– No, you are a member of the committee; are you objecting to the chairperson’s proposal?

MR KAKOOZA: Yes, because there is a word that has been left out yet we already agreed on it. We agreed that it should be formulated using the words, “in consultation”; that means the second word, “minister”, does not apply as it is in the original Bill. Once you put the word “consultation” then you delete the second word “minister” because that is what we agreed on.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, there is a minister in charge of this Bill but there is also a minister in charge of the contracting party. There are two ministers involved. There is a minister in charge of this Bill and the minister in the other sector. That is what the Bill says.

MR KAKOOZA: There is a minister who will be responsible - the Minister of Finance. That is why we deleted the second word “minister”. When you put the other “Minister” –(Interjections)– But that is what we agreed on.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know why, but you, members, should not come here to object to the committee’s report –(Interjections)– what? Did you have a minority report?

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, when we were drafting that clause, we agreed that the contracting authority anywhere – in all the sector ministries - will consult the Minister of Finance. There is no need to include the minister from the contracting authority. That is why we used the phrase “in consultation”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you read the statement you are trying to convince us about?

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, it reads thus: “Any transfer of shares, increase in share capital or changes in the corporate status of a special purpose company shall be with the written approval of the minister in consultation with other relevant…” and not the minister of the contracting authority. This is because this is presided over by the Minister of Finance and any loan –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Kakooza, I think you are confusing this House. The main minister here is the Minister of Finance but he or she will be required to crosscheck with a minister in charge of the other sector.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, what the committee had proposed was to the effect that to reduce on the bureaucracy, there must be consultation but the way the Bill has been drafted – By the way, I would like to request the committee to go back to the original position, which is a much stronger one because we have had problems with consultations. There are some people who will call on phone or write a letter and you have the powers to reject or not.

The way the Bill has been drafted is okay, where it says, “…shall be with the written approval of the Minister of Finance and the Minister of the contracting authority.” Both ministers must approve. From the way we have done it as a committee, we shall dilute it. 

The Minister can write saying they have consulted, after all it is about consultation, and so, you have no power to approve or reject. So, I want to request members of the committee to concede and withdraw the amendment. Let us leave it the way the Minister of Finance put this Bill, which is much stronger.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So that for any transfer of shares, the hand of both must be there. 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then let us go back to our original position.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you very much, Chairperson. We should approve this as it is. Let me give an example of UTL. What these companies do is buy companies today or enter into business with Government well knowing that the next day when they increase shares, Government will not be able to buy. So, if we ask them for the written approval from the minister and the contracting authority, we will have put in place checks and balances. If the amendment has been diluted to the effect that these people will take the opportunity of entering into business with Government and the next day they jump out of it, that is dangerous. Thank you so much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, where do we put the issue of expertise? Where does it come up in your Bill, so that we do not have to disturb clause 11? I talking about the issue of funding and expertise; where is it provided for in your Bill?
 
MR AJEDRA: No, it is not in here –

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are looking at clause 11(4).

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, I want to suggest that we have it in (4) but redraft it a little bit by saying, “The private party shall furnish the accounting officer with evidence of technical and financial capacity for the performance of the obligations to be undertaken by the private party under the project.” “Financial capacity” is a better wording than “funding being available”. It is broader and looks at other issues of how somebody has been performing in the past rather than just simply saying that funding for the project should be available for the project.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, I want to move that we separate the two because in all instances, people will always come in with technical competences. So where one alleges to be having capital, one should provide that evidence. The justification is simple – we had Shimoni Demonstration School, Naguru where some of them are now sub-dividing plots and yet they had come in as investors.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, do you want a new sub-clause 11 (5) to deal with expertise?

MR MWIRU: Yes.

MR MAWANDA: Madam Chair, it is normal in all corners of the world that the person you are looking for must have these competences but also have the financial capacity and technical capacity. You cannot separate the two. That is my submission.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, where do we put it? Please formulate it.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, the proposal by hon. David Bahati is acceptable because it captures both; that is what I was also going to suggest.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that Clause 11(4)(b) be amended as proposed by hon. David Bahati.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, clause 12 is related to the new clause introduced immediately after clause 4, which we have stood over. It is on the role of the ministry. The proposed amendment is deletion of clause 12. The justification is that it has been handled in detail under the new clause establishing the Public Private Partnership Unit. So, I do not know how we can go about it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do we stand over it until we have taken a decision on the other new one? Okay, Clause 12 is stood over.

Clause 12, stood over.

Clause 13

MR OKELLO: Madam Chair, clause 13 is about the project inception. In sub-clause (3)(a), we propose that the House replaces the word “Ministry” with the word “Unit.” The justification is that the unit is responsible for the examination of the project proposals.

MR AJEDRA: It is acceptable, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 13 –

MR SSASAGA: Madam Chair, I have a problem with that. Supposing we fail to agree on the establishment of the unit when we have already replaced the ministry with that unit, what happens?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, let us stand over it and go to 14.

Clause 13, stood over.

Clause 14

MR OKELLO: Madam Chair, under clause 14(2), we propose the insertion of a new paragraph to read as follows: “(i) Indicate any envisaged future contingent liability”. The justification is that the PPPs have a potential risk of creating future liabilities. So, it is proposed that a clause to cater for reporting on envisaged future contingent liabilities be included within the feasibility study report.

Two, in clause 14(4), (5), (6) and (7), we propose that the word “Ministry” be replaced with the word “Committee.” The justification is that the authority responsible for the approval of the feasibility study should be explicitly stated, that is, the committee. The ministry is too vague.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Doesn’t it have a bearing on the other one? Is that a different committee? If it is the same committee, then let us have it stood over.

Clause 14, stood over

Clause 15

MR OKELLO: Madam Chair, clause 15 is about the procurement of PPPs. We propose the deletion of sub-clause (6). The justification is that this is provided for in detail under part IV, which is about PPPs procurement rules and methods. More so, the provision is ambiguous where it refers to “the most economically advantageous or the criteria of the lowest prices as may be prescribed by law.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your rationale for this deletion? Where is it provided for under part IV?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, when you read 15(6), you realise that it is about the most economically advantageous or the criteria for the lowest prices as may be prescribed by law. That statement is ambiguous. How will one ascertain the most economically advantageous? What will be the benchmark? In business, one has to be specific and that is why we do not see the import of this statement.

MR OKUPA: There are economic methods that can be used to determine the economic viability of an entity. When you are doing evaluation, you can use the IRR and so on. Those are the technical methods that can be used to determine the most economically viable entity. Unless the Member is not privy to that information, let me offer it free of charge.

THE CHAIRPERSON: If we have to make a choice between constructing a road with two lanes, for example, and one with three, can’t you compare which of them is more economically advantageous?

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, it is a very easy exercise to determine whether a particular bid is advantageous to the country. We can look at it from different angles. A bidder may give a proposal that I build, operate and transfer this dam after 15 years. Another will say that they will do it in 20 years. So, from those two, one can see the economic benefits of one vis-à-vis the other. That is why I said it is an easy exercise to conduct.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Actually, honourable members, in this very House we have complained about agreements that are not advantageous to this country. So, we should not allow this. This is very critical; it is like a test.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, I concede.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Chair, I have issues with the phrase “restricted bidding.” I would like to suggest that we delete the word “restricted” - that is in clause 15(5) - unless there is justification as to why we must have restricted bidding.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, there are instances where one needs to restrict bidders. This can come about because of a number of reasons. It can be either because of security concerns or maybe that you have done benchmarking and assessed specific companies that provide specific services. 

Let me give an example. Suppose you want to buy a Mercedes Benz car and you know that there is only one company able to do it. So, you can restrict bidding, which makes that sole sourcing, because you cannot open it up for another person to bid for this business. The contract will be that once you have procured its services for the Mercedes Benz, that will be it. There are instances where it can be opened up but there are also instances where you need to restrict it for technical reasons or security concerns.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I can buy the idea of security concerns but the idea of a service provider – the Benz - I do not. This is because as a minister, you could have powers to give restricted bidding to your friend. That is why we should be careful about that. If you want it to be for security reasons, then let us state so. Otherwise, we must reduce on the restriction so that the minister cannot have the leeway to do anything they like, say by giving people they know. We can then just distribute the offers.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, I understand the point that the Leader of Opposition is making. It is important to be as transparent as possible but it is also important to allow some flexibility in terms of security concerns. However, when you read this clause further, you realise that it goes on to hedge in that – “…promote the project to the prospective bidders using any method that does not limit competition…” But of course there are areas that require strict bidding like the area of security or even sometimes in cases where you do not have other bidders on the market.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, we should not be seen to be amending other procurement legislations in this country as we enact this one. Restricted bidding is one of those practices provided for locally in our laws. The justifications have been made within the PPDA Act. That should not be subjected to abuse because there are situations that will require that. But also, there are thresholds, in terms of amounts, in regard to what one is going to do. I, therefore, call upon the LOP to relax.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, allow me ask this question to hon. Oboth, my age mate - we were born on the same day. (Laughter) I want to stress the fact that the issue that the LOP presented is really fundamental. We are talking about this law under the common law legislative process; whatever we do today supersedes what we did yesterday. Therefore, if we are not clear here, how will the two laws be read?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where are we not clear? Where is the cloud?

MR OBOTH: Where is the shadow? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 15 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, under clause 16, we propose the insertion of a new paragraph (i) to read as follows: “is disqualified by the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority.” The justification is that no government institution can give an entity business if it has been disqualified under the PPDA provisions.

In clause 16(g), we propose the deletion of the word “serious” because it is ambiguous and its deletion cannot have any consequence on the content of the sub-clause.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, someone can say that it was only a minor misrepresentation?

MR OKUPA: Madam Chair, allow me seek some clarification because under the PPDA Act, there are grounds for disqualification of bidders. Why didn’t you just lift that provision into this one instead of trying to create another wording? Let us just lift that wording and drop it in here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are they substantially different? If not, why don’t we just proceed with what we have here?

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, in the PPDA Act, some of these provisions feature although not all of them. So, I think the recommendation by the committee is acceptable that if for any reason a company has been disqualified from participating in government tenders, that should by extension apply to this particular law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 16 be amended as proposed.

(Question out and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed.

Clause 17

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, clause 17 is about evaluation of bids. We propose that in sub-clause (2), we replace the word “Ministry” with the word “Committee.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Aren’t we going into the same problem? Let us have that stood over as well until we have decided whether it is going to be called a committee, board or whatever.

Clause 17, stood over.

Clause 18

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: In this clause, we propose the replacement of sub-clauses (1) and (2) with the following: “(1) An accounting officer shall not sign a public private partnership agreement without the approval of Parliament. 

In sub clause (3), replace the words “An agreement shall be forwarded to Cabinet for approval where the contracting authority confirms that” with the words, “The Minister shall submit with the proposed agreement, a statement confirming that”. The justification is that PPP agreements are of very high value and in most cases create contingent liabilities for Government. Therefore, Parliament should examine them for consistency with the national budget and policy priorities.

We also propose the deletion of sub-clause (4). The justification is that all agreements will be approved by Parliament.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, we have a problem with that amendment. While we do not have any problem with Parliament providing that oversight role, what is being proposed by the committee is to the effect that we will be getting into executing some of the functions of the Executive. These agreements are certainly highly complex and it all depends on the teams that are negotiating these agreements. So, to say that such agreements must be first cleared by Parliament is, in our view, to say that Parliament is overstepping its mandate.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why do you bring the loan requests here?

MR AJEDRA: You see, PPPs are not loans per se. They may – (Interjections) – no, excuse me. They may create contingent liabilities. When you read the Constitution, you realise that the role of Parliament is to just give approval to any loan that Government is going to secure; a PPP is not a loan.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are just using the analogy. You know, honourable minister, the problem is that for many of the agreements that you have signed, when they land here we have always found them questionable. There are issues to do with commitment fees and so on, and this is what you are doing all the time. So, that is where this House comes in. You are not good negotiators and many times I wish we would have seen these things before and been able to change, but at that time it would have been a done deal and already signed. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, I agree with the guidance you are giving, although I also agreed with the concerns of the minister –(Interjections)– I am independent.

Madam Chair, what are we looking at and what are we trying to cure? Of course, if we had this law and the agreement like that of Umeme was brought here, we would not have been asked to look at the same provision. It is a serious issue that the government’s technical team does not do a good job when they go out to negotiate. For the minister to say that this is not a loan, this is what - It is a relationship between two entities creating obligations on both sides. You do not want to call it a loan but by whatever name you call it, just know it is an obligation just like the loan is.

Madam Chair, my only dilemma is about the additional ladder of bureaucracy we will be creating. I thought the minister should have seen that as a greater point. But saying that we shall be overstepping our mandate – an overseer is an overseer; they can come in at night or during the day. So, my only challenge is: how can we make it better or commercially run so that it is not seen to be consuming a lot of time? Would it be laid here for just information or approval? That is where the minister should have put his foot. Otherwise, he pressed a wrong button when he said we will be overstepping our mandate.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, just to pick up from where hon. Oboth has stopped; as I said before, PPPs are not primarily loans. Secondly, look at the process. I have had the opportunity to work on a project where there were literally piles and piles of agreements - technical, financial and legal documents. If you bring a truckload of documents to Parliament to seek its approval yet the private party is waiting, – time is of essence as far as implementation of PPPs is concerned – financiers will say, “Okay, we are giving you this money within this window”. Now, if Parliament takes, for arguments sake, three or six months to clear –(Interruption) 

MR EKANYA: Honourable minister, let me give you information. The World Bank used to behave like that but they have changed. As we speak now, the World Bank gives us concept notes and project appraisals. For all projects coming to Uganda, Parliament considers them. So do not use time any more to pull our legs.  

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, one of the reasons why we are legislating on this is to create transparency in public private partnerships. There had been a concern that every time government signs an agreement, after sometime when it is bad, government is bashed. So I look at this as an opportunity for all stakeholders to get involved. 

If you look at the loans that we have been approving, I do not think there is any loan where – I remember only one loan that was delayed in Parliament for reasons that were obvious, and that is the civil service loan which was over exaggerated. We cut it from Shs 73 million to Shs 23 million. All other loans have, however, on average, taken one month or less to pass through Parliament. 

So, I do not think the honourable minister should be concerned about time, especially in Parliament. Instead look at this as an opportunity where all stakeholders will be involved. Once a loan has been approved by Parliament, all of us will be on board. 

MR MAWANDA: As already guided by the Chair, where are we coming from and where are we going? If we had looked at the agreement or the partnership between Government and Tri-star, for example, we would not have advised Government to go on with it. So we are saying, bring these agreements to us, we study them and see if there is any loophole to cure. It will be an opportunity for all of us to ensure that these agreements come to us, we look through them and see that everything is perfect. We need to see where we are coming from and where we are going. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Chair. To some extent, I want to agree with the minister. I was looking at Article 119 (5) regarding the Attorney-General and it states thus: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, no agreement, contract, treaty, convention or document by whatever name called, to which the Government is a party or in respect of which the Government has an interest, shall be concluded without legal advice from the Attorney-General, except in such cases and subject to such conditions as Parliament may by law prescribe.”

With this in mind, I would want to agree with the minister that we leave it with the minister and the Attorney-General to approve but they must lay it on the Table in the House so that we can avoid situations where we struggle to get copies of these agreements. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the point of laying an agreement here, which is already done? What will you do with it?

MR OKUPA: Madam Chair, when I read here, it is the Attorney-General who is empowered to do that and conclude these agreements. So it is based on that. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have been in this House and we have received reports from the Public Accounts Committee, from the Local Government Accounts Committee; why hasn’t the Attorney-General not complained? The Constitution has been available and these things have been happening that notwithstanding. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Chair, we have seen all this, but I am just quoting what is here. Maybe the problem is why they are not following the Constitution, but are we going to do away with it by just avoiding this? Unless we are going to amend the Constitution and now have Parliament do that work – (Interruption) 

MR EKANYA: Let me give you information, colleague. The role of Parliament is legislation, representation, appropriation and oversight. Every PPP has a budget implication and that is one of the key roles of Parliament; it is appropriation. There is no single PPP; there are about five models of PPPs. 

I want the Minister of Finance to stand here and tell me of any PPP that will not have issues of unitary payment or a tax component. There is unitary payment and that will require Parliament to do appropriation. That is why it is important for Parliament to approve the agreement because you are now entering appropriation and that affects the budget. 

MR AJEDRA: I can give you a number of PPPs where Parliament does not appropriate. I will give you an example. We went to Malaysia with the committee; the express train from the central to the airport was done without any government appropriation. All the government did was to secure the right of way for the train to pass. The construction and design were all handled by private parties. I can give you another one – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: How did they get the right of way?

MR AJEDRA: The right of way is budgeted by the sector ministry –(Interjections)– No, his argument was that there isn’t any PPP where there is no unitary payment. I am countering that argument that there are many of them where Parliament does not have to appropriate –(Interruption) 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, this is not an academic exercise; all we want is to get a middle position. So I wonder whether it is not procedurally right for us to look for a middle position – if everything has to come to Parliament, can Parliament approve on time? That is the question. 

Also, on our part, we are saying that given what we have seen, when it involves the tax-payers’ money, people in the ministries can connive with people to dish out money. There are many PPPs – if I asked you today, what is our shareholding in one of the PPPs which Parliament guaranteed US$ 150 million?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, we need to move forward. These PPPs are done for the interest of the public and Parliament is the representative of the public –(Applause)– so we need to have a hand in this. 

Actually, honourable minister, you need to look at this as something that will protect the Executive. It is an opportunity for Parliament to add value and I think, Madam Chair, you can attest to this. Parliament has been thorough in approving the work of the Executive. We have never been a source of delay with the work of the Executive. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: In fact, it is them who bring the work late and then they stampede the House. 

MR SEMPIJJA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Let me start with what the honourable minister said. In Ugandan circumstances, you cannot get right of way without compensation. So, honourable minister, the example you brought cannot work here. 

Two, the problem for me was that all agreements should be “approved” by Parliament. I do not know about this because earlier, we had talked about restricted bidding; where do we put that? I think we should find a word to replace “approval”.

MR AJEDRA: Thank you very much for that information. You see, when you say every agreement is going to be laid on the Floor of Parliament, there are those agreements that show where unitary payments will be involved. A typical example I can give you is the Police housing project. There will be unitary payments involved but there are a number of PPPs where the government, as I said before, does not have such payments. 

I think the question is: where is the middle ground? Is it those which have implications on the budget that should be laid on the Floor of Parliament or all of them? I can submit to you that the moment you start doing that, then we are going to create another bottleneck in the PPPs. Most importantly, all agreements will always be laid on the Floor of Parliament as required by the Constitution. We are required to do that.

I want to allay the fears of colleagues that PPP agreements are not cast in stone. There is always a provision for negotiation and I will give you one example –(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: The honourable minister is a very good friend of mine but is it in order, Madam Chairperson, for hon. Ajedra, who is a Member of Parliament for Arua Municipality, to fear the participation of Parliament in such an important agreement?

THE CHAIRPERSON: You know, honourable minister, I wish your performance had been better but it has been so wanting over time. As I said earlier, people do not trust your ministry. We do not trust your negotiating skills and that is the reality.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, let me respond this way: If you go to other countries, there is what we call a standing committee comprised of experts, not merely the Attorney-General or Solicitor-General, to review contracts. I must say that I think one of the problems we have in this country, and we have discussed this on a number of occasions even in Cabinet, is that we do not have a dedicated team to review government contracts. That is where the problem is. It is not the issue -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what you are saying is that despite all our recommendations on the agreements, you just continue. Is that what you are saying?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Honourable minister, in clause 18(3) of the Bill, you are saying an agreement shall be forwarded to Cabinet for approval where the contracting authority confirms that the best evaluated bidder meets all those requirements, the contracting authority puts in place a management plan and satisfactory due diligence has been done. Cabinet is no different from Parliament. What you will do, we shall confirm here in Parliament. So, what is your worry? You have confirmed and Cabinet is a team as big as this Parliament, so why are you worried? Is it the volume of work that Cabinet can consider and not Parliament?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 18 be -

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, I beg that you allow me to present further proposed amendments on clause 18. There was an oversight and I missed out on a few clauses. 

In clause 18(6), insert the words “among others” between the words “shall” and “specifically”. This would therefore read, “An agreement shall, among others, specifically provide for the following…” The justification is that the highlighted areas are not the only provisions of the contract.

Replace paragraphs (j) and (n) with the following:
“(j) 	the mode of operation, maintenance and exploitation of the project and penalties for failure to meet performance standards.
(n) 	the substitution of the private party or by the creditor by the contracting authority and the circumstances under which the substitution may be permitted.”

Insert new paragraphs to read as follows:
“(x) 	minimum capital of the private party and share transfer restrictions;
(y) 	rights of the private party to guarantee securities to creditors;
(z) 	direct agreements and step in rights of lenders where applicable.”

The justification is that these are key provisions of PPP agreements.

Insert new sub-clauses to read as follows:
“(7) 	The Minister may, by regulation, specify the form in which a project agreement under this Act shall be drawn.

(8) 	The agreement entered into by a contracting authority under this Act shall be subject to the provisions of the laws of Uganda.

(9)	The agreements shall only be amended or varied with the approval of Parliament.

(10)	Parliament shall not approve an amendment or variation to a project agreement under subsection (9) unless the agreement, if so amended or varied-
(a) 	the project continues to provide value for money;
(b) 	the project continues to be affordable where such amendments, variation or waiver has a financial implication;
(c) 	the continued transfer of appropriate risks to the private party; 
(d) 	the continued provision of efficient and effective service to the public; and
(e) 	the continued protection and preservation of the environment.”

The justification is that prior approval of Parliament is required for any material amendments to a public private partnership agreement including any material variations to the outputs therein or any waivers contemplated or provided for in the public private partnerships. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, I have my worries as an investment minister and not as a minister of finance; the substantive minister is here. If you remember, we stood over clauses 5 and 6 and therein, one of the functions of the PPP committee was to do essentially that. Remember the contract would have been signed by the contracting authority so that if there are any variations or if there are circumstances that warrant variation of the contract, it must get approval from that PPP committee.

Now, if you are going to debate clauses that need to be amended, remember this is a contract between parties and the moment you start debating those amendments in Parliament, which amendments have financial implications to the private party, we may begin to have instances where investors are going to be very concerned. This will be the only law that I have come across where contracts are amended in Parliament. I have not, in any of the countries where I have been, seen contracts being amended on the Floor of Parliament.

So, Madam Chairperson, I am very worried that we are taking that route because it is not going to be very good for this country and certainly, I think the intent for which we wanted to set up this PPP law is going to be defeated.

MR OBOTH: Whereas the honourable minister is saying he is worried, the signs and symptoms were not showing –(Laughter)– but I take it that it was internal. 

I want the honourable minister to clarify whether the proposal there now gives mandate to Parliament to be the one to amend or to make the variations. I think that if you looked at his proposal well, are you suggesting that we should stand this over or you are suggesting that your worry is escalating that Parliament is over assuming? 

I may understand that, but you know the problem, as we were guided, is caused by the inefficiencies in the system. Parliament is getting more concerned than cautious. What guarantees can we have in the law to make sure that what is intended is done and done well within the shortest time possible?  

MAJ. (RTD) MWESIGYE: Unless the Minister assures us that in any PPP, there is no borrowing of money from the partner we are looking for; otherwise, in Article 159 of the Constitution, it provides for power for Government to borrow or lend – “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Government may borrow from any source” and I am sure we are going to borrow some money for long-term projects where there is no pressure on Government. 

Article 159 goes on to say, “(2) Government shall not borrow, guarantee, or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or person except as authorized by or under an Act of Parliament. 

(3) An Act of Parliament made under clause (2) of this article shall…” it goes on to explain. So, minister, if you are sure that in these PPPs, Government is not borrowing money, then we go ahead and leave out the Parliament issue. I thank you.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you. I would also like to bring it to the attention of the minister that when it comes to variations, we need to be very careful. Some of these people will come and enter into agreement with us, pretending to be offering us the cheapest price well knowing that after entering into the contract, they will immediately vary the price. They will say that they have experienced this or that and now the price should be so much. This is what we are trying to cure, and I gave you an example of UTL. 

With UTL, Government was the biggest shareholder and immediately after it was sold and a partner was brought in, they varied the price; they said, “Tomorrow, we are increasing the cost of the shares.” Government could not afford and so they bought Government out. They came with that intention and this is what we are trying to solve.

THE CHAIRPERSON: And they did not consult us.

MR AJEDRA: I think –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, listen. You are defending your vote but listen to the views of the Members.

MR MUKITALE: I am sorry that I was in another meeting with a delegation but because of this debate, I thought it very important to attend even at the last minute.

The obligation that comes with PPPs is not an obligation even of a loan nature, there are other commitments. I will give an example of Bujagali. Bujagali came with a power purchase agreement, which is a commitment, and with a partial risk guarantee, which is also a commitment by the government. 

I think that what we need is an honest submission from the minister. What does this mean? Basically, what we are trying to do here is saying that Government is avoiding a direct borrowing and it thinks that it is a cheap alternative. What the minister should be advancing here is that is it actually a cheap alternative? What makes it a cheap alternative if, for example, Government avoids borrowing but the power purchase agreement and partial risk guarantee means that in case of any failure, it is the same government that takes responsibility.

So for me, I would have been happy if the minister used this opportunity to make Members understand what is achieved in this alternative, so that we do not have to borrow directly and Government commits itself. But you are trying to use an – and you should even go further to explain –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what I understand by a public private partnership is that Government puts in their part and the other party also does so. Where does that part come from? Doesn’t it come through here? Do we appropriate without knowing? Where is the public purchase coming through us?

MR KAKOOZA: I think that if history is forgotten, the future is lost. We included that clause because of the way in which our friends, who were entrusted to do the part of government, were flouting it without involving us, who are accountable to the public. If you look at all the privatization deals, the government negotiating team caused us to lose out. This is why in the committee we said that if we are the ones who are accountable to the public and we appropriate money, let all those agreements be scrutinised by the summary of Ugandans, which is Parliament, so that we know the amount. 

Of course, in other countries, like the Asian Tigers, they are morally upright and did not go for privatization but they went for private partnerships. For them, it is because the people implementing those PPPs are morally upright but here, you will go and entrust power with a certain section of people who will defraud the country and people will ask Government or Parliament, “Where were you?” 

Let that amount of money, partial guarantee – you look, when we failed to guarantee Pioneer Bus in Bank of Uganda, it almost collapsed and they were going to exploit us. So, Parliament must be involved and know what part of the public you are allocating a partnership with a private entity.

MR BAHATI: I think the House has agreed and the minister agrees that we have actually moved away from whether Parliament should approve or not. Where we had reached was whether we should approve the amendments by the chairperson on approval of the amendments and agreement. On that, I have some concern on part (c) of his amendment. About whether Parliament should be involved, I think there is consensus in the House, apart from the minister, of course. (Laughter) 

Sub clause (10) (c) of what the chairperson is proposing says, “the continued transfer of appropriate risks to the private party”. I do not think that we should really squeeze the private party to this level. If we are sure that there is value for money, it is affordable, done in an efficient and effective way, it protects the environment, then what is this issue of risk; I do not get the amendment very well. I think that it is not in the interest of the public private partnership because it can discourage some people. I thank you.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, allow me to respond. I think the honourable colleague has read the Constitution very clearly. If you ask the question: will there be any borrowing in PPP projects by Government? Yes, there will be and the Constitution is right here, that before the government borrows, the request must be laid on the Floor of Parliament. I do not have a problem with that. 

What I am concerned about is where Government does not have to borrow. If there is borrowing involved – (Interjections) - allow me to complete. If there is borrowing, we as Ministry of Finance do not have a problem laying the agreement and the terms and conditions on the Floor of Parliament. But where I have a lot of reservation is where every agreement must be laid on the Floor of Parliament even when, for example, the government is not borrowing any money. I will give you another example; there was a concern about price and quality –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, are you suggesting that if the government is not going to borrow and they bring the agreement here, this House will say, “We are forcing you to borrow”? No.

MR SSASAGA: I thank you, Madam Chairperson and honourable minister. Even if the government is not borrowing as you said, there are some models like the build, own and transfer model where this company under a PPP agreement is coming to build a project in Uganda, which they will own and later transfer. The concern was, even if they are bringing in their resources, in the terms of the agreement in reality it would have taken only 20 years but the contracting authority or the authority in charge may collude so that instead of 20 years the project may take 25 years or 30 years. 

It is in that spirit that now Parliament, at that stage, can at least make an input and say “no”. So, even if Government is not committing money directly, there could be a financial loss to the country indirectly.

MR AJEDRA: Allow me to proceed. I want to address one issue raised by an honourable colleague in terms of variations - price and quality. If you were here on Thursday when I was giving the object of the Bill and the benefits of the Bill, this issue of price and quality does not arise. I will tell you why. Once a contract is signed, the contractor takes full responsibility of the price and the quality. 

I will give you a very simple narrative. If, for argument’s sake, the Government of Uganda decided to do the Kampala–Jinja Road as a PPP, and save for securing the access, the private party says, “I am going to develop this project, I will run it for 15 to 20 years, toll it and collect my money”. There is no government borrowing in that case, and there are so many offers that are already on the table – (Interjections) – No, please let me finish so that we do not get distracted. 

We have received so many proposals from companies that are saying, “give us right of way from Kampala to Jinja; we do not want you to borrow, we will put our money and we will bring the expertise, build, operate and after 15 or 20 years, we will hand it over to you.” Now, once you have signed a contract of say US$ 500 million, the risk is on the contractor in terms of the price –(Interjections)- That is what the contract says –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what is constituted in right of way? What does it mean to give right of way?

MR AJEDRA: It means that the Government must provide access where the road is going to pass.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Access by doing what?

MR AJEDRA: Compensation and that will be –(Interruption)

MS TAAKA: Mr Minister, you are just trying to pull our legs. If you entered into a public private partnership to construct a road from Kampala to Jinja, why don’t you just go away after constructing it? Why don’t they just go away and leave it for the government? We are committing Government; it has a monetary implication because this person, after staying there for so many years, wants some profits from his investment. Mr Minister, we understand.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, I think that is the danger that I talked about. If you go to South Africa, most of the expressways where you see a toll, it is not the government; it is in the hands of the private sector –(Interjections)– Let me finish because with interruptions, you will not be able to get the point. 

Most of the roads in South Africa are tolled and they are in private hands. The only contribution that Government made was to give them what they call the right of way - where to pass. That money for the right of way can be got exactly the same way UNRA gets when they have to compensate. You may not need to borrow to compensate. If you want to compensate by borrowing, that is possible. 

Madam Chairperson, there was another issue – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, do not just look at your sector. A few weeks ago, we required the Minister for Works to come and give us an update on compensation on the roads constructed in the last 10 years and there are roads where people have not been compensated up to today – Hoima, Kiboga and I don’t know where. You are looking at your area but not looking at the government holistically. 

Maybe, honourable members, let us adjourn so that we reflect on how this is going to work and look at the government priorities and obligations holistically. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

8.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Chairperson and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the House resumes and considers the report of the Committee of the whole House.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House resumes and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Public Private Partnership Bill, 2012” with amendments. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: I think you are supposed to say which clauses were passed, which ones were stood over and where we ended. 

MR AJEDRA: Clause 1 was passed, clauses 2,4,5,6,7,8,9,10 were stood over; clause 11 was amended; clauses 12,13 and 14 were stood over; clause 15 was passed; clause 16 was amended and passed and clauses 17 and 18 were stood. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Investment) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you. Please use the evening to burn the midnight oil. Do research on the internet on the areas where we are still in disagreement. The House will resume tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 8.14 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 14 May 2014 at 2.00 p.m.) 

