Wednesday, 13 May 2009

Parliament met at 2.32 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. In the public gallery we have university students from North Western University Chicago, USA studying public health. They are in Uganda, based at Makerere University and they are here to observe the proceeding of this Parliament. You are most welcome! (Applause)

Hon. Members, there will be a memorial service for the late son of hon. William Okecho, the late Wilbrod Okecho Jr. It will be at Christ the King Church, Kampala, tomorrow, Thursday, 14 May 2009 at 10.00 am. You are all invited to attend.

2.35
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to raise a matter of national importance regarding the death of my innocent people in Buliisa on Lake Albert due to increasing neglect of wildlife. We communities that sacrificed our ancestral land to the national parks are increasingly getting problems. I have lost ten people due to hippopotamuses attacking people. We have lost about 100 cows to crocodiles and we have had over 50 accidents of hippopotamuses attacking people on the lake. This is largely because the hippo and crocodile population have increased due to the last decade or so of conservation.
The problem is that the park authorities are not doing enough to relocate and scare the hippos away from the communities. The most unfortunate part is that when the warden responsible was contacted by the local community, he shifted the blame to Parliament.

In relation to this, I would like to mention the increasingly deteriorating relationship between the host community and the park due to profiteering for any animals which cross; should any animal be found across, the rangers capture the animal, and if you do not give them money, they take you to court. My district speaker was taken to court and my LC III chairman was taken to court because they were resisting them.

I would like the ministry concerned to help and make sure that the relationship that used to exist between the local governments and the park authorities is reinstated. It is wrong for the rangers to say that because the Buliisa leadership reported herdsmen to the President and they evicted them from the national park, the rest of the community should be punished for that. That is very unfortunate, and we appeal to the ministry to take immediate action. 

I would like to mention the names of the people we have lost:

1. 	Katusime Patrick
2. 	Ronald Katwesige 
3. 	Tumwesige, son of Tumwesige in Butyaba
4. 	Wakunga Jessica in Butyaba
5. 	Kibihiri Mugume Gilbert 
6. 	Udaga Philimon 
7. 	Biliwoti Asylaf from Walukuba
8. 	Soso Odali 
9. 	Byaruhanga James

All these are people who have died in a period of less than 18 months. And it was unfortunate for the warden in charge of the reserve to tell the people that they should learn to co-exist with hippopotamuses. The point here is that the hippopotamuses are leaving the park –

THE SPEAKER: I think you have made the point that there have been attacks.

MR MUKITALE: Yes, thank you, Mr Speaker and I would appreciate if immediate action is taken. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you and sorry about it.

2.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I wish, on behalf of government, to bring apologises and our condolences upon the deaths that have occurred in that part of our country. 

The minister responsible is not here, but I undertake to inform the minister in charge of that sector and request him to take appropriate action. I am sure this Parliament would wish that that happens. Thank you. 

MRS OKURUT: I want to add some information, Mr Speaker, on accidents; very briefly about these grisly road accidents that have taken place. So many people have died on Tirinyi Road, and the ones who were from Juba. 

Mr Speaker, we have stood on the Floor of this House and spoken about these accidents. Sometimes it is because of the messages that are on these taxis and buses. When you are plying the countryside roads and see the kind of messages: “No one can overtake me”, “Flying shuttle”, “Coffin on the road” - and when these drivers are called pilots, then they fly the cars. The ministry concerned should seriously tell our people to change those messages as a must and put positive messages on their vehicles because that is one of the leading causes of these grisly accidents. Somebody says, “Step on the gas, I have to reach Bushenyi, come back today and then go back.” If you wanted to reach there, why didn’t you start off yesterday? So, we regret these deaths but we should take more heed. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I suggest we observe a minute of silence for our fellow Ugandans who died in the accident on Tirinyi Road and at the border in Arua. 

(Members rose and observed a minute of silence.)

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, we take note with deep hurt and sorrow, of the carnage on our roads. It is unacceptable, and as a responsible government, we cannot just keep quite about this matter. It had quietened about two months ago. If you recollect, this same story was going on about two months ago, and we instructed police to be very strict on over speeding and the speed governors. 

Unfortunately, we concentrated mostly on the Mbarara-Kampala Highway and the Gulu-Kampala Highway. The Bugiri-Jinja Road was still under construction and, therefore, speeding was not yet an issue. But now that all these roads leading into the city are well repaired, the temptation to drive at high speed is high. I promise this Parliament that as police will do our best to make sure that people comply with speed regulations. But we share this responsibility with the Ministry of Works; so I will prevail on my colleague in the Ministry of Works to ensure that when these vehicles, especially the buses, are being allowed to operate on our roads, the issue of speed governors is emphasised as much as possible. 

MS NAMAGGWA MUGERWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from government as far as roads are concerned. I think last month we had an accident in Mukono, when a vehicle hit a billboard and the picture appeared in the newspapers. As the minister is referring to Masaka-Kampala road, I want to say that I have a big problem especially at Nyendo. You find a billboard protruding into the road - and I have heavy vehicles especially from the west bringing in cargo - which can hit the billboards. 

So, I am trying to find out who is responsible for these billboards; who gives them permission and determines the distance of the billboard from the road reserve? And in case of an accident, who is responsible for compensation?

THE SPEAKER: This is why the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs and the police and the Minister of Works have said that they are going to liaise to solve the problem. Definitely, the Ministry of Works is responsible for billboards because they are being fixed on the roads.

2.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, I want to join my colleagues in sending condolences to the families of the people who perished in the two accidents: one on Mbarara-Kabale Road and the other on Tirinyi Road. 

When you look at the rate of accidents which were occurring before the police became tough and after they became tough, you notice that they have gone down. But as he has said, we will have to combine efforts with the Ministry of Works. You see, they have changed the tactic; instead of driving at the right hours that are given by the transport licensing board, they are now moving at awkward hours. When you look at the two accidents - the one of Kabale, the bus left at 11.00 O’clock in the night and by that time, most of the policemen had retired. The one on Tirinyi Road, it was at exactly 4.30 a.m. when the policemen had not yet come on the roads. This means that they are shifting now. 

We had a meeting in the Ministry of Works, and we are extending the punishment to the owners of the buses because they are failing to manage their buses. For example, Gateway which has been involved twice is going to be suspended from operations and all its drivers will be re-screened by the police and the people who issue licenses. 

In regard to billboards, when we embraced decentralisation, there arose a mishap on who should give permission to erect billboards. In urban authorities, it is a preserve of the councils. Then on highways, it was the preserve of the local governments. But now we have changed; after the incident of Queen’s Way, we have formed a team with bailiffs to go around pulling down all the billboards as soon as their contracts expire. They had already paid money to the local governments and their contracts are still running. So, we are aware of the concerns of the people and they are being handled Soon we shall have a standardised size of billboards. Not everybody will be putting up a billboard of their own size. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you are eating much of our time, these are coincidental although they are important. I think we should concentrate on the Order Paper. 

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, let me just seek guidance. They have talked about the remedies they are going to take about the vehicles, but what about the accident victims; those maimed on these roads and those who have lost their lives? What will be the way forward? Yes, we are talking about banning certain bus operators, but what about the victims of the carnage?

THE SPEAKER: Well, for the victims, me as a lawyer I say that there is a law; they can take civil action against those who have caused the damage; going to court to seek damages is the direct remedy for this. Whether they have the capacity to do it is a different matter. The courts are open, the lawyers are there, and there is legal aid. But we should wind up this debate.

MR BYABAGAMBI: There is a law on third party insurance. But what we can do, as legislators - maybe I can table this also in Cabinet – is to review the amount of money involved in third party. They are paid peanuts, I think up to Shs 1 million and to me that is very little money for someone who has lost life at the hands of a reckless driver. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable minister. As much as we are talking about negligent drivers who are not qualified to drive, government also needs to take the share of the blame. For example, the Lorries park by the roadside at night; whose duty is it to ensure that these Lorries park in the right places? 

I am a victim of this; my sisters died because of those Lorries that park besides the road! By the time they met their fate, the drive had nowhere to go because the Lorries had parked on both sides. This is common on the Ntungamo, Rubale and Jinja roads. They leave just a narrow space. We have often talked about these matters but nobody takes action.

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Members, we cannot go on with this debate. In the first place, I think a month or so ago we commissioned the relevant committee to look into this road carnage; they have not submitted their report yet. Let us follow the Order Paper. 

PRESENTATION OF PETITION

2.51
MRS REBECCA LUKWAGO (Independent, Woman Representative, Luwero): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to present this petition concerning the welfare of children in Uganda. No wonder the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children is proud of having you as their patron. 

This is a humble petition of the Civil Society Coalition against Child Sexual Violence moved under rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda; and your humble petitioners show that the subject matter of this petition is the urgent desire for parliamentary intervention against child sexual violence, which is a big threat to the wellbeing of children in Uganda. The petitioners are a coalition of civil society organisations that are concerned with the wellbeing of children in Uganda. 

Reports have showed over the years that child sexual violence has been on the increase. For instance, from 2003 to 2004, there was 42 percent increase in child sexual violence/defilement as reported by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics Demographics and Health Survey. 

According to the Uganda Youth Development Link survey on child labour and commercial sexual exploitation, it was reported that in 2000 and 2001, over 65,000 children were married off. And in 2005, it was reported that 22,000 children were involved in commercial sex. 

The existing laws on defilement are commendable in protecting children against sexual violence, such as the 1995 Constitution of Uganda, the Penal Code Act Cap. 120; the Marriage and Divorce Act Cap.252; and the Children’s Act Cap.59, among others. 

The Birth and Registration Act Cap. 309 provides for the registration of a child. This helps to ascertain the age of a child. However, such registration is not readily available to the Ugandan child. As a result, parents or guardians many times are the sole determinants of the child’s age and they usually fluctuate the age of the child to their advantage by forcing them into early marriages and prostitution for monetary gain. 

Your humble petitioners, in light of the above feel that it is costly to obtain birth certificates and registration points allocated in places that may not be easily reached by many individuals in the communities and believe that protecting children from abuse begins with child registration. 

Therefore, by this petition, the petitioners pray:

1.	That Parliament amends the Births and Deaths Registration Act Cap.309 by waiving the payment of fees for birth certification.
2.	A national birth registration policy be put in place.
3.	In the interim period, lobby for the implementation of the birth registration programme at the community level with issuance of birth certificates at district level.

I beg to lay this on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much. Hon. Members, you have heard this petition. I think the appropriate committee to deal with it is the one dealing with the Ministry of Gender because children fall under that ministry. Let the committee take it up and report promptly.

BILLS
 SECOND READING

THE ANTI-CORRUPTION BILL, 2008

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday the minister moved a motion for a second reading, but the chairperson was trying to deliver to us the report but this matter was not followed up. Now I ask the chairperson to come and make a summary of the report.

2.56
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Gerald Menhya): Mr Speaker, I stand here to present a report of the Parliamentary Sessional Committee on Presidential Affairs on the Anti-Corruption Bill, 2008.

Given the importance of this Bill, which contains close to 70 clauses, I estimate that I will rush through it and it will take me about 19 minutes -

THE SPEAKER: Yesterday I specifically asked the Members to take copies of the report and read it so that they know what is contained there. However, the formality is such that you present the report here.

MR MENHYA: Okay. Mr Speaker, the Anti-Corruption Bill, 2008 was read for the first time by the Minister of State in charge of Ethics and Integrity and forwarded to the Committee on Presidential Affairs for consideration and subsequent reporting to the House pursuant to rule 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

The committee received and considered the Bill as per Article 90 of the 1995 Constitution, and rules 133 and 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

I am now pleased to present to this august House the committee’s report on the Anti-Corruption Bill, 2008.

In as far as methodology is concerned the committee received and examined the Bill in various meetings with the following stakeholders: 

•	The Directorate of Ethics and Integrity; 
•	The Uganda Debt Network;
•	The Uganda Law Society; 
•	The anti-corruption threshold of the donor community; 
•	The DPP; 
•	The Uganda Police; and 
•	The Auditor-General.

The committee sought to have an interaction with the Inspector-General of Government, Lady Justice Faith Mwondha, but she declined to attend, citing that she was too busy and that her staff were all engaged in various schedules. She, however, submitted a written report containing her views but the committee rejected it because she did not appear nor did she send any representative to present the report to the committee and respond to issues that would arise thereafter.

In pursuit of more information, Parliament sent a delegation of four members of the committee to Zambia to study the gains made in the fight against corruption so as to strengthen its consideration of the Bill. The trip was successful.

Let me rush through the object of the Bill. The Bill provides for:

1.	A more effective method of preventing corruption in both public and private sectors.
2.	Special investigation of the powers of the Inspector General of Government and the DPP.
3.	A restraining order on disposal of property derived directly or indirectly from corrupt practices.
4.	A confiscation order for property that is a subject of corruption.
5.	Protection of witnesses or informers and any other information received.

I will leave the salient provisions of the Bill, the modifications in the Bill, the deletions in the Bill as well as the new provisions of the Bill. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to rush through the new provisions of the Bill on page 4.
1.	Diversion of public funds under clause 6. This innovation, working together with clause 7, ensures that when diversion of funds injures any party, courts are empowered to order payment or compensation to the aggrieved party. 

2.	Undue influence for private benefit under clause 8. This proposal applies to a situation where an individual manipulates the outcome of any process in his or her workplace for personal gain or a fee. It is illegal under the proposed Bill and the committee believes that once passed, the provision will go a long way in dealing with running of public offices for private gains.

3.	Exercise of discretionary powers. The Bill seeks to regulate the exercise of discretionary powers to avoid abuse of such powers. 

	Under clause 12 and 13, the problem of ulterior motives in the exercise of discretionary powers of an office holder is tackled. Considerations such as religion, ethnicity and blood relations are therefore penalised as sectarianism and nepotism.

4.	Illicit enrichment: the Bill addresses the issue of disproportionality between officers’ wealth and the known sources of income. 

	Clause 31 of the Bill deals with the officers who live beyond their official past and present emoluments. It also proposes that if a person successfully avoids detection of his or her corrupt activity and goes ahead to conceal the wealth that proceeds from the illegal activity he or she will be guilty of illicit enrichment.

5.	Strengthening access of rights of investigators.
  
	The Bill, under clause 40, broadens Section 19 of the current Prevention of Corruption Act, and transforms the offence of “Obstruction of search” into “Obstruction of investigation”. Over time, it was realised that there were other aspects of obstruction that used to occur in the course of investigations which did not directly relate to searches.

	It is anticipated that this will improve the powers of investigators and strengthen their ability to access files, offices, equipment and matters which are a suspect of corrupt practices.

6.	Accessories in the advancement of corruption: unlike the Prevention of Corruption Act, the Bill proposes to penalise accessories - we call them facilitators in the legal language - to the offences of corruption.

Clause 52 is a typical penal provision that extends the culpability of the perpetrators of corruption offences to other persons, who not being the principal offenders, aid and abet in the commission of the offence. These are accessories who can facilitate the crime either before or after.

The Restraining Order and Confiscation Order can be read by hon. Members of Parliament.

At this juncture, Mr Speaker, allow me to go to the observations and recommendations. 

The committee takes note that the pervasive nature of corruption in Uganda is an acknowledged fact. Although it is perpetrated by individuals, its costs are paid by all Ugandans and sometime non-Ugandans. This signifies that the moral fabric of society is on the verge of collapse and that there is serious need for swift recourse for advancing and sophisticating the means of combating corruption. A good anti-corruption law, therefore, is vital in the fight against this vice.

The provision to outlaw corruption in the private sector, which initially was non-existent, is a good initiative which sends out a strong signal that the vice must be fought everywhere.

Observations 

(a) 	Definitions. The Bill has a number of definitions which fall short of the UN Convention against Corruption and the African Convention on Prevention and Elimination of Corruption.

	Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that the Bill should be streamlined to ensure that the definitions of public official and property comply with the provisions of the United Nations Convention against Corruption and African Union Convention on Prevention and Combating Corruption adopted in 01 July 2003 to which Uganda is a signatory.

(b) 	Jurisdiction. The Bill does not adequately address the issue of jurisdiction particularly when corrupt activities cross borders - I call them extraterritorial jurisdiction. Article 42 of the United Nations Convention against Corruption and Article 13 of the African Convention on Prevention and Combating Corruption; require member states to adopt measures for the establishment of jurisdiction of corruption offences. 

	Jurisdiction in clause 51 of the Bill is limited to defining courts which will hear corruption cases.

	Our recommendation is that consideration should be made to further defining jurisdiction to address international and cross border corruption crimes. This would include reforms on the legal instruments regarding extradition under the Extradition Act to aid the process of fighting cross border corruption crimes. 

(c) 	Complimentary legislation. Mr Speaker, in order to effectively fight corruption, there is need for other legal frameworks to supplement and complement the Anti-Corruption Bill once passed into law. These could include but not limited to other laws related to admission of evidence, protection of witnesses or whistle blowers, prevention of money laundering, drug trafficking and regulation of electronic transactions. 

	Our recommendation is that Parliament should expedite the process of legislating the Whistle Blowers and the Electronic Transactions Bills, which were read in Parliament for the first time. This we have, and we are going to expedite the process as soon as possible. Government needs to consider enacting or reviewing the Anti-Drug, Money Laundering, Evidence Act and Extradition Act legislations as soon as possible. 

(d) 	Assets forfeiture/freezing and confiscation. Clauses 53 to 66 of the Bill make substantial mechanisms for freezing /restraining and confiscation of property tainted by corruption. However, these clauses do not provide for seizure or forfeiture of personal criminal proceeds, property, equipment or other instrumentalities used or destined for use in the offence of corruption. For example, if it is a personal computer used to illicitly transfer funds or a vehicle that transported the criminal proceeds, these instruments of crime should be forfeited. 

	The committee recommends that any personal item or gadget or any other medium that facilitates corrupt activities should be forfeited. This would remove the proceeds of corruption and also disable the offender from engaging in corrupt malpractices. 

(e) 	Restitution in lieu of loss. Currently, various reports of the Inspectorate of Government to Parliament indicate that corruption pays and pays handsomely. Reports also indicate that when corruption cases are prosecuted, courts fail to impose mandatory restitution as part of the sentence. The fines seem to be inadequate in comparison to what is stolen or looted. If the criminal only has to return a portion of illicit assets in form of a fine, then it means that corruption pays and that its consequence is not only insignificant but also disproportionate to the financial loss suffered. 

	Our recommendation is that the Bill should, as a matter of principle, compel judges to order restitution, which is commensurate to the loss in any sentence passed on to an offender in addition to any other penalty prescribed.   

(f) 	International cooperation. Mr Speaker, if the Bill is to be more effective, it needs to be aligned to international conventions which call for international cooperation, including extradition and mutual legal assistance agreement in gathering and transferring evidence for use in courts to extradite and institute measures to trace, freeze and confiscate proceeds of corruption. 

	The committee’s recommendation is that the current Extradition Act and the Enforcement of Foreign Judgement Act should be harmonised with international cooperation and mutual legal assistance provisions in combating corruption. 

(g) 	Special investigators. Clause 50 of the Bill provides for the Inspector-General of Government and the Director of Public Prosecutions to appoint a special investigator as a necessary condition for the criminal investigation to be undertaken. Such a provision is necessary and commendable to prevent conflict of interest and to avoid appearance of bias or impropriety. 

	However, the appointment does not provide detailed criteria or qualification of the person so appointed other than the opinion of the DPP and the IGG. 

	Our recommendation is that the appointment of a special investigator or special investigators should be based on well laid down criteria other than the opinion of the DPP or IGG alone. Among others, the following should be considered: possession of necessary skills; considerable experience in the field under investigation; high integrity and moral conduct.

(e) 	Duplication of investigations. The Bill gives similar powers to both the DPP and the IGG to investigate corruption offences. While there could be cooperation and mutual respect between the IGG’s office and that of the DPP, there should be a mechanism instituted to prevent conflict, overlap and duplication of investigations. 

	Currently, the Inspectorate of Government is the investigator, witness and prosecutor. This creates questions whether the principle of fair trial is being complied with. 

	Our recommendation is that in order to avoid duplication, overlap and wastage of scarce resources in multiple investigations, the IGG should engage in consultative processes during the course of investigating and prosecuting corruption related offences. Prosecution of offences should only be initiated after the file under consideration has been sanctioned by the DPP.

Mr Speaker, as I told you earlier on, four members of the committee went to Zambia and heard interesting information from there. Allow me to go through it quickly. I think Members of Parliament will benefit from it.

While in Zambia, the committee noted that there is more than one agency at the forefront of the fight against corruption and these include the following:

(a)	The Anti-Corruption Commission (ACC). This commission was created in 1982. Among other things, it examines the practices and procedures of public and private bodies. Secondly, it advices public and private bodies on ways and means of preventing corrupt practices. Thirdly, it investigates corruption cases and prosecutes after securing a sanction from the DPP. Fourthly, it carries out massive anti- corruption campaigns and dissemination of information. Fifthly, it provides leadership in the fight against corruption, thereby coordinating all efforts geared towards the fight against the vice.

(b)	There is also the Ombudsman or the Commission for Investigations. Mr Speaker, this commission was also created by the Commission for Investigations Act. It is headed by an Investigator General whose office was created in 1974. The body is an equivalent of the Inspectorate of Government in Uganda.

(c)	The Parliamentary and Ministerial Code of Conduct Act. This Act deals with declaration of income, assets and liabilities of public officers. It provides for the establishment of a tribunal by the Zambian Chief Justice to try an officer who is a subject of the Act for breach of code of conduct. Its main function is also outlined in the report. 

(d)	The Drug Enforcement and Money Laundering Commission is also there.

(e)	The anti-corruption taskforce is also entailed there.

Allow me to rush through the recommendations made by the committee in regard to the visit to Zambia: 

1.	The committee would like to observe that Zambia has created structures, organs and institutions at national, regional and district levels with adequate financial and administrative backing. As a result, corruption in Zambia is a very risky venture and is effectively being fought.

	The committee would like to recommend that the various agencies engaged in the fight against corruption should coordinate their energies, efforts and resources towards achieving a common goal. This is because no single agency can fight corruption alone.

2.	The committee observed that the Inspector-General of Government’s mandate in Uganda is overstretched creating inefficiency. The IGG’s Office handles corruption, abuse of authority and office, enforcement of the Leadership Code Act, mal-administration, general complaints and petitions from the public. 

	The recommendation is that in order to minimise overstretch of the IGG’s mandate, there is need to revise the IGG’s Act 2002, with a view of reviewing the powers and functions of the Office of the Inspector-General of Government. 

	Government should consider creating an anti-corruption commission as an umbrella organisation to oversee corruption in the country. The ACC structure should have a commission headed by a chairperson with commissioners and an administrative and management body headed by a director-general. Below the director-general, there should be investigators to head different departments/units to fight various forms of corruption namely; maladministration and abuse of authority and office, money laundering, drug trafficking, enforcement of leadership code of conduct, general corruption complaints, electronic transfer related cases, to mention but a few. 

3.	In Zambia, mass sensitisation and awareness creation have made the public become increasingly active. It is the main source of information for the anti-corruption establishments.

	We recommend that in light of the achievements made in the fight against corruption in Zambia, the government should step up its efforts towards the enhancement of its citizenry in taking up the watchdog role to ensure that corruption is fought. 

Mr Speaker, allow me, because of time, to go to the conclusion. Members will read the engagement of the media.

The committee recommends that subject to the committee’s proposed amendments, the Anti-Corruption Bill, 2008 should be passed. The committee takes note that the Bill shall go a long way in strengthening the fight against corruption in Uganda. However, the committee notes that besides the law, there is urgent need to strengthen the anti-corruption institutions and increase their funding, evaluate some laws in particular the IGG Act and carry out massive sensitisation and awareness creation among the public if the vice is to be fought with efficacy.

Mr Speaker and honourable Members, I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chairman and members of the committee for the report.

3.20
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. 

The committee most importantly has requested this House to recommend the creation of an institution, the anti-corruption commission. They have given a series of examples on the institutional framework in Zambia where they went; how it is being coordinated and why it is important to have an independent institution to deal with corruption. 

I think we need to support this view from the committee to establish a commission because corruption in this country starts from the budget process, in the case of the civil servants. I was in my district and decided to make an analysis of the district development plan and the budget therein. I realised that 54 percent of that budget, which is developed by civil servants, was for allowances, travel abroad and salaries! Part of what was left was for workshops. So the actual money that is supposed to go for development of the poor was about 20 percent of the total budget allocation.

If we analyse even the national budget, it is heavily corrupted by interests of public servants. We are now in the budget process, you will make an analysis and you will be amazed. You will also perhaps find out that a big chunk of the budget is not going to core activities for the poor. That is corruption! Why should we budget for salaries, travel abroad, this and that? The politicians are not budgeting. The ministers you see here do not budget. They wait for their technical officers who use all kinds of words to convince them to come and defend those budgets, and they are defending those budgets for the civil servants. 

One time I was at Fang Fang eating and a group of people were in front of me making a deal. They included civil servants and a contractor. What were they saying? They were saying, “Wait for the budget; immediately it is passed, that project will come and I will give you, but I need ten percent.” The point I am making is that by the time you have the budget read the civil servants have made this budget in their interest. They already have contractors that they are thinking about and have already pre-determined what percentage they will get when that contract -(Ms Namaggwa rose)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, according to our rules the person holding the Floor is the one who allows your clarification or information but this one seems to have declined.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am very happy that this Bill fundamentally addresses the question of those who influence the process of contracts - the issue of civil servants negotiating for commissions before the Parliament passes the budget. I am telling you right now that they are just waiting for the budget to be passed. Contractors have already said, “I will give you ten percent”. We need the process –(Interruption)

MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Is it in order for the honourable member to accuse civil servants over the money we approve here? I know that Parliament is dealing with the budget and even this morning we were discussing it. It is for us to approve according to the way it is set. Are we approving corruption? If we are acting in the way civil servants have premeditated then that means even the Parliament is corrupt. Is the honourable member in order to accuse civil servants that they prepare the budget with the intention of taking the money illegally? Is the definition of corruption in terms of the way civil servants are working? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the existence of corruption is a reality and that is why this Bill is there.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have read the Bill extensively and it addresses the question of abuse of office, influence peddling -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, we agreed yesterday that we would use five minutes but now you have stretched to almost ten minutes.

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, I also want to add that we need a provision to cater for those who habitually commit corruption -(Member timed out)

3.28
MR DENNIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern Region): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the committee for the report. I feel saddened by the fact that neither the IGG nor her staff could appear before the committee to put forward their case. This raises a fundamental question of how we are going to fight corruption without collaboration, co-operation and in isolation. In my considered opinion, corruption is a deadly disease that has rocked our country and requires a comprehensive approach that brings on board all stakeholders.

The committee in its report talked about their visit to Zambia. Zambia is one country in Africa that has demonstrated the highest level of political will in the fight against corruption. If I may give a few cases; in Zambia at the moment there are a number of bodies fighting corruption. As a result, one of the former first ladies has been convicted and sentenced on corruption charges although she has since appealed. The former commander of the air force is also on trial on corruption charges. One of the ministers took political responsibility and resigned on allegations of corruption. I think this demonstrates the highest level of political will that Uganda as a country should borrow as we put in practice each and everything in our law books to ensure that we fight corruption.

I am happy because of the progress that we are making slowly but surely. I am also happy that even within the High Court we have established and created an anti-corruption division. I think that the results have started coming out and we expect even better results.

Finally, according to Transparency International, which is a global civil society organisation leading the fight against corruption, in their report published in March this year they reported that within one year, Uganda’s corruption ranking dropped from 111th position in 2008 to 126th in 2009. This was out of 180 countries surveyed across the globe. I think this brings us to the point where we need to strengthen the fight against corruption so that we can lower these statistics and be a role model in the region. 

Mr Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity and I support all the good recommendations made by the committee in their report in our fight against corruption. Thank you.

3.33
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the committee and thank them for the good work done. 

If we look at the definition of corruption as dishonesty and illegal behaviour especially of those in authority, this shows that we need to support such a motion in this country. On the other hand, I still believe that we have laws in this country that have not been enforced much. Much as we are bringing this motion, if we do not follow it up and implement it to the letter, we shall have done nothing because even those laws in existence have not been followed to the letter.

I am happy with the committee when they bring in the issue of nepotism and sectarianism as something to be penalised. This is an issue that was on the Floor of Parliament yesterday and now I can see it being resolved.

The institution of the IGG in this country leaves a lot to be desired. The committee has just told us that the Inspector-General of Government failed to come citing a tight schedule. If someone can really defy Parliament and this is the person who is supposed to lead the struggle against corruption, this is also being corrupt. If someone is answerable to one person in the country, this defeats what we are doing right now.

We need to put in place serious measures especially concerning those people instituted to fight corruption. This is because even in the institution itself, if we are honest to ourselves we know that people there are corrupt and people know it, so somehow we are sending thieves to catch thieves and in the end, I do not know. 

I know that fighting corruption is a very difficult thing but as Parliament we need to stand and be counted. It may take ten or twenty years but let us begin on a very serious note. I believe that there is lack of political will in this country to fight corruption. Many people have committed this crime and they walk with their heads high and it seems as if we are glorifying corruption. 

I support the motion and call upon colleagues to support it also. Courts of law in this country should do us justice as they are supposed to because many people have gotten away with it. There are many cases we know of as Parliament. I believe that this is necessary especially as corruption has taken different trends from when we repealed the 1970 Prevention of Corruption Act. It is really necessary because even the corrupt are now wiser in court. The whole issue is: are we following it to the letter? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.36
MR ABURA PIRIR (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and members. I am one person who supports this motion with no opinion. We have become very realistic when it is too late. This corruption was launched at the time we accepted decentralisation, and that is the root cause of corruption. 

As somebody said, we are fighting a war and trying to put in place policies that can help us do this. As I said, it is too late. Where do we start from - in the Sixth, the Seventh or the Eighth Parliament? We have been with corruption all this time and moving with it. Corruption is here to stay. If I were the whole House of this Parliament, I would legalise corruption because it is already being practiced. That is my opinion. There is nobody here who can convince us that we shall uproot corruption in this country.

Last year in November I represented our Parliament in the UN and I introduced the same motion. At that time when I was presenting the paper, I said, “For us in Africa, the cancer and disease that is eating up humanity is corruption.” As I talked in detail about this, many delegates supported me. We have been talking about insecurity and all that but I think it is high time that we included this agenda in the United Nations programme.

If you go to any district in Uganda, it is the order of the day. You will find that we make releases and the money goes there but the auditors end up as the very people who benefit from all this. I do not know what modality is in place. Somebody was quoting Zambia and how corrupt it is. How clean is Zambia? What we can do here so that we become equal is to legalise. Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let us allow.

3.40
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for their report. Of course there are some amendments that some of us will try to move at a later date. However, it is important to know that corruption is in all forms. If somebody is supposed to be in office at 8.00 a.m. and comes at 10.00 a.m., he has stolen two hours and that is corruption. If somebody has a public asset and puts it to his own advantage, that is corruption. We are supposed to attend committee meetings here in Parliament and unless you are away on official duty, if you do not attend, that is corruption. If you are supposed to pay taxes and you do not pay or you pay less; that is corruption. 

Maybe we need a commission for truth and reconciliation on corruption and praying. This is because according to the report, it seems there are some agencies they have left out. The committee went to Zambia and it left out Rwanda, which is near here and where there are live examples on how they have dealt with corruption. 

There is a UN Convention about corruption. I wish this was imported directly here because it deals with confiscation of assets without question. There are the investigating bodies like the DPP and IGG. It is unfortunate that the IGG never came. The owner of the law seems not to be interested in this law. There must be a reason why she or he is not interested in the law. Maybe he does not want this law. The Police should also be here because the DPP depends on the Police. Why are we leaving out CID? The DPP has no capacity to investigate; it is the Police which have capacity. 

Having said that, for me the issue of nepotism and sectarianism is very good; it is welcome. We have had a sectarian law which talks about anyone who reports sectarianism being penalised and the one practicing it is exempted. I am happy that now it has been captured. However, it should go further to even deal with associates, with people using other offices. If I am a minister of finance, for example, and I ask the Minister of Health to employ my brother and he also brings his brother to the Ministry of Finance, that is not different from nepotism and sectarianism. In effect, they will have employed my brother or sister in the ministry. 

There are contracts signed in Uganda, and I want to support my sister, hon. Betty Amongi Nantongo -(Laughter)– you know, we have to acquire some names in order to be able to get favours. (Laughter) A person signs a contract and he knows that it is exactly against the public’s interest. I will give you an example: a person in the Ministry of Works signed a contract for road construction which says that when we delay to pay, we shall pay interest at a commercial rate, plus a penalty of 10 percent. They go ahead and delay to pay because that person would be happier to have that money accumulate instead of taking it to the bank where he would get maybe five percent and then he earns interest five times as much as he would have earned in the bank. That is theft and corruption! I think people who sign such contracts should be put on the firing squad immediately.

I am happy they have talked about cooperatives. You know I am the chairman of a very big cooperative, which they want to remove me from because I have fought the thugs. People have mismanaged public assets even for individuals. That is why I am happy with cooperatives and I am happy with NGOs. I am so happy about that -(Member timed out)

3.45
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will not talk for only five minutes; you might have to give me some more time. I would like to thank the minister and the chairperson of the committee for this good report. 

So many people have talked about corruption but I have read through the report and not seen anything on greed. We know very well that greed is the major cause of corruption in Uganda. It is a very big demon in Uganda. You know very well that so many Ugandans are greedy. As I speak now, we do not have any legal restriction on greed. So many Ugandans are poor just because others want to add more to what they have. I think that the committee should look into this.

On page 15 the committee recommended that there is need to strengthen anti-corruption institutions. Yes, we need to strengthen anti-corruption institutions but it is surprising that the same government that we want to strengthen these institutions is the one which protects the people who are implicated in corruption cases. This is the kind of leadership that does not take any action against the people that are convicted. So, unless we change the leadership, corruption will not be combated out of this country. 

Last but not least, of recent government is planning to finance patriotic clubs in schools. If you want to combat corruption in Uganda, we should start right away from schools. Instead of promoting these patriotic clubs in schools, government should set up anti-corruption clubs in schools. Teachers should start teaching these children principles like morality and accountability. Children should know that stealing is bad, misuse of school fees is bad –(Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you, my sister, for giving way. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the honourable member that even the process of selection of teachers to meet the President to start on that business of patriotism was most corrupt. (Laughter) It was most corrupt in that the procedure was to go through the RDCs. The RDCs had to select the teachers who were to meet the President. So my fear is that whatever the case may be, corruption is here to stay until we overhaul the leadership which has been promoting corruption –(Interjections)- the leadership of Uganda, especially those who are in the NRM party -(Interjections)– we have seen the Temangalo issue. Thank you. (Laughter)

MS NAMPIJJA: Thank you, my honourable sister. Mr Speaker, I was talking about sensitising these children right away from school. If they know that misuse of school fees is bad, if they know that cheating in exams is bad, that positive feeling for their country will automatically come. I know that there is no one who is patriotic and corrupt at the same time. If you love your country, how can you be corrupt? It is impossible.

We know very well that corruption is part of us; it is part of the business in Uganda. We must therefore ensure that there is political will and commitment to combat corruption.

Finally, I would also like to talk about the role of Parliament -(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: In the public gallery, we have members of UPC Listeners’ Association of Kiruhura District. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.52
PROF. WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Mr Speaker, this is one of the best reports I have ever read, and I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee. I want to quote from page 6 of the report: “…the pervasive nature of corruption in Uganda is an acknowledged fact.” This statement is very important and we should be moved. Corruption is a moral cancer which has taken root in Uganda and I think we should not take it lightly. 

Corruption is a global issue, only differing in intensity from country to country. Unfortunately, in Uganda it has taken deep roots. As a moral cancer, I think it requires moral attack and the moral attack I am talking about starts in the family. I think it is time for us, legislators and parents, to start to instill morality in our families and children so that they can be conditioned to good moral behaviour.

Various people have described corruption as a monster, as madness and a moral cancer in society. In our case, this may be the situation, and I am very happy that something is being brought forward to assist us to attack this monster. 

What may be important to mention here is that we have very many good laws in Uganda but we have a weakness - implementation of our laws has suffered for a long time. In fact, the policies that Uganda makes are effectively used in other countries. I hope this good Act will be implemented in the strongest possible way so that corruption is curbed. 

Mr Speaker, the manifestations of corruption are many. I think we should not be deceived that only stealing public funds is corruption, even sweet talking may be a manifestation of corruption. The commonest manifestation I have seen in Uganda is commercialisation of politics. Some of these things are done under the pretext of the Constitution. I want to urge the legislators of Uganda to take all steps to try to curb corruption; otherwise, this country will never develop. Thank you very much.

3.57
MRS BEATRICE BYENKYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to commend the committee for going through this Bill. If members will recollect, Members of the African Parliamentarians Association against Corruption (APAC) discussed this Bill. I am happy that we have gone this far and I believe that some culprits will be got. It may not be everybody or those that are required; by the way, we do not have to wait for everybody to be caught. Let us examine ourselves, and that is the angle that I am going to take. 

Corruption as far as the dictionary is concerned has various descriptions and one of them is dishonesty. Let us just sit here and recollect on what we do at times. Leaders here and outside, remember when you have not attended a workshop or a meeting and you request your colleague to sign up for you. That is not only telling lies but it is also dishonesty. That is being dishonest.

As a politician, you stand up and say something which even in your heart of hearts you do not believe in but simply because you have to say something, that is being insincere and dishonest. You know, we do it thinking people do not understand. This is insincerity, dishonesty and telling lies.

Let us also look at the other angle. Not everybody will be caught by the trap but there are some people who will be on the way to the trap. It is a matter of time and a matter of speed. However, we do not wish everybody to be caught so let us caution. That is why I like the patriotic lessons although I have my own discrepancies of who should handle what, but let us come up with that programme. 

Let us be sincere in whatever we do and say. We might not be caught by the law but we might be caught by the word of God at the end of the day. So let us look at our moral fiber. In fact, that is why you find most times many of us cannot put up our heads to say anything about corruption because we know somewhere down the road we did something wrong. We fear to put our heads up high because we know we are not the type. 

On some occasions, I have heard somebody saying “Who can come and stand up against corruption; don’t you remember the other time?” It is time for self cleansing. When you cleanse yourself and repent, you do not have to keep moving round in your mud. Repent, stand up and speak against corruption. It is high time people became sincere. Dishonesty is underlying everywhere in government; it is like the base for everything that is built on top. So, we must start self cleansing now.
 
Will the law get everybody? Not everybody will be caught by the trap. Some people are about to get to the trap and some people are walking to the trap; it is a matter of time and speed, but let us not wait to be caught by the trap. Thank you very much.

4.01
MS HUDA OLERU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. This is a good Bill that we should pass, seeing the rate of corruption which has been embedded in this country. Indeed, we need to fight corruption and we have people who are key stakeholders in fighting corruption like the Police, institutions like the IGG and even nurses. We need to look at any institution where people are working and where money can easily go through. 

The Police is key in fighting corruption. If we do not revise their salary structure, this Bill will not be effective. Therefore, I am urging us to find a way of increasing the salary structure for the Police or for whoever is working so that he is never tempted to get money for giving services. If our Police are still getting Shs 120,000 and this is a person supposed to work throughout the day without lunch, for any minor mistake this person will be forced to ask for something because he wants to go and have lunch. However, if his pocket is wet, he will be serious with whatever he is doing. I hope this Bill has considered that.

I know this Bill is in this House today because there is political will. However, I am going to prove this if we are going to pass adequate money to fight corruption as one of the three priorities in the next budget. It is then that I will prove if there is political will. If we pass this Bill today and we do not have funds to implement it, then it means the political will is fake.

All Ugandans are awake. We are talking about patriotism. We are all for patriotism and I know if this is implemented very well, it will not only be in classrooms but it will go even to trading centres and then people will start to own this country. When people own the country, they will protect their resources. 

Corruption is very high because somebody may see you being corrupt but because he does not own what the country has, the person will be unbothered because he will think “That is your chance, tomorrow I will get mine.” However, if I know that these resources are ours, when I see somebody being corrupt, I can stand up to tell them, “What you are doing is wrong”. Unless this patriotism works very well, corruption cannot be stopped.

I support the committee on the need to put up a commission. We should operationalise this commission up to the district level. I think there have been problems with the IGG because the institution has been so independent – it decides on what to do and does it at whatever time because there is nothing else that would be in place to work hand in hand with it. So if we set up this commission, it is a way of reducing too much power that has been given to the IGG. It is also a way of monitoring. The IGG and the commission will work together to have better results. If we set up this commission, we shall not have any more problems with the IGG. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.07
MR JULIUS BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Persons with Disabilities): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I thank the committee for the report but I have a few observations to make. 

When you look at page 7 of the report, they talk about assets forfeiture, freezing and confiscation.  This monster called corruption is very sophisticated. We may confiscate the gadgets and all other things that have been used in handling the deal called “corruption” but without mechanisms of having the proceeds recovered from the corrupt person, we may not have headway. 

I find it a big problem for us to think that at any one moment we shall be able to recover what has been stolen through corruption. I am saying this because many Ugandans who have today got wealth through corruption do not register it in their names. So it becomes difficult to trace an asset or property that has been acquired through corrupt tendencies. 

When you read the IGG’s report, you see that one of the institutions that is mentioned as being corrupt is that same IGG institution. You can imagine that the very institution that is supposed to fight corruption is being mentioned as one of the institutions that are corrupt. Even the Police that are supposed to help us are mentioned as one of the corrupt institutions. So, if you talk of establishing a commission, I think it may even become worse. 

I am saying this because I do not see a patriotic Ugandan who is approached and asked to share Shs 11 billion or Shs 20 billion and they say, “Let us go ahead.” What we need to do is to maybe turn to God. If we all get saved, it might do us a great deal. 

Corruption is as ancient as Adam and Eve –(Interjections)– Yes! So, uprooting it requires the grace of God. (Laughter) I am saying this because it is out of moral decadence that this vice has remained around for so long. It is until people’s morals have turned positive that it will go. The political will to fight corruption is there, but those who are supposed to implement the decisions to fight corruption have failed us in certain instances.

I think the way to go is for everyone of us to decide that enough is enough. The time is now for us to think of the kind of nation that we are going to hand over to the next generation. We need to leave a legacy behind. That legacy should be determined by us. We should take a decision of repentance and forget about the past. We should be looking forward to a better future for the next generation.

Whereas it is true that the political will is there, without us making a concerted effort, it may be a waste of time. We shall debate and put this law in place, but how many good laws have we put in place and they are not implemented?

4.12
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Corruption is an evil from all angles. What we should also know is that corruption has got no political identity. At times it dresses well in yellow, at times in green, at times in blue and at times in red and white. Corruption cuts across; it has no political identity.

What we should do as leaders of this nation is to ask ourselves various questions, one of them being: are we really fighting corruption? The other one is: are we getting stronger than what we are fighting?

As we talk, to a very big section of Ugandans corruption is a necessary evil. So if we are to fight what has been termed as a necessary evil, we must be a little bit stronger and move various steps ahead. 

When you look the way we are elected to become Members of Parliament, you realise that there is need to sensitise our voters down there. We need to do civic education as Members of Parliament. Sooner than later, we will be going for elections but what the electorate expect from members here is extreme – I cannot term it. My appeal to all hon. Members of Parliament is for them to realise that it is we who are in a position to sensitise our voters. We should tell them that when we go back to them to ask for votes, they should not ask for kitu kidogo. Let them not ask for any thing in order for them to vote us. That is not allowed. That is part of corruption –

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, so you go to your constituency and say to them thus: “Never ask me for kitu kidogo”? (Laughter)

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Speaker, what I am putting across is that if we do not sensitise our electorate, then definitely we will not be assisting in as far as the fight against corruption is concerned.

THE SPEAKER: So, what you are saying? Are you saying that you go to Lira to do that and somebody from Lira comes to your constituency?

MR SEBAGGALA: No, Mr Speaker. What I am saying is that there must be an approach for every Member of Parliament and people in other elective offices.

When you look at our religious institutions – my colleague has talked about moral decadence – you realise that they are not saved; corruption has gone there. We need to pray hard to the Almighty God otherwise even our religious institutions are not saved.

Finally, I would like to say that we have had very important people in this country who, when they go to campaign in by-elections, promise voters that they will do a, b, c, and d, if the voters elect candidate “b”. Is that not corruption? That is corruption because you are telling them that if they vote for candidate “b”, the roads in that constituency will be worked on. That is corruption. I think we should handle anybody who does that first. This will send a signal to the others so that when they go for campaigns, they should not promise something to the voters in order to elect a certain candidate. They will not be assisting this country in the fight against corruption. When you go using public assets then that means you are also a corrupt officer. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I thought I had said Soroti. (Laughter) No, when I said Soroti I meant the district. (Laughter)

4.18
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin my submission by quoting two people. The first is an unknown author who says, “When the state is corrupt, then the laws are most multiplied.” The second one used to be my neighbour on the Back Bench but he is now chairman for Gulu Municipality. He used to say “Fish rots from the head.” I believe that the two statements will be very informative as we analyse the situation to do with corruption in this country.

I believe that when we get to levels where we call it corruption instead of theft, there is a problem. This is broad daylight theft and robbery and murdering of Uganda’s people. When you steal drugs that are meant for immunisation or money which is meant for antiretroviral drugs, Global Fund, GAVI, whatever you do in your office or in government; that is theft. I think we should stop styling it up and clothing this thing and calling it corruption when we know it is real theft. 

You know, “corruption” sounds a bit nice, easy and acceptable. None of us wants to stand here and be told, “You are a thief” because the word “thief” is in a language that ordinary Ugandans understand. Therefore, this Bill we are dealing with is about theft - plain theft where leaders or people in authority steal from the poor. That is what this corruption thing is, and it should be defined as that. It is unacceptable and it is treasonable.

I want to say that it is important that we do not just multiply laws. I want to caution the honourable minister that another law just does not fight corruption. You are seeking to repeal the Prevention of Corruption Act of the 1970s but it is on record that in the 1970s, corruption in this country was at a lower level than it is now. This is when we have all these well-dressed and smartened laws before this Parliament as well as the previous ones. 

So what was it that was in Ugandans in the 1970s and the years thereafter that is missing in the Ugandans of today such that we need another law? While I think having a law for the sake of it is the right thing to do, I am sure that a law per se does not help in the fight against corruption.

The second issue I want to raise is the issue of enforcement. We have seen small people being caught - people who steal Shs 1 million, teachers who have stolen Shs 200,000 of UPE funds - but there are big fish. We just do not have the courage, as a country, to confront corruption. You remember recently the Kenyan Parliament censured a minister and people were on the Floor. Let me ask this Parliament if we can stand here and censure anybody. We do not have the courage! Even if we censure someone, you know that they will be reappointed. We do not have the courage!

It is wrong for us to think that a law per se is going to arrest the corrupt in this country. There must be demonstrated political commitment to fighting corruption and there must be strong institutions -(Interruptions)- hon. Members, I am suggesting - you just have to listen to me. There must be demonstrated commitment. 

The recent scandal involving the Office of the IGG has weakened that office terribly. If we do not work on institutions and give them the courage, the independence and the backing they need to operate, we will continue arresting chicken thieves who do not matter to anybody perhaps save for their neighbour whose chicken they stole. We will leave the real people who are causing death and who are propagating systemic corruption in this country -(Interruption)

MRS ANYWAR: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker. Dear colleague, I wanted to give some information: as an institution this Parliament had at one moment censured a minister on these allegations. Unfortunately, as we stand here, shamelessly, the same minister was recycled and reappointed as a leader of this country. So if you talk about people standing up against the corrupt, at least on record this Parliament has ever censured a minister.

Let us talk about the head of this country. The President likes to shield those who fought and those who are civilians cannot advise the colonels. This is where the problem is. I thank you.

MS ALASO: That is good information but just for the record, the Seventh and the Eighth Parliaments have never censured anybody and they are not about to censure anybody. Going by the debate we had over Temangalo, CHOGM and the Shs 5 million for Members of Parliament, they will not censure anybody.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, is it being suggested that every Parliament must censure? Must it be on schedule that every Parliament has to censure? (Laughter)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I think that is a very good one. Is it also assumed that in every session or every life of a parliament, there are no corrupt institutions involving ministers? Is that the assumption? This House knows better to answer that question.

I would like to emphasise the issue of public assets. When people begin to use public assets, whether it is cars or whatever, for aspects that those cars are not ordinarily mandated to be used -(Member timed out) 

THE SPEAKER: I can see hon. Nakawuki looking at me and saying that when I leave Kampala to go to my constituency, I pass through her constituency. I do not know what to say. (Laughter)

4.25
MS REBECCA AMUGE (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for a job well done. It has been for a long time that Uganda had kept on crying that it seems the 1970 law may not help us but I had my reservations. I felt that probably the enforcement and the will could have been lower than the strength of the law itself.

One time Justice Ogola said in a meeting that corruption starts as just a small thought in your mind and then it moves and becomes an attitude. When it becomes an attitude, it is very difficult to correct. I have begun thinking that at some point corruption became an attitude in this country. 

I want us to pass this Bill into law because it will exonerate Uganda even internationally. When you go out there and you tell people that you are from Uganda, the first question they ask you is, “How are you fighting corruption now?” There are things we have done, which make everybody think that we all condone corruption but I believe that if we pass this motion into law, it will cleanse the image of this country.

I want us to look at unveiling persons, especially those who use the private sector, and I want to thank the committee for having brought this out. We have many public officers who go and hide under the public sector and pretend that the work is for the public sector. You have seen on several occasions when you begin to question, they tell you that this is a private person and you have no mandate to go and find out what they are doing. 

How much wealth has been hidden through corrupt means in the private sector? How many people have registered unborn children as the owners of assets that they have and they say that they are for those children. Children who are not born have been insured and already have assets in this world. How are we going to correct this? 

As we get into debating this motion, I want the penalties to be deterrent enough so that others may not even think of being corrupt at any point. I also want the investigative institution to be strengthened. I think that in most cases it is the process of investigation that kills the fight against corruption, so that area must also be looked into. I also want to agree with you on including more anti-corruption institutions, which are functional. 

There is also the issue of baiters - those who facilitate corruption. Those are the worst culprits and I think these are the people whom the law should look at.

I also want us to see how we are going to recover those riches. We should confiscate and allot them to government coffers so that they are used for the benefit of all Ugandans.

Finally, I would like to propose that the people who are corrupt must know that they leave a legacy even when they die. I am proposing a book of shame so that even your grandchildren will look at the book. It should be put in all public places so that it is known that when Rebecca was a Member of Parliament, she was a corrupt person. This will ensure that my third generation will read about me and see if this is good. I am therefore proposing a book of shame for the corrupt. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I realise that many of you are interested in making contributions to this motion but we have a problem in that we have a lot of business lined up and Parliament is due to be prorogued on 21st. We have the dual citizenship report, human rights report and other reports. I beg that we turn ourselves into a committee and legislate because legislation is actually in the committee. I will then give those who have not made contributions today a chance on another occasion. Thank you very much. The motion is that the Bill entitled the Anti-Corruption Bill, 2008 be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ANTI-CORRUPTION BILL, 2008

THE CHAIRMAN: Normally we should deal with the clause dealing with the interpretation afterwards. This is because I have seen many times you deal with it first but as you move, you need to refer to it. We shall not deal with the first clause so that we do so after we have exhausted the Bill. I do not know whether we have understood. 

Clause 2

MR EUKU: Mr Chairman, I have something on clause 2. It gives a full definition of corruption but what is here tends to define personal or private interest but there are other definitions that have been left out, which I feel should be included here. 

I believe part (i) should read: “Any act or omission in the discharge of his or her duties by a public officer in relation to deliberate damage of public interest.” Here we now bring in the issue of public interest. I would like to give an example of what could have happened to Mabira Forest if it was destroyed. Such persons should be brought to book as having committed the act of corruption. 

I propose that we add part (i) after (h). The definitions that have been put here tend to be personal and reflect personal gain but are not comprehensive in bringing everything out. That is why I suggest that we put something there that reflects public interest.

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, I appreciate the concern raised by my colleague but I raise a practical problem. I may be the district forestry officer for Mukono and I have received a directive from my permanent secretary who has also received a political directive from the minister. The minister is also implementing a Cabinet decision, which he has been asked to implement by the appointing authority. In this particular case and provision, who will be caught by this proposal you are making? Is it the forestry officer? Can you please assist me?

MR EUKU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. If the question he has raised is to stand the test of what I am explaining, then we would know what the government policy is all about. The public interest that I am referring to here is something that will avert government policy that will have been set to handle the issue. I thank you. 

THE CHAIRMAN: If you intended to move this amendment, and I think you have been thinking about it for quite sometime, the procedure should have been that you put it in writing and distribute it to members so that members think about it. The formulation is even not very clear. 

The rules actually say that if you have an amendment in respect of a Bill, you should go to the committee and submit that amendment. If it is rejected by the committee, you can come here. This has just been abrupt and I do not know whether members have understood it. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to seek guidance from you. Here we are making the law and the committee looked at it. Now as you are making the law and something comes up which could make the law better, should we abandon it? 

THE CHAIRMAN: What do our rules say? You see, this is not something which just came as a result of a debate but definitely the honourable member had this amendment in his mind when we started the process. I am only saying that in this case, what you do is to write it down. The rules actually say that amendments should start with the committee. You go to the committee, if the committee rejects the amendment, you can bring it here. 

The point I was making is that if you have an amendment, why don’t you put it down in writing so that we can see it? If I can ask you now, hon. Mafabi, what is the amendment he has mentioned? Can you draft it for us? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: What I understand the amendment to be saying is –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, can you tell us what he has said? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, I can say it. 

THE CHAIRMAN: What has he said?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: He is saying that we should add (i) to take into consideration any officer who implements an action, which is contrary to the policies and laws. That is what he is trying to say. 

THE CHAIRMAN: He said many things; he even used the term “omission” but I have not heard you mentioning it. Anyway, I am not blocking your amendment. I am saying that in future if you have such an amendment, you help the House appreciate it if you put it in writing. Hon. Members, you have heard the amendment; I put the question to it.

(Question put and negatived.)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Chairman. I would like to propose that we amend clause 2(c)  to read as follows: “The diversion or use by a public official for purposes unrelated to those for which they were intended for his or her own benefit or that of a third party of any movable or immovable property, vehicles, monies or securities.” That is my proposal. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Is that clear? Is it okay? I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I also want to add an amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Which number? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: On that same one but since that is (i), I want to add (j) to read: “Any person who misuses time” –(Laughter)– okay let me mention it again. I want you to listen to this and appreciate it. You are supposed to be in office at 9.00 a.m. and you come at 10.00 a.m. and one hour has been lost -(Interjections)- I am referring to officers; MPs if you want to be exempted, you can move your own clause. So I am saying, “Anybody who misuses time”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then say, “negligence of duty” maybe that will be simple. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, anybody who negligently – (Laughter)- any public official who neglects duty. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Say neglect of duty. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: “Any public official who neglects duty”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes. So, hon. Members there is a proposal to amend clause 2 to include “neglect of duty.” 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.     

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to add (c) to read: “Any person who provides personal, inside information”. I will give an example. We have budgeted Shs 1 million for an activity and for you to be able to tender and get it, you quote either Shs 1 million or slightly less. This is inside information because the persons inside are aware. So, I am talking about any person who trades inside information for whichever purpose or gain. 

MR MENHYA: Mr Chairman, I want to appreciate the views of my colleague but on page 10, clause 4(a); I think that has been catered for. If I may read it for him, it says: “A person who with intent to obtain from any public body a contract for performing any work, providing any service, doing anything or supplying any article, material or substance offers any gratification to any person who has made a tender of the contract as an inducement or a reward for his or her withdrawing the tender.” I think that has been catered for.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I had seen that one; it is for the one tendering. Here I have inside information. Trading inside information is a criminal act so we must provide that anybody who trades inside information is corrupt. 

THE CHAIRMAN: You mean inside information to enable the other one win a tender?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Exactly. It is a good one OB. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I thought that what he is saying is that there is crucial information that may determine the award of contracts. So what you do because you are in the know, you pass that information to one firm while you do not pass it to the others. That is why we have said “to the prejudice of others.”

But hon. Members, whenever you want to move amendments, it is better to write them down. Otherwise, you will be accused of wasting time. 

MR OTEKAT: I think this clause is about conniving between two tenderers. It is not about the conniving of information and all that. It is about two tenderers conniving and one withdrawing for the benefit of the other.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, it is not saying that. Inside information means somebody is working in an institution which is inviting bids for tenders and one officer, because he knows what will help them to determine the winner of the tender, supplies that information to that person to the exclusion of other people. That is the case he is talking about. Is that not the case?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, (b) on page 10 of the Bill refers to a person who solicits or accepts. My interpretation is that to give inside information, it must have been solicited -(Interjections)- this is page 10 of the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, it could be solicited but it may not. I give that information to him because when he wins the tender, he will give me something. It may be solicited or it may not, but I do it because I expect benefits from the successful tender.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Chairman, I do believe hon. Mafabi has a very strong point, and I would wish that members use this opportunity to tighten this proposed law so that we really do make progress. I commend that.

THE CHAIRMAN: We are just working out the formulation. (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_) Are you improving it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am saying “any person”. Of course, I am suggesting this so that the draftsman improves it. 

THE CHAIRMAN: You cannot say “any person” because if I am not working for an organisation but I get to know the crucial information and I pass it on, you cannot charge me. It must be a person employed in an organisation. He must be a public officer. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am saying a person who provides inside information to enable a person win a tender commits an offence.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

THE CHAIRMAN: I am not going to allow any amendments. Because I allowed them in one instance, it should not become a routine. It is not fair. The rules are very clear. 

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, in clause 6, the word “funds” is just a component of an asset. We should add “and or other assets” because funds is an asset and yet we are looking at money. Maybe we can say “diversion of public resources for purposes ….”

THE CHAIRMAN: It is wider than funds. I put the question on the proposed amendment. (Mr Euku rose_) No, let us dispose of this one, unless you are improving it.

MR OTEKAT: Mr Chairman, I would like to thank my colleague for bringing up that issue, but I want to raise this in consonance with what hon. Alaso had mentioned earlier on 2(c). I thought we would also put here under diversion of public funds, “a person who uses, converts, transfers and disposes of public funds for purposes unrelated to that for which the funds were intended.”

THE CHAIRMAN: We agreed on resources.

MR OTEKAT: Yes, resources. However, that person might use the funds for his or her own use.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if we want to deter corruption, a penalty should not be something which someone can get away with. If you look at 1, it says ten years or 250 currency points; 250 currency points is Shs 5 million, which is very little. When we were making the National Audit Act, we moved 12 years for the auditor and 5,000 currency points; 5,000 currency points is equivalent to at least Shs 100 million. This would deter people from doing these things.

So, I want to propose “not exceeding 12 years” and “not exceeding 5,000 currency points”. The reason is to deter any person from committing this kind of crime.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, are you increasing the punishment?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Chairman and minister, is it okay? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BETTY AMONGI: Mr Chairman, the general provision of penalties here is that the discretion is being left entirely to the judge. I am proposing, as the committee proposed in one of the clauses on embezzlement, we introduce the principle of imprisonment of “not less than” and “not exceeding”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you prescribing the minimum and the maximum?

MS AMONGI: Yes, as a principle because it is only the maximum on this particular one. On 10, I am proposing imprisonment not less than four years.

THE CHAIRMAN: Have we come to 10? Which 10?

MS AMONGI: 12. I am proposing -

THE CHAIRMAN: Which part of the clause? We are dealing with clause 9.

MS AMONGI: Yes, in clause 9, it is 10 years. I think he has amended it to 12 years. So, I want a minimum of not less than four years.

THE CHAIRMAN: which one?

MS AMONGI: This is clause 9(1) to read: “… is liable on conviction to a term of imprisonment not less than four years and not exceeding 12 years or a fine –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, the proposal made by hon. Amongi is good but there is a problem. This is why you see across many laws, we do not provide for the minimum. What you may have in mind is that a person has been convicted and at least should have a minimum of that punishment, but you forget that by curtailing the discretion of the court, the judge may actually see that the punishment should be lower but sees that his hands or her hands are tied so what he will do then is to completely acquit. Therefore, the best is to leave the discretion with the court so that he sees an appropriate punishment commensurate with the gravity of the matter. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to seek clarification from the Attorney-General. Conflict of interest is a very bad thing in our lives. This means you have put others at a disadvantage and to deter this, so that nobody thinks about it, you must have a minimum. So you will go in knowing that you will get a minimum of four years. If you are ready to go for four years, you do it. If you are not ready, you do not do it.

We want to fight corruption. We agree corruption has been around, like one of my colleagues said, since Adam and Eve’s time, but we must stop it because we cannot bring back Adam and Eve now. To stop it we must deal with it now. So I propose that the Attorney-General -

THE CHAIRMAN: I think what he is saying is that the judge should not be seen as if he is a robot. He should be left with some discretion. That is the principle. I think let us accept the Attorney-General’s idea.

MR EUKU: Mr Chairman, I still have some concerns on clause 9, line 3 where we have the immediate family. I propose that we amend it to read “family relations” so that we cover other family members that do not fall under the immediate family. So it will read: “… or his family relations” not “immediate family”.

THE CHAIRMAN: The problem is here in my area. Hon. Sebaggala belongs to a certain clan and in that clan there could be 1,000 or more women or girls, and those are sisters, and 1,000 or more boys who are brothers. Is that how you want to treat this one? That is why I think they restricted it to immediate family. Otherwise, it becomes a problem. Let us accept it as it is. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, this is not really an amendment. Since we have moved the amendment on penalties, then they should go in the same order of apportioning. Where there is 250, it becomes 5,000 and where there is 72 it becomes 1,000. We want to move it in the order of the penalty and the years.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it accepted that we run this figure throughout the Bill?

PROF. KAMUNTU: My difficulty with spontaneous proposals for amendments is that it is very difficult to establish consistency throughout the Bill as it is being debated on the Floor of the House. So I would suggest that we go by your ruling. Otherwise, we shall find after the Bill is passed, a lot of difficulty and contradictions.

THE CHAIRMAN: You see the circumstances may really be different. Running it throughout the Bill may not be fair. I put the question.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to add at the end “associates”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Please read it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: it reads: “… for religion or ethnic group -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, 12 says, “A person, being the holder of an office, does any act in connection with the office for the purpose of doing a favour or offering undue advantage to any person on the basis of that person’s religion or sect, ethnic group or place of origin commits an offence.” What do you want to add?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I wanted to put after ethnic group, “place of origin or an associate.” what I am trying to bring out here is that he may not be from those groups. I am from Bugisu but I associate with hon. Kamuntu from Bushenyi and I can act sectarian for Kamuntu and then Kamuntu does it for me. 

THE CHAIRMAN: So, what do you want to add?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am adding “associate” in the group.

THE CHAIRMAN: Associate?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We can associate as we are together. We can become associates but I –(Interruption)

MR MENHYA: Mr Chairman, I think that has been catered for in “favour”. If you read it, it says, “A person who being the holder of an office does any act in connection with the office for the purpose of doing a favour ….” It has been catered for under that.

THE CHAIRMAN: We have a problem of an associate; who is my associate and in which way? Do not make the law very difficult at enforcement otherwise you may be defeated.

MR SEBAGGALA: I would like to know whether we can include “political party”. (Laughter) Yes, because someone might be from my party and because the other one is from the yellow party, he is denied access. Why don’t we add “political party” or “place of origin”?

THE CHAIRMAN: Does it mean that you cannot give something to somebody with whom you have the same religion? Do you really say because we belong to the same religion therefore I cannot see you, or we come from Kalangala or Masaka and I cannot deal with you?

MR SEBAGGALA: Clause 12 talks about sectarianism and there is no way we can leave out political parties and religion here. 

THE CHAIRMAN: So you must only deal with strangers? You have no business with people you know; it must be strangers?

MRS RWAKIMARI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think this law is going to contradict the principle of balancing regions, religions and other aspects. When the President is appointing ministers and other people in high offices, he normally considers balancing religions, regions and other things. If we put it into law, isn’t it going to contradict that principle of balancing various aspects in this country?

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the consoling provision here is that for him to be liable, you must prove undue advantage. The onus is on you to say, “What I did was undue influence to enable him ….” It is not the fact that he is of my religion and tribe but I must say that it was undue influence. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We have accepted now, but what happens if somebody does it indirectly. I think to be able to tie this sectarianism we should look at it both directly and indirectly. What am I saying here? I am a Protestant and I want to do a favour for my Bishop; I ask my colleague in another place to do it for me and I will also ask him to send his to me and I do the same for him. To tighten this rope very well, we must say “directly or indirectly” and we shall have captured all those corners.

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, the more you complicate this law, the more failures you will encounter. That evidence is not easy to get and you will become frustrated. I would rather we leave that provision as it is.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13

MR ARUMADRI: I would like the Attorney-General to advise me on this. In light of the recent debates we have been having in the House about sectarianism and nepotism is it possible to apply this law retrospectively? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: The answer is: constitutionally, no. It cannot. 

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

MS ALASO: I would like to propose at the heading, a provision for un-authorised or fraudulent administration of oath. The reason being we have come across instances where an entity is authorised to commission oaths but they commission an oath of a non existing person.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then there is no agreement.

MS ALASO: I am saying they should be held accountable. I will give you an example. We ended up in court over such a matter and the judge said he wanted to award us costs but the person who was purported to have sworn the affidavit was non existent. 

THE CHAIRMAN: That is not un-authorised because if there is no person who has made an oath, there is no oath. There is a difference between a forged document and this. You bring in an affidavit in the name of Ssekandi when Ssekandi has not done it and you want to use it - that is tendering forged documents because you are drafting me in a document when I am not there.

MS ALASO: I beg your indulgence that I explain this a little further. My situation is where this person has the authority to commission oaths, then somehow that entity comes up with documents purported to have been commissioned authoritatively and genuinely. So you end up in court with something from Wadri and Advocates whom you know are commissioners of oaths purporting that Alaso actually went in and swore an affidavit.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is a false document.

MS ALASO: But I would like something that helps me hold Wadri and Advocates as fraudulent.

THE CHAIRMAN: But there is a way of handling that one. We need not do it here because first of all, authorisation to witnessing must be personal. It is not a firm. It is Ssekandi. There is no firm which takes oath of somebody. It must be an individual and he puts his stamp and name. If this has not been done by an authorised person, it is not an affidavit and it is of no consequence. I know what you are talking about but that was not an oath. 

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to put real sanctions in clause 17. There are people who impersonate our President and this is very dangerous. My suggestion is that anybody who impersonates the President should be given a punishment of imprisonment not exceeding 12 years or 5000 currency points. This is intended to deter this activity completely.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, what do you want us to do?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: What I am saying is that the punishment for that offence should read: “Not exceeding twelve years and not exceeding 5000 currency points.” The objective is to deter that act completely. 

THE CHAIRMAN: What is 5,000 currency points in shillings?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is Shs 100 million. When anybody thinks about 12 years and Shs 100 million, they will not do it. Mr Chairman, do you like people who impersonate?

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, no.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If that is the case, then let us pass this punishment.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, more than anybody else, you can guide the House when it comes to the proportion of the offence to the punishment. That will guide us in determining whether what is being proposed in this Bill is not adequate to address the anxieties of hon. Mafabi. I have always been advised by lawyers that every punishment should be in proportion to the crime. What is proposed in this Bill is 72 currency points or imprisonment of three years. I feel this is grave enough.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, 72 currency points is only Shs 1.4 million.

THE CHAIRMAN: But is that little money? Do you think a person who impersonates the President is a man of means? He is not! This could be a sweeper who puts on a doctor’s gown.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we are saying, “not exceeding”, which means the judge can even talk of zero currency points.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, and we should leave that to the discretion of the judge. The judge will decide according to the circumstances. 

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19

MR MENHYA: Mr Chairman, the committee wishes to propose an amendment to clause 19. Our proposal is that the last paragraph of clause 19 should read as follows: “…commits an offence and is liable on conviction, to a term of imprisonment of not less than five years and not exceeding 25 years, or a fine of not less than 120 currency points and not exceeding 600 currency points, or both such imprisonment and fine.” The justification is to make the sentence more deterrent.

THE CHAIRMAN: That is what the Attorney-General was saying; you can restrict the maximum sentence but you cannot restrict the judge’s discretion on the minimum sentence. According to him, that is not good practice in the judicial system.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, allow me seek a clarification from the chairman of the committee. Does this penalty include refunding what has been embezzled?

MR MENHYA: Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member that what he is raising has already been catered for under confiscation. Your concerns are well catered for in the Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If that is the case, Mr Chairman, you recall that earlier we moved from 10 to 12 years with 5000 currency points. Now that this is 14 years, I suggest that the currency points be 6000.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, so long as you do not deal with the minimum, the court will be able to. So what figure are you suggesting?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am suggesting that the currency points become 6,000 with 14 years.

THE CHAIRMAN: How much is 6,000 currency points in terms of shillings?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is Shs 12 million.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Chairman, I would like to support the proposal by hon. Nandala-Mafabi because this is only the maximum. So depending on the gravity of the crime, the judge can work it downwards with that scalability from Shs 12 million to even Shs 5,000.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, how much do you think it should be?

MR ODUMAN: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Recently when we were handling some Bill in the Committee of Finance, we were told that there is some law that guides the relationship between the currency points and the years of imprisonment. I do not know whether we could be guided by that law.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, what do we do Attorney-General?

MR RUHINDI: I am not quite sure what the honourable member is referring to but the idea of evolving this schedule or such schedules is to give delegated powers to the responsible minister as appropriate, to amend the schedule. When you look through this Bill, you realise that this is provided for under clause 67. It says: “The minister responsible for justice may, by statutory instrument and with the approval of Cabinet, amend the schedule to this Act.” The other law, which we passed here, and which you may wish to look at in terms of fines and penalties, is the Law Revision, Fines and Other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters Act of 2008. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don’t we leave it as it is? Since the minister has the powers, he can adjust it as circumstances may dictate. I am saying this because we have no scientific method that we are going to use to do any adjustments. I think let us leave it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, in some clause we passed 12 years and 5,000 currency points. Now this is 14 years –

THE CHAIRMAN: What is 5,000? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is Shs 100 million. You multiply by 20,000. The 20,000 is determined by the Minister of Finance.

THE CHAIRMAN: What do we do? You have no scientific methods you are using to enhance this. Why do we disturb it? We have no scientific methods.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Actually, I want to agree with you that as much we want to increase these fines to deter offenders, we cannot proceed this way unless you refer this Bill to the committee such that we analyse these fines. Otherwise, if we just skip others and increase others, we shall make a very bad law.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think we should leave these fines as they are. Since the minister has the power, they will assess the situation. Otherwise we are just being arbitrary. 

COL. (RTD) BUTIME: Mr Chairman, we are talking about embezzlement. You cannot know now how much money this embezzlement involved. It may have involved Shs 5 billion. Of course it will be at the discretion of the judge, but for us we would like to make it as difficult and as frightening as possible. So, that is why I go for Shs 120 million so that you just die. That will be frightening and nobody will attempt to do this. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but there must be a method. It is not what you feel is big. Otherwise, we will become arbitrary.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to seek guidance from you. We are saying here, “not exceeding 14 years” but if I convert the money, it becomes “not exceeding Shs 7.2 million”. Surely, Shs 7.2 million for a man who has embezzled one million, put it on fixed deposit and gained more than that in interest! We must really deter this man.

THE CHAIRMAN: You see there are other methods of recovering what you have embezzled. Those measures are there. Imagine 14 years; it is not a joke. (Laughter)

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, also to note is that the presiding judge or magistrate can put you in for the maximum 14 years or fine you that much money or do both. He can put you in but you also pay this money so that the money is recovered. What is not frightening and threatening about that?

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to. 

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.
Clause 26

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Chairman, I want to introduce a new clause 26 before the sub-heading to cater for habitual committing of offences of corruption, to read as follows -(Interjections)- it is against somebody who commits the offence of corruption continuously. For example, one who is convicted of embezzlement and perhaps serves his time and pays his fine but then commits another crime the next time. 

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, after one has been convicted of an offence, the prosecutor will come in and say that he is a first offender. If he is not a first offender, the court will be informed so that the judge or the court takes into account the fact that this person is not a first offender. This also influences the judge’s decision on whether it should be 10,000 or 20,000. This is normal. It is done.

Actually, if you do not have a record, the sentence may not come. They might say, “Give us time so that we get the records.” When the records come, the court is appraised of this record.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Chairman, the reason I want -

THE CHAIRMAN: This is what they call mitigation. You say, “I am a first offender and I am sorry for what I have done.” This is also taken into account when deciding whether to give you a light sentence or a heavy sentence.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Let me get a clarification on whether in those circumstances the penalty increases. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes.

MS BETTY AMONGI: That is the reason I wanted the penalty to be much more.

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, we might have committed a similar offence but because I am a habitual offender I will get a heavier sentence than you who is a first offender. 

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31

MR MENHYA: Mr Chairman, I propose that on clause 31 we delete the expression, “…or an authorised officer may investigate or …” which appears in the second line of sub-clause (1).

The justification is for consistency with Article 120(3)(a) of the Constitution which mandates the DPP to direct investigations, and Article 230 of the Constitution which gives the IGG powers to investigate or cause investigations.

THE CHAIRMAN: So when you delete it what happens?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I seek clarification from the chairman of the committee; where do you place the Director CID since all investigations which the DPP handles -

THE CHAIRMAN: Those are officers acting for the DPP because eventually when they carry out investigations, their reports are submitted to the DPP for perusal and advice.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, what I am saying is that since we have included the DPP, we should also include the Director, CID here.

THE CHAIRMAN: As I have said, the director works for DPP - so have you internalised the amendment? So I put the question -

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, before you put the question, I would like to understand the chairperson of the committee. If you say we delete Inspector-General of Government and Director of Prosecutions then what happens? Because I thought the spirit here is to re-emphasise the fact that they have the mandate to do all. If we delete them at that level, do we still have anybody who would cause an investigation?

THE CHAIRMAN: What harm is there in leaving this provision there? It says, “Inspector-General of Government” and we know who that is under the Constitution; “the Director of Public Prosecutions” and we know him as he is created under the Constitution, and “all authorised officers” that is those authorised by either the Inspector General of Government or Director of Public Prosecutions. What harm does this do if it continues to be there? That means that they can authorise somebody to carry out investigations on their behalf. Is there any harm in that?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, there is harm. I have now known that the people who are supposed to carry out investigations include the DPP and IGG. If you put, “an authorised person”, who is this officer? Somebody can authorise someone on the street -

THE CHAIRMAN: No, when we say “authorised” let us not be negative. He is authorised by the DPP so that you don’t say, “You are not the DPP or the IGG”. He can say, “I am authorised by the DPP to investigate”.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If we leave it here, even the Director ISO can also be an authorised person so we should do what the Constitution says that is Inspector-General of Government and Director of Public Prosecutions.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I think I agree with you because clause 31 does not contradict, for instance, 120 or 230. 120(3) of the Constitution says: “The functions of the Director of Public Prosecutions are the following:
(a)	To direct the Police to investigate any information of a criminal nature and to report to him or her expeditiously ….”

The power to direct and to investigate, these are two different mandates. What this clause is saying is that the Inspector-General of Government or the Director of Public Prosecutions or an authorised officer may investigate. It is not the power to direct, which is with the Inspector-General of Government or the Director of Public Prosecutions. So there are no contradictions in my opinion.

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, my problem here is not about the DPP or the IGG or the powers they have to direct. My problem is this person who is authorised and cannot be specified. Because I think that if you are authorised by the DPP, you fall under the official and known categories. I fear that this aspect of the law will be subjected to abuse if anybody is going to wake up claiming to be authorised. Let us be specific. Can’t the committee or the minister tell us who the authorised people are just like we have mentioned the DPP and IGG in the law? Let us mention them but to leave it vague is subject to abuse.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, the reason you don’t specify is that there could be many people authorised to carry out work for the IGG or DPP. What matters is, have you got authority from the right person that is the IGG or DPP. If one poses, that is a different matter but we assume that there is authorisation from the DPP or IGG but you cannot specify because it is not one person.

MS AMUGE: Mr Chairman, if you look at page 4 under interpretation, they have defined the authorised officer. Maybe you could look at that.

THE CHAIRMAN: Authorised officer means a police officer not below the rank of Assistant Inspector -General authorised in writing by the Inspector-General of Police or an inspectorate officer – this is a common term for these people. I think we should leave it. I propose that clause 31 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, I want to include under clause 31(b), an amendment after asset to say, “All those that he or she has personal interest in.” Personal interest is defined as including where the person has interest. In this section it includes the personal interest of a spouse, child, dependant, agent, business.

It is because most of this illicit enrichment is hidden under children, dependants and spouses that I want that this investigation also be authorised in circumstances where -

THE CHAIRMAN: What are you reading?

MS AMONGI: I am reading clause 31(b) which says, “Is in control or possession of peculiar resources or property disproportionate to his or her current or past known sources of income or assets” and I want to add, “All those that he or she has personal interest in…” to cater for the fact that if there is suspicion that this illicit enrichment is hidden under the spouse, children or dependants as defined here, it can also be investigated.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is the present formulation not enough for carrying out investigations and to cover even those?

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, to support the point being raised by hon. Amongi, if you reflect back to what the UN report on the plundering of resources in the Congo said, there was mention of a seven-year-old boy who was the registered owner of a plane, which was used for ferrying resources. And you know for sure a seven-year-old boy cannot own a plane; that plane was owned by somebody else. How will that be reflected?

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, this is a big umbrella under (b). They have not said that you must be a grown up man or an old man or child. So once they know you have this plane, first they will find out whether you are in control or possession of an aeroplane; what is his background? What was he doing that enabled him to do this? This is sufficient to investigate even those children. 

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, the age of criminal responsibility in this country is 12 years. If I am seven years, I cannot be investigated. I cannot be arraigned in court because I am below the age of criminal responsibility.

THE CHAIRMAN: That is different. Arraigning you or taking you to prison does not mean that we do not investigate you. You have a current account with Shs 1 million, where did you get it from? It will be in your name; you are seven years of age; how did you get it? Definitely, this is enough to investigate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If you look at (b): “His or her current or past …” That is the person. Now what the Chief Whip, hon. Wadri is bringing is like I have a child who is seven years; that is not him now, it is me. So the child must appear here and that is what they are bringing. 

THE CHAIRMAN: No, it is not necessary to investigate. The parent will be there and will be able to answer the questions. It is not necessary; we are not writing compositions. (Laughter)

DR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Chairman, not only is it necessary but 31(3) really provides for that concern that the honourable members have. It talks about relatives and those people to suspect. I think it provides for that.

THE CHAIRMAN: So I put the question that clause 31 do stand part of the Bill.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34

MR MENHYA: Mr Chairman, I wish to propose an amendment to clause 34 to delete the expression, “Or an Inspector-General of Government” appearing in the second line of sub-clause (1). The justification is for consistence with Article 230(2) which gives the Inspector-General of Government powers to make orders necessary and appropriate in the exercise of its function. 

THE CHAIRMAN: So you say the Inspector-General does not need the court; suppose he or she wants to use the court rather than his or her chambers? Because this is saying: “A court may, upon application by the DPP or IGG, issue an order basing restriction as they appear to the court to be reasonable on the revelation of any bank account as the accused person ….” You see, they are in court and maybe the proceedings have been taken there by the IGG and he or she finds that there is a need to appear in court. This is what is here.

MR MENHYA: Mr Chairman, I concede and I think we should proceed. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I propose that clause 34 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35

MR EUKU: Mr Chairman, I propose that clause 35(2) be deleted because when the property is sold and the proceeds may be more than what someone has taken, giving back part of the proceeds that will remain will not make us restrain the act of corruption. So I believe that the proposal stands so that we really restrain the act of corruption.

THE CHAIRMAN: The clause is dealing with compensation; compensations are determined because of what you have done. For instance, you have lost 100 million and so they sell your property. If the property is fetching 200 million, what will be the extra 100 million for? You have to return it to the owner. It is the same thing with the court proceedings. When there is execution of a warrant and a house is sold or a vehicle is sold, any extra amount beyond that sum required has to be given to the owner. I propose that clause 35 do stand part of the Bill.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, in clause 36(2) they are saying that a police officer or a special investigator; where is this special investigator coming from? Because we have known an authorized person who is a police officer and we have no special investigator. So we have to delete “special investigator”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Having agreed that we leave “a person authorized,” we cannot contradict ourselves by deleting this one; we have to take it. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, what I mean is not that the “authorized person” - we are saying a “special investigator”. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, that is what it means, instead of repeating it there.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  No.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think this formulation is proper in law. As I said, we are not writing English compositions; we are dealing with law.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, clause 50, which we have not reached, talks about appointment of special investigators. So there is a provision of pointing out who they are. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I propose that clause 36 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38

MR OBUA OGWAL: Mr Chairman, as it is now, this clause leaves us hanging because it is not time bound. Supposing somebody takes eternity to provide that information, when do you consider that he has defied the request to give such information? 

THE CHAIRMAN: If a person is required by a police officer or a special investigator to give information on a subject: “It is the police officer’s or special investigator’s duty to inquire into under these circumstances and shall be legally bound to give that information.” It means that if the person who is investigating thinks that you have the information, he calls you or he comes to you and you are obliged to give the information. It may not be helpful but you give the information which you have.

MR OBUA OGWAL: Mr Chairman, if such information is very important for the investigation and there is over delay, there is a possibility that evidence can be tampered with.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, you may say “I have lost memory; some facts I do not know.” (Laughter) But you give those facts. He may be disappointed that the information you are expected to have, you do not have it or it is very poor and it is not helpful, but you give only the information that you have.

MR SEBAGGALA: On clause 37(4), Mr Chairman -

THE CHAIRMAN: No, we are on 38. I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Chairman, I want to propose that the period be increased from 10 to 14 years. The justification is that 10 years is short a period. You will agree with me that if a public officer commits an offence at the age of 20 or 25, from prison he is 30 years and is contesting for elections. So the country will be having big people with a very bad history. So 14 years is a good period.

THE CHAIRMAN: The other day, I was listening to a speech by Dr Byabashaija, the Inspector of Prisons. He was talking about the purpose of prisons; it is correction, rehabilitation. Do not condemn somebody simply because he was imprisoned for a long time. Otherwise, you make him desperate and then he may do other things so when he is released, he has no hope, he has nothing.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, I agree with you and I just want to mention that the laws we make are doubled-edged swords. I am referring to clause 46, 10 years from conviction. I am saying that we should be very fair knowing that the laws we make are very double-edged. Those who are pushing like holier-than-thou heavy punishments, you might fall the first victims of these laws that you are making! Consequently, your advice is pertinent, that the prisons sentences should aim at reforming rather than making people more desperate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman under the Leadership Code, Article 235, “Parliament will prescribe the period for which a public officer will never be appointed to an elective post.” This is for appointment.

What I want to seek the clarification on is that there is also 235(a) Leadership Code tribunal. I think as Parliament we will not put the Leadership Code to tribunal as yet and this is quite important and I think it is the one which should be able to prescribe the period of –

THE CHAIRMAN: I think for the time being -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So for the time being, to deter people as hon. Nsubuga has said, let us put 14 years so that maybe it will force them quickly to put the Leadership Code tribunal.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Nandala, I appeal to you to leave this as it is. Do not make people desperate. By making them desperate, they can do other things. I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I am proposing a deletion of clause 47.

THE CHAIRMAN: Deletion? Why?

MS ALASO: Yes, because I think that officers who are on duty should act such that they do things the right way. I do not want a situation created where somebody for instance goes and shoots a suspect and then he thinks that he is protected by the law. We are supposed to be not guilty until court proves otherwise. I get the impression that the import of clause 47 is that you can do anything as long as you have been authorised. Like there was a time in this House where some people were reported to have been collecting taxes in Arua and they shot people. Somebody can say it was in good faith.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Alaso, this formulation here is very common in very many laws that protect people who carry out public functions but somehow make a mistake or cause damage. They are protected, even in the Constitution. And the operating part of the formulation is in good faith. It is not only in this Bill, but in many laws. This is put there for protection. I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, this clause is dealing with exemption from prosecution. I am wondering whether it would be okay to add “or the validity of a leader who has immunity and privileges,” because there are circumstances where we have complaints, like now I have in Apac, where there is a corruption case on a magistrate but because of such privileges - there are certain categories of people who have some immunities and privileges. I am wondering whether we can add, “or by validity of his or her immunity or privileges.”

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I think this provision is talking about a public officer but should it happen that I was invalidly appointed in an office but it was carried out, you cannot say I was invalidly elected there. That is the aim of this provision. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: This is a good one. But what about those who are validly elected? For example, I have been a CAO, I have mismanaged the district and I am now a Member of Parliament that is validly elected.

THE CHAIRMAN: It does not cover you; you will be charged. I put the question that clause 48 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49, agreed to.

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51

MR MENHYA: I propose an amendment to renumber clause 51 to read as 51(1) and insert new sub-clause (2) to cater for territorial jurisdiction.

“(2) The High Court shall have jurisdiction to try offences where:
a)	A national of Uganda or a body incorporated under the laws of Uganda does anything in a country or territory outside Uganda; and
b)	The act would if done in Uganda constitute an offence under section 2.”

The justification is to ensure criminalising corrupt acts when committed wholly or partially in Uganda.

THE CHAIRMAN: If committed partially, there is no problem because he will have committed it in Uganda. But the Attorney-General can assist us.

MR RUHINDI: I am not quite clear about the amendment whether it imports in elements of extradition because under normal cross-border jurisdiction, we normally apply the rules of extradition. A person has got to be extradited and there must be an arrangement between the two states but if a person has committed an offence in Mombasa and you want to try him here, that is not possible. But if an offence is committed here and he goes to Mombasa, then we can actually apply extradition arrangements between the two states.

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, I want to share with you an experience I earned from a delegate from Malaysia when we met at a conference in the last Parliament.   Malaysia made a very firm stand to fight the evil of corruption and one of the stands they took is that if Wadri went to Congo and was charged with corrupt acts in Congo and convicted by the courts of Congo, even if I serve there my sentence in prison, upon discharge when I return to Uganda, Uganda will be waiting for me –(Interjections)- yes, you need to interest yourself especially the Attorney-General needs to link up with his colleagues in Malaysia. It may seem double punishment for the same offence but it works. Yes it is double jeopardy. You may be convicted, you serve your sentence and you walk free, but on the part of your country, they ask you to refund whatever you fraudulently obtained. 

I would like the Attorney-General to interest himself in this case so that you can enrich our law-making process here. How is it happening in Malaysia which is a commonwealth country and what is our situation? How best can we learn from that country? I side with the recommendation of the committee chair.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: In this era of electronic fraud, some of the crimes may be committed outside Uganda. I could access a website or a bank in another country. How will you take care of such offences? Unless the committee rephrases it to make it clear that if you did that it will be considered as having committed an offence in the laws of Uganda.

THE CHAIRMAN: It will be different; you may be in London and you are committing an offence here. If there is evidence that you did, you will return and they charge you because the offence was committed here. But committing an offence in Mombasa and expecting that offence to be charged here - our Constitution does not provide for that. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: There are many of our Ugandans who are involved in issues like drugs and the reason they cannot bring them to serve sentences here is because we do not have a law for that. If we make this law here, it will help people like our friend in London whom they caught with some pounds. He would be brought here and his family would visit him because even a prisoner needs the family people to see him.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, already before the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, there is a Bill on transfer of convicted persons or offenders. And this is based on the commonwealth scheme which is partly applied but we want to have it strengthened and it is also strengthened by the Prisons Act that we passed here some time back. In fact, as I speak, because a section of the Prisons Act partly allows for an arrangement which is already in place between this government and the United Kingdom to have about 81 convicted Ugandans in the UK brought and they complete their sentences here in Uganda. Even the UK Government has agreed to improve certain facilities for our prisons services. So I want to assure the Members that we already have a Bill which will be coming for debate before this Parliament shortly.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: In this law you are talking of the High Court, but we have the anti-corruption court; where is it? 

THE CHAIRMAN: The anti-corruption court is the High Court. It is a division.    

DR BARYOMUNSI: I just want to seek clarification. If I left here and I went to our embassy in Nairobi and I solicited a bribe there, does it mean I cannot be charged in this country? I thought the import of this provision by the committee is that if I go to Nairobi, for instance, and solicit a bribe there, I can still be charged here on return. I thought the amendment is proper. 

THE CHAIRMAN: The courts in Nairobi will try you. I put the question that clause 51 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52, agreed to.

Clause 53, agreed to.

Clause 54, agreed to.

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 56, agreed to.

Clause 57, agreed to.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

Clause 60, agreed to.

Clause 61, agreed to.

Clause 62, agreed to.

Clause 63, agreed to.

Clause 64, agreed to.

Clause 65, agreed to.

Clause 66, agreed to.

Clause 67

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the Minister of Justice has no authority over this schedule because this is talking about currency points and this is for the Minister of Finance. So this should be deleted -(Interjections)- but even if it is with approval, they are saying the Minister of Justice but it is the responsibility of the Minister of Finance. We have even made laws like that.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Chairman, that is not correct. The standard practice is that the minister responsible for that sector is the one who may amend the schedule as need arises.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But the schedule we are talking about -

THE CHAIRMAN: But since it is in Cabinet, they will have their internal arrangement and it should not worry you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The currency point is equivalent to Shs 20,000. The schedule we are talking about is the schedule of financial obligation and that schedule is the responsibility of the Minister of Finance. I do not want us to make a law for the sake of it. 

THE CHAIRMAN: So what do we do? This Bill passed through Cabinet.

MR RUHINDI: My purpose is not to arrogate myself to the extent where hon. Mafabi would not like to see me. But we have passed a number of laws and this is crosscutting. These are matters to do with penalties and the person charged with the sector of penalties, justice, fines and so on and so forth is the Minister responsible for Justice. We passed here a law Revision of Fines and other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters Act, 2008 and the minister responsible for all this and the amendment of the schedules is the Minister responsible for Justice. Are we deviating from what we have already done and for good reasons?

THE CHAIRMAN: I do not think we should go on with this. The schedule and work of ministers is given by the President not by us and this we know passed through the Cabinet and he gave that schedule to the Minister of Justice. Then why should we be confused? They agreed.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Chairman, I have had the privilege of presenting Bills here and I know that the standard practice is for the sector minister in conjunction with the Minister of Finance to handle this aspect. May I say that perhaps in hindsight we should have defined what we mean by minister –

THE CHAIRMAN: We are going back to clause 1. 

MR MUGAMBE: This type of schedule as hon. Mafabi is pointing out is different from other schedules we have handled. This one is defining what a currency point is equivalent to.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but hon. Mugambe, will Parliament decide the schedule for ministers? Is it our function?

MR MUGAMBE: At first we passed what a currency point is equivalent to. It used to be Shs 20,000 but we later on increased it to Shs 200,000 –(Interjections)- unless every ministry has got a different value for a current point. Otherwise, what I am saying is that this is a general issue.

THE CHAIRMAN: We may recommend but we cannot decide on it. For example, we may say what we think the value for the currency point should be – that function of assigning duties to ministers is that of the President.

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, I have listened to the explanation that you have given. However, I would like to point out that we are not challenging the schedule of responsibilities given by the President to the ministers; that is his prerogative. All we are saying is, when you define a currency point then who is the person in government supposed to come to Parliament and say that a currency point is worth so much? I would like to say that that should the Minister of Finance. That is all we are saying.

THE CHAIRMAN: You are reasonable, but we are saying that if this were the arrangement, can we change it? You are sounding very reasonable and there are merits in what you are saying – 

MR WADRI: But if this is the document that came from Cabinet and it never saw the reasons of bringing it to us, then why are we here? We are making these changes to help government.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Chairman, I just want to request members to reflect on all the Bills we have passed. I know they will realise that all the miscellaneous have actually been like this. This clause is actually in consonant with the Bills we have been passing. It says in parts: “The Minister responsible for Justice may, by statutory instrument and with the approval of Cabinet ….” The Minister of Finance sits in Cabinet. You cannot tie everything to this minister. The schedule prescribes the currency point as being worth Shs 20,000 unless you just want to know who will prescribe the currency points –(Interjections)– no, it is not like that.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Chairman, I really would like to challenge the Attorney-General to help us. As I said earlier, there is a law that defines the relationship between currency points and years of imprisonment. I remember we were given a copy of that law in our Finance Committee. That law has a provision for the definition of who is authorised to amend the currency points no matter whether it is Shs 20,000 or Shs 30,000. It also says that when such an amendment is done, it affects all the other laws that deal with currency points. I think the Attorney-General needs to assist us.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would like to say that even in the Public Finance and Accountability Act it is very clear that determining the currency point is the responsibility of the Minister of Finance. So where does the Minister of Justice get the authority to bring a statutory instrument to amend the currency points? The moment the Minister of Finance says, for example that each currency point is worth Shs 30,000 it affects all the laws that deal with currency points no matter whether they are in Justice, Defence, but not you.

THE CHAIRMAN: You do not need to be personal.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, the problem I see is for the colleagues to read currency points in isolation as a stand alone activity. You must put the schedule in the context of the law because where you find a penalty, there must be a fine. Somewhere you may find a fine alone without a penalty, but those are very rare cases. In order to understand the magnitude of the currency point, you must understand the magnitude of the penalty as a whole. To be frank with you, if you want to subject the Minister of Finance to that, so be it. Otherwise, I do not think it is prudent. The best is for the responsible minister to harmonise the currency points relating to fines and the actual penalties with the advice of the Minister of Finance.

Under other circumstances of this nature, you find the law saying that the responsible minister should do this in consultation with the Minister of Finance. But this Bill has gone further to provide for the approval of Cabinet where the Minister of Finance sits.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Chairman, I think we are confusing two things. The minister responsible can vary the number of currency points, not the value because that is the responsibility of the Minister of Finance. The responsible minister should decide on the number of currency points varying say from 10 to 20 or 30 because he knows the gravity of the offence.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the formulation in this clause is that this is done in Cabinet. I think this should be sufficient protection for the Minister of Justice not to do things that are outrageous. The Minister of Finance sits in Cabinet – we cannot delete Justice and put Finance.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to seek some clarification –

THE CHAIRMAN: The problem is that we are repeating ourselves. What I said some five minutes ago is what I am saying now. I am sure what you said some 10 minutes ago is what you are going to say on this subject now. You realise that we are handicapped in the sense that when something is passed in Cabinet it becomes difficult for us to change it. We can advise, but changing will be arrogating ourselves duties that do not belong to us.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am standing on the notion that there is no end to a learning process. I therefore, would like to be helped by the Attorney-General to know whether there is a currency point for Ministry of Justice alone; whether there is one for Ministry of Education alone; and whether there is another for Ministry of Health alone. I am asking this because I think in our laws when you talk of currency points, it is standard. A currency point has a standard value. So, if we subject it to different sectors, does it mean that in Justice there is a different value for a currency point with another at Ministry of Education? That is what I would like to learn, Mr Chairman.

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Chairman, this is a mathematical equation. The parameters are assigned by one officer: the Minister of Finance. The ministries of Defence, Education, and Justice must all conform to the parameters that are provided by the Minister of Finance.

THE CHAIRMAN: So if it is causing confusion, you can propose a deletion.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would like to suggest that we either delete or insert that this will be the responsibility of the Minister of Finance. I have seen the Attorney-General quoting the laws, but recently when we made the Trafficking in Persons law here in Parliament, we assigned the currency point to the minister responsible for currency points -(Interjections)- you have come with yours and you are ready. So I think on the issue of a currency point, we should delete 67 to avoid problems.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, Prof. Kamuntu.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairman, the law revision, a copy of which the Attorney-General has given to this House, which defines the financial amounts on criminal matters, also has currency points defined. Let me read it: “A currency point is equal to Shs 20,000 defined ….” 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Who sets it? 

THE CHAIRMAN: Allow him to say what he wants to say.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Why don’t you allow me? I want to warn hon. Mafabi in a friendly manner that these laws we are making are double-edged. 

A currency point is equal to Shs 20,000 defined in the Law Revision on the Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters Act, 2008: “Where the amount in shillings does not translate exactly into currency points, the amount shall be expressed as a fraction of a currency point.”

And in the determination, the difference which I think should be made in the Bill that we are debating, there are different amounts on penalties on conviction of offences committed. So when an offence is committed, currently you are fined 14,000 or 10,000. In order to vary these amounts, it has to be proposed through Cabinet, and then be approved. But the point is as determined by law. The Attorney-General’s advice should be adhered to. That is all. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 67 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 67, agreed to.

Clause 68, agreed to.

Clause 69, agreed to.

Clause 70

MR MENHYA: Mr Chairman, I wish to propose that clause 70 be rephrased to read as follows: “…the Leadership Code Act is amended by: (a) repealing sections 8, 9 and 13.”

The justification is to criminalise any act amounting to loss of public property.

Sub-section (b): consequentially amend section 20, sub-section (3) of the Leadership Code Act to replace five years with 10 years.

The justification is to harmonise with clause 46 of the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 69, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 70, agreed to.

Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN: I propose that Clause 1 stand part of the Bill -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Clause 1 is the definitions.

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you want to add something?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, in the definition of “property” on page 5, I want to include “taxes”. What I mean here is that if somebody does not pay tax he is not different from the one who has taken the tax that has been collected. They are equal. That is the justification for that -(Interruption)

MR MENHYA: Mr Chairman, I wish to go to clause 1 and propose an amendment to the definition of clause 1.

THE CHAIRMAN: Have you finished hon. Nandala?

MR MENHYA: He is on clause 1.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes.

MR MENHYA: But he is talking about property and yet I am talking about -

THE CHAIRMAN: He is on clause 1. 

MR MENHYA: There are two issues to be amended under clause -

THE CHAIRMAN: No. He has his amendment to clause 1.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Chairman, I want to differ with what hon. Nandala is proposing on the following grounds. You will recall that when the Minister of Finance is reading the Budget, he at times uses his discretion and calls taxpayers to declare their tax liability saying, “The moment you declare your tax liability, you will not be penalised.” Arrears are even waived. But in this law that we are about to pass, you cannot declare, “I really embezzled money and now that I have declared myself voluntarily to police -

THE CHAIRMAN: No, but hon. Nandala wanted to add tax. I think that is what he wanted. This is on town property. But isn’t tax money? Isn’t tax a claim by Uganda Revenue Authority? It is. Why don’t you leave it there?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, Mr Chairman. If you are saying that tax is money as well as a claim, I will concede.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But I want to move a further amendment. On page 6, we mention the East African Community. But we also have the African Union and you know that we have people there. So if we are including the East African Community, we must also include the AU and its institutions and corporations. I am saying this because there are staff of ours in the AU and if they are involved in corruption tendencies they must be dealt with - even the UN. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I think let us restrict it to these institutions. So now I think we have disposed of -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have some two small issues. We have talked about enterprises like corporation -

THE CHAIRMAN: Which page is this?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Page 6, but I will start from (d) which says, “District Administration”. Now we have LC I councillors and I want to give an example of NAADS. A person may steal NAADS’ money at LC I and if we leave him out here he will not be charged for corruption. So we should amend (d) to read: “Local Councils”. That means we are covering councils from L C I to LC V.

The second issue is that recently, we allowed the Auditor-General to audit where we have interest. The reason we wanted to audit where we have interest is because we do not want to lose our resources. So, I want to move an amendment that where they say, “Government has controlling interest,” it should be, “… where government has an interest.”

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: I just want to be assisted as to whether -

THE CHAIRMAN: No, where do you want to place it? Let us exhaust one first.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am going to provide the assistance that you wanted to seek. Where government has an interest in the sense that because we have an interest there, any public officer who is or maybe on that board where we have an interest, which is below 51 percent undertakes a racket, which is contrary to our interest must be held for misconduct. This has also been dealt with in the National Audit Act. The purpose of controlling interest is so that where we have invested 20 percent, a person cannot do anything and we are at a loss.  That is the amendment I wanted to move that where we have an interest, the person should be treated as such.

THE CHAIRMAN: But we are talking about a public official. Isn’t that what you are talking about? Where government has no controlling interest and somebody is employed by the organisation like the case of Sudhir where you have heard where there is 25-75 percent, is an employee in Sudhir’s establishment a public official?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: How do we treat a member of the board? We have people from Foreign Affairs and Ministry of Finance on the board. Suppose they are involved in such misconduct, how do we treat them? They are board members so we must -(Interruption)

MR MENHYA: Mr Chairman, probably if I go through the amendment as proposed by the committee for the definition of a public official, hon. Nandala-Mafabi would appreciate. I wish to propose an amendment to clause 1 about definitions to replace the definition of a public official with the following, “Public official means any person holding a legislative, executive, administrative or judicial office, whether appointed or elected, whether permanent or temporary, whether paid or unpaid, irrespective of that person’s seniority or any other person who performs the public function, including a public agency or enterprise or who provides a public service including an employee in a government department or an agency of the government including local government.” The justification is to widen the definition.

Two, to replace the definition of property with the following, “Property means assets of every kind whether corporeal or incorporeal, movable or immovable, tangible or intangible and legal documents or instruments evidencing title or title to or interest in such assets.” The justification is to broaden the definition.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I have a problem with the definition of a public official as proposed by the committee chairperson. I think it conflicts with Article 257 of the Constitution because in the interpretation of the Constitution, public office means an office in the public service. Public officer means a person holding or acting in any public office. Public service means service in the civil capacity with the government or of a local government. 

Clause 2(a) of Article 257 says, “This Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires, reference to an office in the public service includes reference to the Office of the Chief Justice, Deputy Chief Justice, Principal Judge, a justice of the Supreme Court, justice of Appeal, judge of the High Court and the office of a member of any other court of law established by or under the authority of this Constitution other than a court martial, being an office, the emoluments of which are to be paid directly from the Consolidated Fund or directly out of monies provided by Parliament. 

The reference to the office of a member of the Uganda Police Force, the Uganda Prisons Service, the Education Service and Health Service, reference to an office in the public service does not include a reference to the Office of the President, the Vice President, the Speaker or Deputy Speaker, a minister, the Attorney-General, a Member of Parliament or a member of any commission, authority, council or committee established by this Constitution.” 

So isn’t this definition -

THE CHAIRMAN: I think what we should do is to carry the meaning as defined in the Constitution. This is because we cannot go beyond the Constitution. If it has given a definition, let us use it for the time being until we think otherwise.

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The clarification I am seeking from the Deputy Attorney-General is whether there is a difference between a public officer and public official. What he is quoting from the Constitution is the definition of a public officer. In this law, public official is mentioned. Is there a difference between the two?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, as the Attorney-General looks for the law, I want to say that we should tie all the loose ends of this law. I want to give an example of when you mentioned Munyonyo where we have 25 percent of the shares. If the majority shareholder wants to dilute our shareholding by making us lose, the people who signed those accounts will be the board members and one of them will be from government. He agrees, knowing very well that they are diluting this investment and that is a wrong act. If we don’t have a law to deal with such a person, we are finished. That is why as we are defining a public official, these board members should be brought to book especially where we have an interest.

THE CHAIRMAN: If I may ask, against whom is this law intended? Because that will give it the perimeter of the people concerned. People employed in a private company? If it is the public sector, isn’t this definition enough to cover those? 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I think I have a problem and those lawyers in the lobbies should help me. There are two articles on the definition of a public officer. One, under 257 and another one I think either under the Operationalisation of the Leadership Code under the Constitution and it is a little bit broader than the one under Article 257. And since this is a matter that falls on the Operationalisation of the Leadership Code and Related Acts, I stand to be –

THE CHAIRMAN: Then let us borrow the definition in the Leadership Code. It carries the same meaning as in the Leadership Code.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: I would like to reflect what hon. Nandala has mentioned because in the Audit Act we have said that Government of Uganda has an interest and can audit all public or private companies where we have an interest and we are now empowered to send commissioners as our representatives to those companies even though we do not have a controlling interest. What if those companies committed a crime, would they be covered under this definition?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: I would like the definition in the Leadership Code to be read to see whether it caters for our concern. I say this because from the two proposed amendments, they had actually classified the LC Is to be public officers, which is not correct.

THE CHAIRMAN: The amendment is that the public officer carries the same meaning as in the Leadership Code. I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

The Schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Dr Nsaba Buturo): I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Dr Nsaba Buturo): I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Anti Corruption Bill, 2008” and passed it with some amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Dr Nsaba Buturo): I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE ANTI-CORRUPTION BILL, 2008

6.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Dr Nsaba Buturo): I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Corruption Bill, 2008” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED THE ANTI-CORRUPTION ACT, 2009

THE SPEAKER: I congratulate you all Members and I thank you very much for the involvement you have displayed in respect of this Bill. This brings us to the end of today’s business. Tomorrow we shall start on the Dual Citizenship Bill. Go and read the report and prepare for your contributions. I now adjourn the House to 2.00 p.m., tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.48 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 14 May 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)

