Wednesday, 11 May 2005

Parliament met at 2.34 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like you to join me in welcoming in the Visitor’s Gallery councillors from Kabarole District. They have come to see how we work in this Parliament. You are welcome! (Applause)  

Secondly, the Chairman of the Budget Committee invites the Members of the Budget Committee to meet tomorrow at 9.00 O’clock, and this includes the core members of the Budget Committee and ex-officio ones who, as you know, are the chairpersons. You are required to finalize the report to the President, which by law must be submitted on the 15th day of this month. But because the 15th of May falls on a weekend, you will have to submit the report by Friday, the 13th May. So, all the chairpersons and the core members, please do your constitutional obligation.  

The third matter, on which I wish to communicate, honourable members, is on the question of voting. Yesterday, some Members did not exercise the right to vote; they neither voted for a position nor against it nor abstained and I was informed that a precedent had been set and that the Speaker had allowed Members to spectate, as it were. I have perused the records of Parliament of the meeting of 28 April 2005, and found out that the Speaker did not do that.  

I would like to read what the Speaker ruled on that matter and I quote: “On the question of voting here and making decisions, if you think you do not have to vote, you abstain. Therefore, if I need 148 people to pass a motion and 148 Members abstain, the motion will be lost. So, you are free to decide as you wish and I am here to protect you, should you decide to abstain, should you decide to vote contrary to the wishes of other Members”.  

So, I am now making it clear that the Speaker did not set that precedent, the voting pattern will remain what it is in all other Parliaments, namely; voting for, voting against and abstention. The question of being a spectator in this House will not arise. So, our proceedings will proceed in the normal way. Thank you very much.

2.36
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Madam Speaker, I want to raise two important issues concerning Busoga region, they are so important that I think the government should act quickly. I really want Government to know that Busoga should not be taken for granted anymore, because I think that is what is happening.

Madam Speaker, last Thursday 10 people from Mayuge District came and lodged their complaints to the Sessional Committee on Natural Resources, about the on-going suffering caused by eviction of people from their own land around the area called South Busoga Forest Reserve. 
The 10 people who came included one woman who was 70 years old, who was allegedly raped by three UPDF officers. There was also an old woman over 65 years who almost died because NFA and UPDF soldiers set fire on her grass thatched house – (Interruption) 

Dr Mallinga: Point of information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, why do you not let him finish?

DR MALLINGA: The matter the honourable member is raising is under investigation by the Committee on Natural Resources. There were quite a number of questionable incidents and statements from the people who came to that committee from Busoga.  Until we have carried out an investigation, I think it will be unfortunate for us to discuss that matter in this House. (Applause).

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I partly agree with hon. Dr Mallinga but the issue, which is under investigation here, was the issue of Mayuge District. It was specific to Mayuge District when the district Member of Parliament raised the issue how women were raped, beaten. So, that is the issue that is under investigation but not Busoga as a region.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a place in Busoga which is known as South Busoga Forest Reserve, which is in Mayuge.  

MAJ. (RTD) KINOBE: Madam Speaker, the honourable Member has submitted that the allegation was about an old woman raped by three UPDF officers, I wanted him to clarify whether the allegation specifically said that they were UPDF officers because officers are different from people who were dressed like UPDF soldiers. Was the submission to the effect that they were three UPDF officers or they were people who were dressed as UPDF personnel? Because I do not know how UPDF is involved in forest matters. I wanted that clarification, Madam Speaker.

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, the whole matter was questionable that is why it has been subjected to investigation. I know Busoga, it has a lot of beautiful girls and why UPDF officers would go and rape a 70-year-old woman is extremely questionable!  

Secondly, the lady who had burns, she said she incurred those burns in February this year. But when you see them they are completely healed, they are at least one year old; that is why the committee is investigating. It would be premature for us to talk about matter here.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Nabwiso, if a committee is investigating the matter, I think we should leave them to handle it otherwise, we shall pre-empt their report and confuse their minds.

DR NABWISO: Madam Speaker, I am the one who made an appointment for those people in Mayuge to come to that committee. The questions I want to put here are as follows: A month ago, the Minister of Lands, Water and Environment came here and promised to come and make a ministerial statement on that forest reserve. But, up to now he has not done so and as you recall, Madam Speaker, this is an age long problem. Even when we went to see the President in Rwakitura, in January 2004, we raised these questions and nothing has been happening.   

So, what I would like to know is whether the minister will come to the House and give a ministerial statement and even these investigations -(Interruption)

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, I deliberately allowed hon. Nabwiso to continue hopping that he would say something else. But me and hon. Nabwiso know that this matter is being handled by the committee, and it is him indeed who drew the attention of the committee to this matter. The committee has so far met with the people from that area, and tomorrow the committee is meeting with the ministries concerned with the issue and I would like to invite hon. Nabwiso and any other honourable Member who may be interested in this matter to attend the committee meeting tomorrow. It would not be very prudent to expect the minister to make a statement when we have actually invited the minister to the committee tomorrow. I will suggest that this matter be left until a report from the committee comes to this House. Thank you.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we are talking about two things. I was here when hon. Isanga raised the matter and the Minister of Environment said that he was going to give us a statement. That was before the Mayuge citizens came here. So, we are talking about incidents, which are being investigated by the committee after the visit of those people, but he has a commitment he made to this House before. So, I think the minister should make that statement which he undertook to make here which is separate actually from these other incidents. He still has an obligation but the matters, which are under the charge of hon. Simon D’ujanga, we should not delve into them.

MR AWORI: Guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On that matter?

MR AWORI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, I have given you guidance! I have said the minister is under obligation to bring a statement, which he undertook here and I have said the committee is free to continue with their proceedings -(Interruption)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Point of procedure. Thank you Madam Speaker - (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, I have given the procedure - yes. Prime Minister, can you tell us when your minister will come with that statement?

THE MINISTER OF STATE (PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS) (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Madam Speaker. To my recollection, the minister made here a statement, which provoked other issues, related with the National Forest Authority from other different areas and as a result, those issues were taken to the committee. So, I would also perhaps say that, let us wait for the committee report since the minister is appearing before the committee and then we see how to move. Otherwise, there was a statement that was made here which Members thought that could be improved upon by further detail. I thank you.


MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.   Rule 64 of our Rules of Procedure provides that when the Speaker is addressing the House, any Member standing shall immediately resume his or her seat. I have noted that when we have very serious matters and especially with the very able mobilization of the honourable Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs, the House does overflow. Therefore, it becomes difficult for us to observe this rule. 

But most importantly, we are supposed to go into multi-party politics and if nothing terribly goes wrong, my honourable colleagues who are seated here (front bench) will remain on the front bench but on the opposition side since we shall be assuming this side  - (Laughter) - and I would like to know on a more serious note what Parliament is doing. I see we are trying to borrow money, is there any plan for the Commission to expand Parliament because I want to be a comfortable Member of the government side at the front bench in the next Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Parliamentary Commission is totally aware of the requirements of the 8th Parliament and they are being handled, do not fear.

DR NABWISO: Madam Speaker, I was going to raise this issue. The second issue is on the Lumbuye River. I have documents here, which clearly confirm that SPENCON Company has been given permission to grow rice along that river from Lake Victoria to Lake Kyoga. To the best of my knowledge, this matter has not been discussed with Busoga leaders including the Members of Parliament, the two Members of Parliament for Luuka and Bulamogi counties. 

I would like to know whether this is how the NRM wants to carry out its business, because for us, we are trying to advise government –[Hon. Members: “Who are you?”]- You are asking who I am?  I am a Member of Parliament who was elected to speak for the oppressed in this country.  Therefore, I want to know whether the minister is aware of this problem and whether it is prudent for the minister to go on with discussions to grant permission to a private company to start growing rice for the Basoga, as if the Basoga cannot grow rice for themselves.  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First of all, hon. Member, I have checked my records and you are the Member for Kagoma, there is no constituency called “oppressed”. Please, address us as the Member for Kagoma; do not create new constituencies here.

DR NABWISO: Thank you, for your ruling. The oppressed in Kagoma, Madam. (Laughter).

2.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE (ANIMAL INDUSTRY)(Mrs Mary Rutamwebwa Mugyenyi): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. I must say that this information from the honourable Member comes to me as a surprise and that I would like to ask for time to investigate this issue and report back to the House. 

As far as I am concerned, I have not known that SPENCON is going to grow rice for Basoga people. The information I know is that, we are making preparations to do irrigation using the waters that are available to us, including the waters of the Nile around that region. And the intention is that we should facilitate the people to grow the rice. 

I have not known about SPENCON but I would like to investigate the issue. I am not saying that it is not there, but if it is there I have not got that information and I would like to beg, Madam Speaker, that I am allowed to investigate this matter and report back to the House. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Any time frame?

MRS MUGYENYI: A week or two weeks, it is up to you, Madam Speaker, depending upon your ruling, I will take it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us give the Minister of Agriculture two weeks to report on the rice.

2.53
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national concern where, as a Member of Parliament for Aruu County, I feel this Parliament should intervene. I know a precedent has already been set, following hon. Lukyamuzi’s case, of not using newspapers as evidence in Parliament. But in today’s New Vision on Page 2, the headline is that: “700 recruited for Iraq” and the information inside is that the United States, through some employment bureaus in this case as Askar Security Services, has embarked on a massive exercise of recruiting Ugandans to go and fight in Iraq and other countries. The information here is that, by 3.00 p.m. yesterday, over 1,000 people were already being drilled and the first batch will be leaving next week.  

Madam Speaker, I feel this is not fair, because for a private security company here to collect Ugandans - they gave a loose statement that they have contacted the Minister of Internal Affairs. I think it is appropriate that this Parliament stays this exercise. If we have even failed to recruit for our domestic uses, it would have only been appropriate if this Parliament feels it necessary for sections of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces to be deployed to Iraq. 

But to come and collect senior six leavers, Makerere University students and those who are idling in town to take them to Iraq as if we do not listen to CCN on a day today basis, I think, Madam Speaker, with your advice I would even go ahead to draft a motion to see that the Minister of Internal Affairs would come and give a formal statement to this House. If not, then the Minister of Defence would come and give a statement.  Otherwise, it is so alarming and it is very sensitive. (Interruption).

MR AGGREY AWORI: Thank you, honourable colleague for yielding the Floor. I would like to inform the august House and particularly my honourable colleague, who has raised the matter, that it is against the law of this country for a citizen of this country to carry arms without the authority of the Uganda Government, and much more so to carry arms in defence of another country which is not in diplomatic relations with this country. 

Worse still, I would like to inform the honourable colleague that Iraq is a volatile area where a number of people have been recruited internationally under similar circumstances and terms of reference and in the end, it is the countries of origin that have picked up the problems when and if the so-called recruits or people who have been recruited to work for security purposes have been kidnapped. As I speak now, Japan and Australia are in a fix because two people who were recruited also privately to go and work as private guards in Baghdad have been kidnapped by certain people, and now the citizens of those countries have called upon their governments to make sure that those people are rescued.

MRS MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, thank you very much.  When hon. Odonga Otto raised this issue, which he correctly said it is based on newspaper reports, whereby we have a precedent in this House that we should not debate matters that are based on newspapers –(Interruptions) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, no, order please.

MRS MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, I had hoped that he would actually raise a question to be responded to by the relevant minister. Is it, therefore, in order for hon. Aggrey Awori to now continue a substantive debate based on hearsay? Is it in order for this House to continue debating substantively matters based on newspaper reports instead of raising formal questions and they are responded to?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I think what you want are answers about why something is happening, how it is happening, whether the government knows. Let us ask the Minister of Foreign Affairs to come and explain that matter.

MR OTTO: Madam Speaker, before she would do that, I think the recruitment is going on and the first group might leave and we are soon going for a weekend, because we do not want to use other civil means to start demonstrating to the American Embassy to leave our brothers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, how will a resolution of this House stop a private enterprise?  You have never stopped Cheeye, you have never, how is it going to work? I think let us ask the minister to urgently answer that question and then we see what to do, because now we are all speculating.

2.58
MR MAURICE KAGIMU (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Again recently, I was reading in the press, and the information I got was that the soldiers are no longer allowed to have pastors in the barracks. That there are no more pastors to go to the barracks to preach, nor the Sheikhs etc. If the soldiers want to pray, they have to go outside and they must seek permission first. Even the mosques, the churches in the barracks have been turned into other uses. Now you can imagine such a situation! Soldiers are people, in fact –(Interruption)

REV. BAKALUBA: Already a question has been put to that effect to be answered by the honourable Minister of Defence, probably on Thursday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Kagimu, you are in good hands of Rev. Bakaluba Mukasa. So, we expect an answer.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I note the concern of an ex-seminarian and the reverend, and I will undertake that government will come with an answer in a week’s time. Thank you.

2.59
CAPT. (RTD) DAVID GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda County North, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, there are some issues which have been bothering me in my head and they relate to the Order Paper. At the beginning of this Parliament, 2001 July or August there about, a select committee to look into election violence was set up. And we have spent here roughly speaking 48 months. Since that time, the Order Paper of this Parliament unfailingly has been reflecting this item. Madam Speaker, I want you to help me understand because election violence was a matter of great significance for Ugandans in 2001 election. 

. I have seen a colleague in this Parliament registering Members of Parliament in CEDO/KAP. Elections are around the corner, and there is already a fever in the country. Parliament in its wisdom set up a committee, a report was produced, it has been appearing on the Order Paper for the last 48 months. I want your clarification on that.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, a standing Committee of National Economy discharged its constitutional duty, and wrote a report on the performance of the general economy. In the wisdom of the committee, it is believed that the economy is actually sinking.  It is believed that poverty is on the increase, even regionally; even a ship sank the other day. I am seeing my elder brother, Paul Etiang, here visiting Parliament today to put up his case, together with his political leadership of the ministry. We are seeing these reports. So, a report gets pushed. 
 
Madam Speaker, some of us have come to talk to some of the leadership of this Parliament, we do not understand why certain business of this House is relegated, even subordinated to some issues you see on the Order Paper. Matters of economy are so important; representatives of the people would want to raise issues, place their views on record.  Madam Speaker, I want your honest position on these issues. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you actually suggesting that I conduct myself dishonestly in this House? I want to know. I have asked you a question, hon. Guma Gumisiriza.

CAPT. GUMISIRIZA: Come again, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have asked you to tell me whether I conduct myself dishonestly in this House.  I want an answer to that.

CAPT. GUMISIRIZA: Madam Speaker, I do not want to be involved in unnecessary exchanges with the headship of the institution. I can withdraw that bit of the honest statement. But I still request for your indulgence, comment and ruling on the issues; the honesty or the dishonesty insinuation is withdrawn.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the items you are talking about are on the Order Paper.  Only this morning I told the Clerk that both the Domestic Relations Bill (DRB) and the National Economy report must be debated this week. I did not have to announce it to the whole country, but these are the instructions I gave these members. You have been here, for I do not know how many weeks, without me.  When I appear, then you attack me. (Laughter). All the matters will be handled. 



MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had indicated that the Minister of Works would make a statement, but when I was coming here I had not received the text. So, let us move to item 4, if he comes we shall give him an opportunity.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORIZE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW FROM THE EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK FOR FINANCING APEX IV PRIVATE INVESTMENTS LOAN FACILITY

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that this Parliament does pass a resolution authorizing Government to borrow from the European Investment Bank for the purposes of financing Apex IV, and that the said resolution go as follows: 

“WHEREAS a credit agreement for Euro 30 million is to be concluded between the European Investment Bank and the Republic of Uganda for purposes of financing Apex private sector global loan IV facility;

AND WHEREAS under Article 159 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Government is authorized to borrow money from any source subject to other constitution provisions;

AND WHEREAS under Article 159(2) –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, in protection of the people I represent namely; Lubaga South, I am standing on a point of procedure in regard to the presentation of the minister. It is on record yesterday that the Minister of Finance failed to explain to us the issues we raised before we would sanction the borrowing namely; Uganda is one of the poorest countries in the world, it is also one of the countries, which does not pay its debts and the Government of Uganda has already set a code of conduct, which it must follow over the amount of money it must borrow –(Interruption)

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our rules are clear. Rule 58(4) provides as follows: “Where a Member interrupts debate on a point of procedure the Member shall state the rule of procedure he or she deems to have been breached by the Member holding the Floor before subjecting the Member to the Speaker’s ruling.” Is hon. Lukyamuzi in order, Madam Speaker, to interrupt on a point of procedure without quoting a specific rule that has been breached?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, can I know which rule the minister has breached?

MR LUKYAMUZI: I was invoking Rule 58 to move a point of procedure in regard to what the minister was presenting.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Read it.

MR LUKYAMUZI: “Debates may be interrupted- 
by a point of order being raised;
 (d) upon a point of procedure.” (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, what that means is that you stand up and say, “Speaker, the minister has violated Rule X and I am rising on a point of order on that one.”  

MR LUKYAMUZI: But, Madam Speaker, I am a career debater and I know what –(Laughter)  
So, I was referring to yesterday’s deliberations where the minister was challenged that before he goes on with his presentation, there was need for him to explain why point a, b, c, d, would not be respected, and I was exactly following up that as a careful debater and a calculated debater. So, before the minister explains why the code of conduct for borrowing has been abandoned in the view of the fact that Uganda is one of the poorest nations in the world, it is also a country, which is on record for not having been able to pay its debts - why do we over borrow when recently the President said –(Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, the issues the honourable member is raising, were raised yesterday when we were considering a motion for a resolution to borrow for totally a different loan. The concerns were adequately responded to as a result of which the motion was passed. Is the honourable member in order to interfere with the proceedings of today referring to what transpired yesterday, when this august House passed the resolution on being satisfied of the explanation that was given? Is he in order to drag the issues of yesterday on a totally different motion, which this House passed to apply and affect the motion at hand?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, actually I do not know where this system of various and numerous interruptions has come from. But let the minister move, you can speak against his proposal.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural concern because this loan was presented here before and we had debated on it. There were some queries, which the committee had raised and they had been addressed. So, the procedural concern I am raising is that, I would have expected us to debate this loan and the chairman reports back because, it had been presented and it stopped at a debate level.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, is it not necessary to refresh Members’ minds about what was debated?

MR BANYENZAKI: There is a report, Madam Speaker.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I concede and I think I was slightly out of order. I think the honourable member is right, the motion was moved and considered by this House on the 9 March 2005, but was referred back to the committee with some recommendations. I think the honourable member is right, what we should be doing is to allow the chairperson of the committee to report on the consideration of the reconsidered matters. I hereby withdraw my first motion of moving this resolution once again because it was already moved.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable minister, I think for the purpose of the Hansard, just state the text. Otherwise, if we vote on something, which has no text, it is a problem for me.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: I am much obliged, Madam Speaker. The resolution to be passed was to authorize Government to borrow from the European Investment Bank the sum of Euro30 million and it should read as follows:
“WHEREAS a credit agreement for Euro 30 million is to be concluded between the European Investment Bank and the Republic of Uganda for purposes of financing Apex private sector global loan IV facility;

AND WHEREAS under Article 159(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Government is authorized to borrow money from any source subject to other constitutional provisions;

AND WHEREAS under Article 159(2) of the Constitution borrowing by Government has to be authorized by or under an Act of Parliament;
AND WHEREAS in line with the above stated constitutional requirement, Government has laid before Parliament the terms and conditions of the stated loan for their approval and authorization;
 
Now, therefore, be it resolved by Parliament that the Government is hereby authorized to secure the said loan from the European Investment Bank for financing Apex private sector global loan IV facility.”

Madam Speaker, as I stated earlier, this motion was moved, seconded and debated, but this august House raised some issues and it was referred again to the committee to handle the issues that were referred. The committee has considered the issues and it has come up with the report. I beg to move that the House consider the reconsidered position and be pleased to pass the loan. I beg to move.

3.16
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Nathan Nandala Mafabi): Madam Speaker, I would request to be given a permanent seat on the front bench because it looks I am common now here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, I was missing you today.

MR MAFABI: Madam Speaker, honourable members, this is the addendum to the report of the Committee on National Economy on the Apex IV loan request. The loan request for the Apex IV funds was laid on the Table on the 6 October 2004, and it was committed to the Committee on National Economy and the committee presented the report to the august House on the 9 March 2005.

However, there were issues, which existed at that time and made the House not pronounce itself on the report. These were the recommendations in brief in the report of 9 March 2005:

· The funds should be channelled through UDB (Uganda Development Bank) to promote long-term financing and reduce on interest rate.

· The development finance department of Bank of Uganda be transferred to UDB as per the Budget Speech of 2004/05.

· The government to provide the account on which repayments are banked and the overall plan of these funds.

· The local entrepreneurs should be prioritised in accessing these funds.

· The interest rates should be lowered to six per cent to promote small and medium scale undertakings.

· The line of credit should be renegotiated to provide at least 30 years of maturity.

· The government should undertake to provide these loans to upcountry undertakings at a lower interest rate for equitable development.

· The government should roll back the repayments for a wider coverage of activities in the country. Then the plan for this roll back should be submitted to Parliament for analysis.

· The agro-processing industries should be promoted to link up with the predominantly agricultural economy.

· The charge by Bank of Uganda should be minimized to reduce the cost of this money to AFIs (Approved Financial Institutions), and this should ideally not exceed one per cent.

· The tax obligation performance by the firms that benefited from Apex I to III be submitted.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I want to seek your indulgence to make some corrections to this report. 
Under 3.0 bullet 1, the attachment of the appendix. The committee had its own letter and what we have attached is the letter of the minister but I will lay on the Table the letter the committee wrote.

4.0 Bullet 1, it should read, “That 30 per cent of the funds under this credit will be channelled to undertakings outside Kampala, Jinja, Mukono and Entebbe. This should be utilized within 12 months. If they have not been utilized within 12 months, then undertakings elsewhere will take them over.” 

Page 4, the last bullet should read, “The interest rate at which Bank of Uganda lends to AFIs (Approved Financial Institutions) will not exceed three per cent.”

Now, there is one bullet missing which you should add, the last one, “That tax payments to be submitted within two months.” Of course, here URA had promised to submit it within two weeks as you can see the minister’s letter, which expired on 14 April 2005. Those are the corrections I wanted to make.

Now 3.0, these were unresolved issues:

· The House did not pronounce itself on the report and asked government to give more information on the above issues. The committee wrote to the minister, copied to the Speaker, to clarify on the unresolved issues highlighted above. I have attached the letter of the minister’s response but the letter, which we wrote is not attached but it is in the same line. 

· The committee maintains that the interest rate should not exceed six per cent in as far as the last beneficiary of the Apex funds. Bank of Uganda charges 8.2 per cent per annum to Approved Financial Institutions (AFIs), who in turn load their margins in the rage of 5 per cent to 8 percent. I have Appendix II which shows you how Bank of Uganda charges. 

· The funds paid back to be rolled out to the new borrowers. The committee maintains this position that instead of keeping transferring this money on the consolidated account, it should be rolled back to new borrowers.

· That all loan repayments made after six months will be transferred to UDB, which will administer this loan portfolio. 

· The government should provide the use of funds that were transferred to the Consolidated Fund since they were not appropriated by the Parliament. You know you appropriate it in budget, you have never appropriated these resources which have been on consolidated account.

· Tax payments by the beneficiaries have not been provided despite the fact that this was to be availed to the committee. 

Now this is the harmonized position with the Ministry of Finance. Of course we had so many meetings and with people from Bank of Uganda. It is as follows:

· That 30 per cent of the funds under this credit will be channelled to the undertakings outside Kampala, Jinja, Mukono and Entebbe. Now this upcountry undertaking should absorb these resources within 12 months. Of course failure, it reverts to the centre. This measure should be monitored carefully in order to avoid misuse. 

· That the local business community should be empowered through affirmative consideration in order to build a local middle class. It was agreed that all the funds will be allocated to local entrepreneurs.

· That the restructuring of Uganda Development Bank will be finalized within six months and the Development Finance Department of Bank of Uganda will also be transferred to the same bank, UDB, within six months. 

· Government will provide a roll over plan for repayments within one month to Parliament. 

· Audited reports for the previous Apex funding will be availed to Parliament within one month. 

· Bank of Uganda will provide its operational costs for administering these funds to Parliament within one month (The one-month period will be after the approval of the report of the committee).

· The time deposit rates used for computation of the interest rates be spread to two years instead of the current one year.

· That Bank of Uganda should appeal to commercial banks to charge interest rates that are affordable by using different scenarios in their criteria of determining the rates. Members noted that there was double counting in calculating the interest rates since Bank of Uganda and commercial banks use the same factors to determine these interest rates. Of course what we are aiming at here is that the interest rates should not exceed six per cent to the last consumer.

· The interest rate at which Bank of Uganda lends to Approved Financial Institutions will not exceed three per cent. 

· The tax payments will be submitted to Parliament within two months.

In conclusion, since the government has agreed to the above issues, the committee recommends that the House approve this loan request. Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairperson.  

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Chairperson, please sit there comfortably.

MR RUKUTANA: It is true that the ministry harmonized its position with the committee on all these issues, but we have one small problem regarding the last but one issue that is interest which Bank of Uganda should charge the approved financial institutions. The committee insists that the interest should be three per cent and in coming to this figure, they took into account Bank of Uganda statement that it charges between four as the lowest and eight as the highest. Therefore, they wanted some affirmative action for upcountry enterprises.

Madam Speaker, the ministry has no problem in giving affirmative action to rural enterprises and we would support this. However, this three per cent interest may not take into consideration a number of factors:
One; exchange rate losses should the situation be such that there has been depreciation and we have experienced losses in the exchange rates, then we shall get a problem repaying the original money we borrowed.

Two; the cost of administration. Of course Bank of Uganda put some small interest as its administrative costs.

Three; the cost of money generally. So, while we agreed to giving some affirmative action, we would want the recommendation to be amended - we agreed three per cent but we say where these parameters change especially exchange rate losses and cost of money, if they should increase during the period, then Bank of Uganda reports to the Minister of Finance and we believe Parliament will have the view to revising this rate.

MR MAFABI: The minister was trying to make a point but as we have said, the Government should lead in economic growth and if it is supposed to lead in economic growth, to undertake this instead of giving people money they are going to borrow and pay. Now, the minister should take into consideration that the Uganda shillings of late has been appreciating. What happens if it appreciates, do you reverse to the borrowers? So, given that the economic growth has to be led by Government and Government should take an affirmative action in this line to promote this local entrepreneur.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, I think let the other Members express their views on this matter.

3.30
MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. One of the functions of the Bank of Uganda is to prudently manage the foreign exchange of this country, and what the minister is now saying is that we should shelve the Bank of Uganda from losses of its own inefficiency. Are we in order really, the borrowers too have problems, who pays for their losses? And who says that Bank of Uganda should transact without any loss? Who says it should be loss proof?

The Government should be serious because some of this money - look at what the chairman has just said, that they even transfer the money that has been paid back to Consolidated Fund without any accounting principal. 
This is a serious matter!  This issue of interest rates is glossed over by Government and interest rates keep rising because of the inefficiency in the operations of Government and we cannot sit here and watch over interest rates rising to the expense of the borrowers, of the citizens of this country. In fact, what has been happening is that money has become so expensive to borrow that it is only foreign entrepreneurs who are able to borrow this money and yet they are borrowing the money but it is us, our children and grandchildren that will pay back this money. So, the minister must clarify why the Bank of Uganda should be loss proof.

3.32
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. However, I want to seek some few clarifications from the minister. Madam Speaker, if you can recall yesterday’s debate, the gist of the matter was, we want equitable distribution of resources, we want to develop the rural areas. So, I actually agree with the chairperson when he proposed the three per cent interest rate for investors who are going to invest upcountry and the minister’s argument actually does not hold water because when the shilling appreciates, he cannot come back to Parliament to tell us that actually Bank of Uganda has made profits. Why should he only come when there is a crisis? 

Madam Speaker, when you go to bullet 4, I am not happy, as I informed this House yesterday, when you say that the 30 per cent of the funds should go outside Kampala, Jinja, Mukono and Entebbe actually, I would not love to be forced to start agitating for a district for Buvuma. But it looks it should be the order of the day otherwise, when Buvuma continues to be classified under Mukono, we shall not develop because Buvuma also is a rural area and we want to benefit. Actually, Buvuma should get these benefits of the three per cent. Nobody will invest in Buvuma when you do not give him incentives and I want to urge the minister - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Nsubuga, if somebody reads the Hansard of your contributions yesterday and today, it will be very interesting. Yesterday you said, there is no problem if that thing is in Namanve because Bavuma are going to get jobs- (Laughter)- now you have completely switched and then–(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and my colleague for giving way. I would have loved to seek clarification from whoever is in best position to give this clarification because when they talk of spending 30 percent to undertakings outside Kampala, Jinja, Mukono and Entebbe are they talking about municipalities, townships, districts so that the people who are intending to apply for this money can know actually what they mean by these –(Interruption)

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Actually what I was saying yesterday and this one, the two are different though I know that when industries are located in Kampala the Bavuma benefit. But actually when a factory is set up in Buvuma who benefits more? Actually my appeal is that Buvuma should be curved from Mukono so that we also benefit at the interest rate of three percent. 

Madam Speaker, I appeal to the Minister that apart from the interest rate, the government should come up with good policy measures like tax holidays to encourage investors to invest upcountry.  Otherwise, when all the industries are set up in Kampala and with the few infrastructures we have, if we get a crisis, like fire, this country can be wiped out, yet if we spread out our industries, we stand better chances.  So, my appeal is that the Minister should think of encouraging industries to be set up upcountry. 

On interest rate, I agree with the chairperson that the interest rate of three percent is high enough. We have seen business people who have got loans without interest. So, if a peasant can get a loan at three percent interest, I think it is not so bad. I thank you.

3.37
MR WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I support the report of the committee and I think they are taking the right path to emancipate the people of this country from poverty. But the government on the other hand should not take advantage of the rural poor who are actually supposed to benefit from these interventions by making loans a source of revenue. One of the reasons why Government does not borrow from commercial banks is that the burden to the taxpayer should not be high. That is why they are able to borrow from the World Bank, European Development Bank, African Development Bank, which charge minimal interest. Therefore, the end borrower should also be able to borrow at minimal interest rate. 

The Bank of Uganda is already the government’s banker. It makes enough money from transactions of Government and when we are talking about upholding the cost of money, Bank of Uganda is not only handling APEX funds as a source of money. It therefore, defeats my understanding why the minister should insist that this particular loan portfolio should be the one to cushion Bank of Uganda from making losses on repayment. 

On the contrary, the Bank of Uganda is actually acting as a middleman and the earlier this portfolio is transferred to the Uganda Development Bank, the better. The administrative charges which they are claiming, and I hope that they will present the actual figure to the committee within due time, should be a cost, which should be the undertaking of the actual lender to the final beneficiary rather than Bank of Uganda lending to unapproved financial institutions, then the approved financial institutions is also loading its card. Sometimes some of these approved financial institutions also have other agencies that handle the loan. (Interruption)

MR LULE MAWIYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Wagonda for giving way. I would like to inform this House that in Appendix II, in a letter from Naomi Nasasira, the Director, Development Finance Department, she alludes to the fact that although we say that 30 percent will be channelled through those undertakings outside Kampala and the like, “Please kindly take note that this is a rate between Bank of Uganda and AFI.  The final rate between the AFI and the ultimate beneficiary remains freely negotiable between AFI and the final borrower.” 

So, this is where the crux of the matter is. We have time and again fought with these people down the micro-finance institutions to know the – So, this information I think you will take.
MR WAGONDA: Madam Speaker, I have that information. The point I am making is that if Bank of Uganda is borrowing at the rate of between one and two percent, why should it charge eight percent? A clear six percent difference when actually it is taking no risk in the matter. There is no risk to Bank of Uganda whatsoever and already members have expressed their concern that what happens when the shilling appreciates? It is just revenue. The government must take a clear decision and distinction whether it is borrowing this money as a source of revenue at the cost of the final borrower, or it is making an intervention to liberate the people of this country from poverty? Those are the clear lines. 

So, let the minister note that there is no anger; it is only that I feel very strongly about these issues and the government should equally take me seriously.

Madam Speaker, I am constrained by the new definition of upcountry by the country -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Try to wind up.

MR WAGONDA: I do not think that Mukono has no upcountry and that it is not upcountry. Already there is a classification as to which enterprises can be funded from the APEX funds. In my opinion, if the committee sticks to those enterprises, which will help the rural areas to come up, the question of urban and rural will not be a factor. I think insistence should be on, what impact would the enterprise that is proposed for funding make on that particular area and in that particular sub-sector?  

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the move of that portfolio from the Bank of Uganda to the Development Bank is long overdue. 

Two, the Minister of Finance should clearly come up with a statement to ensure that the proceeds from these loans are recycled and they do not become revenue to go into other expenditure. This is clearly development into rural areas. So, the loan should form a revolving fund purely for rural development.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.43
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the committee’s report, which was initially presented to this House, the committee recommended and they are upholding the recommendation to the effect that agro-processing industries should be promoted to link up with a pre-dominantly agricultural economy.

Madam Speaker, yesterday, I lamented about the unequal distribution of economic benefits in this country and I want to point out just one thing that does not seem to tally with the recommendation of the committee.  And I particularly want to draw the attention of this House to the developments in the Teso region. 

Madam Speaker, way back probably in the ’80s, there was a low cost factory in Soroti, which was manufacturing agricultural implements. In the 1990s, the people of Teso region pleaded with His Excellency, the President of Uganda, to upgrade that low cost factory and the President committed himself and that low cost factory was upgraded. That is SAIMCO, which manufactures agricultural implements for the East and North Eastern parts of this country. This is not only about agricultural implements, those of us who are familiar with the disarmament process in Karamoja, the products of SAIMCO, especially the ox-ploughs and the weeders, are tied up with the disarmament process in Karamoja.  

My concern this afternoon, Madam Speaker, is what is happening with SAIMCO, being the only industry in the Teso region; being the only source of employment, and being an engine towards the disarmament process, which is really important to us; almost just a week ago, SAIMCO was privatised. However, the team that bought SAIMCO called Habib Alarm Uganda Ltd has decided to transfer the equipment in SAIMCO. So, they have been ferrying the equipment out of the district and by the time the district authorities realized two or three days back, they were actually beginning to dismantle the factory.  Now, as people in the Teso Region, we do not think this augers well politically and economically and if – (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, hon. Alaso for giving way. With my rudimentary economics, I know that all investors will relocate to where the cost of production is lowest and they do not put political considerations into their profit margins.  I do not know if you will want to rationalize your ideas with what I have just said. Thank you.

MS ALASO: I know that hon. Odonga Otto was listening, and he is not always absent minded, when I said in this House that to upgrade SAIMCO to that level took serious political considerations. I am not talking about only about the economic bit of it; I am talking about the political element that went into it before the privatisation. And my concern and the concern of the people in Soroti is; if we are talking about uplifting agriculture in the area and then we are having this type of exercise going on, then we should be able to focus, first of all, on the implications of this to the whole region.  

Madam Speaker, that is why following the committee’s report, I would like to ask you if it is possible for a proper explanation to be enlisted from the relevant ministry to help us appreciate what this new development has on the future of agro-industry, agro-processing and whatever it is in the Teso Region. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Minister for Privatisation here? I thought I saw him. Can the NPC give us information?

THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Madam Speaker, the point that hon. Alaso is making is factual. It is true that the private owner who has been manufacturing these implements had started to move the installations from the factory to another site. I was in Soroti two days ago, and I was briefed by the RDC who after consulting with the relevant Minister has halted the movement, and I would like to assure hon. Alaso that things will be put back to normal.

3.49
MR MICHAEL OGOLA (West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for giving me this chance. I must compliment the Committee on Economy for this report. There are other issues on which I wish they had also given attention especially on page 2. The reason why I have risen is on page 2, on the two bullets just before item 3, on unresolved issues. 
“The charge by Bank of Uganda should be minimized to reduce the cost of this money. This should ideally not exceed one percent.”  

I want to compliment the committee extremely heartily because this is the area in which the ordinary Ugandan citizen is suffering enormously.  Money is extremely expensive in this country and yet it can also be said that money is not altogether absent. The reason why money is lying idle is partly because of the information on whatever money is available. I do not think the Ministry of Finance is doing enough to advertise the availability of funds for development and the rate of interest charged so that the people wake up and utilize the money that Government has worked so hard to bring about.

Secondly, I appreciate the committee’s observation that the tax obligations performance by the firms that benefit or have benefited from APEX I to III should be known. But I think there is something unsaid here which I would have wished the committee also to say. The committee should have called to order the Government, who should also have brought in the names and firms of individuals who have actually benefited from this loan. I believe a loan of this nature is intended for the lowest economic activities in the country but it – (Interruption)

MR MAFABI: We have the details of all those who benefited, and if you check the first report, they were attached there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I wish I was told that you had a lengthy debate on this matter and what you are dealing with are what the chairman calls “unresolved issues”. Hon. Ogola it appears what you are discussing was already discussed. Can we handle 3.0, Okay?

MR OGOLA: I appreciate the information, but the focus of my intervention is really that we know whether the ordinary authentic Ugandan is getting access to this money. I am using the word “authentic” advisedly and deliberately because it would appear that this money is accessible to the heavyweight economic activities in the country, because the information about this money is not at the lower level of society and yet it is reasonably cheap money. Activities are dried up without money in the countryside, and all I beg is that information about such money should be made available so that those who can take advantage of it should at least try to do so. This is the information I am after – (Interruption)

MR AGGREY AWORI: Thank you honourable colleague for yielding the Floor. You recall that last time they brought this particular application we got the list of the beneficiaries. When I worked out the total list of the beneficiaries we found that 48 percent of the money loaned out went to companies of non-indigenous Ugandans, and we found out that 92 percent of the 48 percent were accessing it for the second time.

MR KAJIMU KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, even this money is channelled through foreign banks; there is not a single indigenous owned bank. For example Centenary Bank has been applying for a long time but has never been allowed, it is only DFCU, Orient Bank, Barclays Bank, Standard Chartered and - They give to fellow Bazungu. Thank you.

MR OGOLA: I think the statement the honourable colleague has just made wraps up the concern that I am trying to express here. I do not believe that there is a shortage of money in Uganda. I believe there is money and it can be made available but the people with the information and who benefit readily when the money comes are not authentic Ugandans. But the authentic Ugandans, the poor farmer, the poor rural herdsman, who ultimately work so hard for this money to be repaid - This is unfair and it spoils the name of the government, it makes government look like it is only concerned with APEX may be that is why the name even is called APEX, at the top, but down at the bottom of the pyramid, which holds this country together, is not served. 

Madam Speaker, I hope that the Committee on National Economy will close the file on this matter. They should dig out from the Minister of Finance accountability so that our people are informed and benefit from what is meant for them.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.55
MRS GERTRUDE KULANY (Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for this report. I support the motion, but I need some clarification on the following. It is true the rural Uganda is still very poor and it is poor because it has no access to the loans. Madam Speaker, how will these rural Ugandans have access to these loans when they have no collateral, no land titles, no permanent structures and yet to get these loans you need these collateral. Is there a way they are going to put aside all these requirements so that these poor Ugandans will have access to these loans? 

Madam Speaker, it is true you cannot be rich unless you have had access to loans. But how is the minister going to make sure that these poor rural Ugandans who have no land titles or permanent structures are going to have access to these loans and I am talking about -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, honourable colleague. Once again I rise to give information on a matter of this particular loan. If only you check with the EIB representative here, they will tell you that they have built in a two percent risk factor which they normally allow a Commercial Bank to levy or to on-lend to the borrower. That two percent risk factor should take care of no collateral and yet they take advantage of us and charge us two percent and they still ask for collateral. Honourable minister, for your own information, check on this matter.

MRS KULANY: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I want to emphasize, more especially about the women. The women are least empowered economically in this country, and we would really love to see that they become the most beneficiaries to these loans. I want to support the committee’s report that the interest rate remains at three percent. This is the only way we can empower -(Interruption)

MR HENRY BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and honourable member for giving way. The information I want to give is that this loan is specifically targeting the people in high profile investments. The loan that was meant for the category the honourable is speaking about, especially the women, is like a rural micro-finance support programme, which was actually approved by this House some time back.I urge the Minister of Finance to move in line with the affirmative action of fixing low interest  on such a loan where the intermediary MFIs are charged more than 15 percent, and the participating beneficiaries, who are the women, end up paying more than 36 percent.
 
So, honourable minister, I think you should take note of this and have that loan revised affirmatively the way you have revised this one; it would really benefit our rural people.

MRS KULANY: I thank you for that information. I want to conclude, Madam Speaker that of recent the cost of agricultural inputs has gone very high. I come from a district where we had mechanized as far as farming is concerned, but as of now it is not easy to afford a tractor. 

So I would appeal that maybe through this if we could have the cost of agricultural tools coming down and free of tax then we shall talk of modernizing agriculture in this country. Without that, we shall remain backward.  With those remarks, I want to thank you.

4.02
MAJ. (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and to thank the committee for some of the issues they raised. 

Madam Speaker, the reason for supporting this loan, first of all, is for the purpose it is being borrowed. This loan is extended to Uganda because of our programme to fight poverty, and the interest rate is one percent from the European Investment Bank. I am, however, disappointed with the level of poverty going on. We should not be approving APEX IV; we should be approving APEX XII, but because of our internal problems, we are still lagging behind. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, a loan of one percent interest is as well as a good donation. Madam Speaker, I have a few areas of concern in the report. One is the distribution upcountry or spread all over the country. I am a student of business.  There is no way government is going to distribute this money. You must have a project that is viable.  You have heard that they are building in an element of risk factor in the interest. You must have collateral. So there are so many things you must consider. 


Where can we remedy our poor people then?  Madam Speaker, the answer resides in affirmative action to say, for the money going upcountry, we are reducing interest rate by two or one percent.  Otherwise, do not come here and dictate for government to take business out of Mukono. Have you seen Mbarara here being talked about? No. But if somebody comes with a viable project, you will come assist him.  

Madam Speaker, the other area of concern is interest rate. True, this money is to fight poverty. It must go at a lower interest rate, but we must also consider other factors. There are administrative costs and risks. By the way, honourable members, you must note that the repayment of this loan is 100 percent. And how does it happen? The banks, which are disbursing money, have undertaken to pay money whether the borrowers pay back or not. I agree with the committee, the interest rates should come down, but it should be slightly lower than the Treasury Bills rates that the government offers.  

In this report, in the attachment by the committee, I have seen a letter from the Minister, which indicates that the interest rate on Treasury Bills is 12.9. Anything between six and ten in that region is comfortable for any businessman who is ready to do business.  

Madam Speaker, the other issue of concern is channelling this money through UDB. I want to be clarified by the committee, if it is only channelling or disbursement. But if you mean disbursement, I have this to say: We have a history of government to own the banks and the political influence in these banks. We should not take the risk. If it is channelling through the UDB, then other development banks must access it because the history has been that other development banks will only disburse money on competence and proven viable projects. But we know, and not today and not yesterday, that politicians will go and support their cronies for even projects that are not viable.  

Madam Speaker, (Interruptions)

MS BEATRICE KIRASO: Thank you, hon. Rwamirama, for giving way. I just want to be clarified on the other development banks, which should access this money along with the Uganda Development Bank.
MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, we have DFCU, Centenary Rural Development Bank, Uganda Housing Finance Company, –(Interruptions)- Why not? They should extend it because it is to fight poverty. That is where we go wrong. It is only Centenary Rural Development Bank that has a network branch all over the country. So why shouldn’t it access this money? Are we here to fight poverty or we are just going to promote cooperate banks here to circus?  

Madam Speaker, the issue of local investors or local entrepreneur accessing this money: For us not to have a mechanism in place to identify who is a local entrepreneur and who is not is actually to fail in our responsibility. This money was borrowed by government at a lower interest rate, and therefore we must create a mechanism to make sure that all the local entrepreneurs who are competent to access it must access it.  

Madam Speaker, I want to conclude on the issues raised by my sister, honourable Alaso. We must learn from our experience. Some years ago, when we had just adopted liberalization and privatisation, we made a blunder. We sold Uganda Transport Company (UTC) without the necessary legal framework. We did not put into consideration putting a condition that this person who is taking over UTC and Uganda Peoples Transport must operate in transport service, and therefore UTC Park must remain a bus park. Immediately after the investor bought the company, he sold the company depots in Mbarara, Kabale, Fort Portal, and Jinja. The transport company disappeared and the buses disappeared.  Madam Speaker, we should learn from our experience.  What can I say and what can I leave?  

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Rwamirama, notwithstanding the rude interjections from hon. Aggrey Awori as usual.  The honourable member on the Floor has just told us that he is a student of business, and we accept that. The person who bought UTC did some transactions. Did they make business sense or they did not? And if they did, why should he not have done it? I thank you.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is what I am saying; if I am buying Dairy Corporation, Government must make sure that I am going to do business of milk. But when you buy a transport company and you say, as it is, exactly that is why I say, may be some of you are not students of business, because if I am selling you a bus as Government, you must make sure that you are going to do the exact business that he is doing.  

Madam Speaker, Foods and Beverages was sold in the same manner. I know the PERD Statute provides for the necessary legal framework, and this is what my sister is talking. If you sell somebody a factory, and you do not provide the necessary framework that actually you are going to indulge in the business of making a, b, c, tomorrow the man is going to sell because he is there to make profits.  

Madam Speaker, with those few remarks, I beg to support that APEX IV be approved, and I urge Government to put the necessary mechanism so that we can go up to APEX XII and even XX so that we can alleviate poverty in this country.

4.12
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe North County, Busia):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support any initiative that will enable our people access inexpensive money. But in the same breath, I would like to condemn the lazy attitude on the part of the government especially the Ministry of Finance for lack of initiative in creating the financing.

Madam Speaker, where any commodity is scarce, you come up with various methods for making it available to the maximum number of people. In this case, I am saying, while we are borrowing from EIB, probably the cheapest source of money from government to government, there are other sources of funding in Europe, which we have failed to explore for that matter. 

For instance, Madam Speaker, there are banks in Europe, which lend to property prospectors, or people who would like to invest in property, so long as you have a guarantee, and I can see you are providing guarantees to European Investment Bank (EIB) in various formats to borrow money. Some of my colleagues here will confirm, those of you who have got property in the United Kingdom, that for property lending –(Interjections)- You know where I looked when I mentioned that, and you know who is smiling.  Madam Speaker –(Interruption)
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, are you suggesting I should not smile?

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I know of some colleagues who might own or who own or who used to own property in Europe but very inexpensively, and I am simply saying among other things that the Government should enable us to access that kind of money individually so long as you provide the same securities that you are providing me to access money on EIB.

For instance nobody borrows money for property in the United Kingdom for more than nine percent, actually in some cases five percent. Now, if I can access that kind of money and I put in one percent risk factor and then one percent to the Government for administrative costs, I could land that money here for less than eight percent. Now, why do you want to lend me this very expensive money at nearly more than 10 percent? So I am saying lack of creativity on the part of the Ministry of Finance has made it impossible for us to access cheap money. The policy towards borrowing is all wrong.

The first time the Chairperson made a report on this particular loan, he gave us a schedule of people who have benefited from this money. From my previous information to my colleagues on the Floor, not long ago, when we calculated, at that time 48 percent of the money went to people who actually do not deserve it at all in our terms. I do not want to give specific examples because some of us might be shareholders in these companies. To call a spade a spade –(Interruption)

MR KAGIMU: Madam Speaker, for example, there is Fontana Auto Parts; they applied as producers but they are selling spare parts. They were given Shs 366 million. There is Tile Centre, which was given Shs 739 million; Matama Hardware were given Shs one billion. Madam Speaker, the list is endless, whereas this money is supposed to be for tourism, agriculture, health, education and manufacturers. I fear to add some because I can see some who have some interests –(Laughter)

MR AWORI: Thank you, honourable colleague. I do not want to embarrass anybody at all. But, Madam Speaker, really what my honourable colleague has just said is very important. 
I can give even a longer list of the people who do not deserve that kind of money. I would like good food and I know a restaurant that serves good Italian food, and virtually 90 percent of the ingredients are imported. This is an Italian-owned restaurant; I will leave the name out. These people have accessed this money to the tune of half a billion, which should go to a local agricultural farmer. 

Madam Speaker, while I am talking about agricultural farmers, really this money should not be limited to UDB per se –(Interruption)

MR MIKE SEBALU: Madam Speaker, they have said the loan is supposed to benefit tourism, and we definitely appreciate that if you are to build sustainable tourism, then there are some sectors that you need to invest in like the hospitality industry, which also includes restaurants and hotels. So if one is developing capacity for Italian foods to cater for those tourists that have a taste or a liking for Italian food, then it is within the ambit of the consideration because that is part of the capacity you need locally in order to attract sustainable tourism.  

MR AWORI: Thank you my honourable colleague. I know we share the same kind of level –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was a procedural matter the Minister wanted to raise.

MR AWORI: But procedurally, Madam Speaker, usually they answer after we have finished.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): I have a procedural problem. This loan request was exhaustively debated. The same issues that are being raised now were raised, considered and recommendations were made upon which the loan request was referred back to the committee. The committee went and addressed the concerns that were raised by members. These are the very concerns that are being raised now; debate is being re-opened on the issues that were referred to the committee. 


The committee made a report, it has given its recommendations; is it procedurally correct for us now to disregard the recommendations of the committee and re-open debate as if the committee did no work? I thought that procedurally we should be looking at the recommendations of the committee to see whether they have actually addressed in a proper manner the recommendations that we gave. But the way I see it, debate is being re-opened over and over – who the beneficiaries were, non-Ugandans – issues, which we thoroughly and exhaustively discussed at the first instance.  Why don’t we, Madam Speaker, restrict ourselves to the recommendations made by the committee on the referred issues?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had already ruled that we should concentrate on the matters, which were unresolved, which the committee was instructed to handle and has reported. So, do not re-open the debate, just touch on the issues the committee has re-handled.  

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My honourable colleague, you are very lucky, you have been covered by the Speaker. Nevertheless, looking at the report, Madam Speaker, there is a letter from the hon. Minister of Finance to the chairman of the committee more or less bringing up the same issue.  

Take for instance Appendix 1, the second page, the Minister says among other things, there is no policy on locally owned companies vis-à-vis foreign owned companies regarding the procurement of these resources. Companies, both locally and foreign owned compete equally for the resources so long as they meet the necessary requirements. This is exactly your own senior colleague re-opening the wounds you are trying to cover.

Now, what I am saying, in this country we should have a policy to the effect that no foreign investors can borrow money locally until he has been here for a period of two successful years of business. That is the only we can tell he is a serious investor. You come here with a briefcase and a little business project, then you walk to EIB, you go to your cousin and he lends you a collateral and then you take the money, which a local borrower should have taken. 
I am saying, Mr Minister, it is time you protected our own people with the little resources we have. Any foreign investor, who wants money, let him bring his money here. For two years let us see his balance sheet then we can see he is a serious person, then he can access local credit.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the hon. Minister that this Apex IV should be reviewed, re-opened, so that you can channel this money by setting up a Uganda Agricultural Development Bank; we want an Agricultural Development Bank, just like you are talking about UDB. We want local people to access cheap money like this. There is no cheap money in this country for a farmer. Madam Speaker, I beg to oppose the motion because of lack of consideration on the part of the Minister. Otherwise, I support any initiative that we can have access to the money.

4.23
MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I will try to be very brief. First of all, I thank the committee particularly the chairman that he has started moving as a real Chairman of the Committee to heat up the economy to action. Earlier on, I think he was being sluggish, but now he has started moving in the direction where we want him to be before elections, and I must congratulate him very seriously. 

I would like the Minister of Finance this afternoon to clarify to this House –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members!

MR WAMBUZI: To clarify to this House whether the moneys we are borrowing 60 million dollars or 30 million Euros is really big compared to what other countries are borrowing. Madam Speaker, I am told that at the threshold, when countries of the greatest Tigers in Asia were breaking even they had borrowed money to the tune of 3,000 billion. I get amused when I see the economists in this country borrowing peanuts and solving no problem; we just go on revolving in poverty. 

Madam Speaker, I would like this Minister this afternoon only to clarify to me, what is the per capita debt ratio of this country compared to other countries? Madam Speaker, all countries borrow money and they really borrow big and in fact, those who borrow big are the ones who eventually steal the show. I was told Singapore actually had, I think 400 billion before - burst. However, if we go on borrowing 60 million dollars –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and my colleague for giving way. Madam Speaker, we have got a saying that - I will say it in my language then translate it into English –(Interjection)- Yes, I think it is allowed. “Enkoko eshonda akeramire”. In other words that a chicken pecks only that piece which it can swallow. A country like Uganda does not have the capacity to pay back the big loans. That is why we borrow in small loans.

MR WAMBUZI: The American people say if you want to act big think big; there is no short cut to it. So, if you think small you will act small, if you want to shoot and aim low you will not shoot high, it is as simple as that. However, it is very important whenever we are borrowing money to remember that; both the committee and the Minister should always tell us what we are going to benefit?  How much improvement are we going to get on employment, what is going to happen to our employment index or unemployment index, if it is not referred to that we are fighting poverty, Madam Speaker. 

I would like to end by saying that we should approve this loan. However, when you read in today’s papers that a bank made 180.4 percent profit, then you know the peasants are in trouble. A bank getting 180.4 percent profit and the Ministry of Finance is not bothered he is just saying look let us give land in Lumbuye to some other foreigners. That means the black people in this country are actually going to become poorer and poorer; at the end they are going to be foreigners in their own country, which will be a very great pity. I think every borrowing must be focusing to improve the plight –(Interruption)

MR PAUL LOKERIS: Thank you Madam Speaker and my friend for giving way. I think if you are not aware most micro finances institutions here charge a rate of 10 to 15 percent per month. I am sure most of us here are even victims of the borrowings we get from these institutions.

MR WAMBUZI: I thank you, Madam Speaker.  Obviously, my time is over. So, I am saying that it is very important for the Minister of Finance to get involved in seeing that every home, in fact, every citizen of the 24 million people should be able to put on the market a good or a service of 200 shillings only so that at the end of the day he can save only 100 shillings. 

What am I saying? It means that sort of saving and that sort of marketing is equivalent to this country building a factory worth 2.4 million dollars everyday. Now if the Minister is not thinking in that big way then we shall continue endlessly borrowing small moneys and acting in small way and, therefore, not getting out of the poverty levels we are in. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.29
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to start from a point where honourable Wambuzi ended. If you find a bank getting the kind of profit as has been reported in the press today, you wonder what is actually going on. In effect to what is happening is that this money we are borrowing is really not to benefit the Uganda poor; this money is benefiting the foreign banks. The people who are deriving benefits from this money are the foreign banks and to some extent Bank of Uganda because they borrow cheap and lend expensively. 

Let me repeat the statement, which was made by hon. Awori. I think this is something, which is very important for us to know. You see the committee asked the Minister on the question of empowering local firms so that they can actually also benefit from these loans. The Minister was honest to the committee. He said, first of all, there is no policy on locally owned companies namely vis-à-vis foreign owned companies regarding the procurement of these resources. All companies both locally and foreign owned compete equally for the resources as long as they meet the necessary requirements. Can you imagine?  Would these small companies we have been trying to argue in favour of ever be in a position to compete on the same basis as foreign owned companies? The answer of course is, no. 


Let me tell you, Madam Speaker. Last year the Ministry of Finance organised a workshop on this very subject and many of us attended. One of the questions that were put was; “Why was this money being lent to foreign owned banks which were lending the money to foreign owned enterprises?” Where do local Ugandan owned firms come into this picture? Of course there was a guy from Barclays Bank who was very blunt, those of you who were there heard him. He said, “Look, for us we are in business to make money. We are not here to say we must channel money to certain types of customers; we are here to make money. That is our business.”

So, really we should not kid ourselves and say that APEX loans are here to fight poverty, maybe indirectly but certainly not directly. And the money is only benefiting commercial banks, unfortunately foreign owned commercial banks.

Now when you say the committee was supposed to harmonise their positions with the minister, you find that there are still a lot of disagreement between them. For instance, on the issue of affirmative action, the committee wanted money to be channelled to some enterprises outside Kampala. Hear what the minister said. He said, “All the approved financial institutions are based in Kampala that are enjoying 53 percent holding of the projects because of the access to utilities required for successful project implementation. However we have so far held three regional sensitisation workshops to mobilize the business community in these areas to demand the loans. More will be conducted after the loan approval.” 

So, really the minister is saying look, apart from me sensitising the businessmen outside Kampala, there is nothing more I can do. And there is no way we can insist that he allocates a certain proportion of these monies to people outside Kampala. He has given you the reason.

On the question of interest rates, the committee was concerned that Bank of Uganda was earning about 8.2 percent and these other companies I think were adding further margins of between 3.3 to 8 percent. The minister said, among other things, that it should be appreciated that the issue of interest rate is market determined. 


Currently the interest rate for a risk free loan that is, government securities is 12.9 percent which is above the highest rate charged by EADB on the APEX load of four loans. Which means therefore that it is going to be very difficult to apply this loan in the manner in which the committee has recommended. The minister has told very frankly what has got to be done. I think if Government would like to address poverty, they have to revisit the way these APEX loans should be applied. But if he is going to use the loans the way the minister is saying in his letter, we might as well forget about using APEX loans to fight poverty. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, is hon. Otafiire in order to sit in a format showing that he is no longer with us? (Laughter). 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think I will not rule on that one. (Laughter)  

4.37
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank hon. Otafiire for listening to me attentively. (Laughter). Madam Speaker, I rise with pain from an angle of exposing fraud in the manner in which these projects are being allocated. And Madam Speaker, it will bother me so much if I am to wait till the end for the minister to put my questions among the hundred others and they will be forgotten. 

In the APEX III projects as at 31st December 2004, Fontana Auto Parts, which is opposite the Old Taxi Park and supplies spare parts of vehicles, was given Shs.162 million as a manufacturing sector. Hon. minister I want to declare here in Parliament that Fontana Auto Parts is not manufacturing even a needle. They are just retailers and vending spare parts. (Maj. Rwamirama rose_) No, you can’t take the Floor because this is the fraud I am talking about. 

Madam Speaker, Tile Centre Uganda Limited has not yet developed capacities of making tiles. Tile Centre on Bombo Road was given Shs.322 million and the loan was endorsed under manufacturing. Honestly speaking, if you are getting money and giving to retailers –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you honourable member for giving way. I would like to inform you that you should go deeper, but as for Fontana, and the chairman of National Economy will bear with me, it is very amazing that Fontana is one of the biggest taxpayers in this country, if you look at it the way you describe it. But at least they are paying taxes and they are one of the leading taxpayers.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I would have loved the chairman of the committee to clarify to me just this question I have put. These sectors, which were not in the criteria for selections like Tile Centre, they are claiming they are doing manufacturing. Fontana, Matama Hardwares are for service and they did not meet the criteria to receive the money yet they got the money. Did the committee request those firms to refund the money since they are not in the APEX loans III, Mr Chairman Committee?

MR MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we have two types of taxes, indirect and direct taxes. The indirect taxes are paid by the last consumer of an item, and direct tax is paid by the person who is paying his own taxes. The majority of the people who call themselves taxpayers are tax collectors; even Fontana is a tax collector. It is paying the highest VAT, which it is collecting from the last consumer. But if you look at corporation tax, I am sorry to tell you, it is one of the poorest. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR ODONGA OTTO: As I wind up, I will be the happiest person if the hon. minister could tell me what Fontana is manufacturing in Uganda unless I have a very narrow view of manufacturing. Hon. minister I would challenge you to this debate.

Madam Speaker, if the minister is composing himself to respond to me on what Fontana and Tile Centre are manufacturing, I want to raise the issue on page 3 of the committee report. It seems the minister has refused to interject, which makes it very interesting. The next time I talk about this loan, I will bring the shareholders in those companies because it seems this one is not provocative enough. People are giving money to their businesses and no one can respond here in Parliament before we approve more loans. 
On page 3 of the report, the committee said government should provide the use of funds that were transferred to the Consolidated Fund since they were not appropriated by Parliament. I am aware in this very Parliament that a minister apologised to Parliament for running an illegal account for 12 years in Bank of Uganda.  

So, the honourable Minister will tell us which steps he is taking to provide Parliament with that information so that we do not have an illegal account from such a loan.  Lest my allegations are cleared, I will oppose this loan, because the beneficiaries are just middlemen and shareholders and friends and relatives of those who matter in Government.  Thank you.

4.42
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. From the committee’s point 3 - unsolved issues - they have gone ahead to give a time frame. For example, the loan repayments made after six months will be taken to UDB, which will then administer the loan portfolio.  

On the tax payments, they have given two months.  I want a commitment from the Minister on this point that hon. Odonga Otto was raising, whether the Government is supposed to provide the use of funds.  I want a time frame in which the Minister should provide the use of funds that were transferred to the consolidated fund since they were not appropriated by Parliament. I am proposing that you give the Minister a time frame of one month to provide this information.

Two, on this issue of loans, when the Committee of Transport, Works and Communication were looking at the loans that we passed here for the roads in this country- I can give an example of the Soroti-Lira road, but then Government has failed to provide the counter funding and there are a number of them. Even this one of Kabale- Kisoro was also included and funds are not available for co-funding.  There are a number of them under that sector. 

I want a guarantee from you that Government is ready to provide co-funding to these loans that we are approving in this Parliament. We are paying the interest rates before this money starts making more money for us to be able to pay these loans.  Thank you.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, I noted that some of the members who want to contribute arrived long after the report was presented.  So, I do not think whether it is fair to debate something you have not heard.  So, let me ask the chair if he has anything to say in response and the Minister will –

4.45
MR NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri West County, Sironko):  Madam Speaker and the honourable members, I want the whole House to thank the committee, because if we had adopted the report the other time you would have missed a lot. You should also know that all these loans, the development loans, are meant to be at a lower interest rate world over. 

I do not agree with my brother Rwamimrama that this should be above treasury bill interest, because treasury bills are just short term trading. A development loan all over the world is supposed to be for a long period, but at a low interest rate.

Bank of Uganda, it is true- I will request all of you, colleagues, to read the accounts of Bank of Uganda- Bank of Uganda is making losses. I do not know why, but if you look at it you may know the reason.

I want also the House to thank the committee, because putting 30 percent- we were moving from nine percent; nine percent includes Masaka and part of Mukono. I think this is an affirmative direction by the committee to see development, as honourable Engineer Gagawala has said. This committee looks beyond, but you have not been allowing it to look beyond.

Privatisation, yes, it was a very good point. I have talked to the NPC and the NPC agrees with honourable Alaso.  But one point I must tell you here is that privatisation in Uganda was more or less speculative, many people made their money and left.  But the NPC has said Government is taking an affirmative action to help upcountry enterprises and he has requested to meet him.  I am going to invite him at our committee and we discuss this further.

Now I want you colleagues to know that the banks are making a lot of profits, but you have forgotten one thing.  If you look at the top management of all banks in Uganda, they are managed by foreigners. Where are the locals?  So, you must not only look at the banks; don’t’ we produce managers?  So, if we do not produce managers, I think the Government should tell us the reason why we are not producing managers to manage these banks.

Finally, the detailed analysis of all the loans will be provided at the time when we get the tax obligations, but one important thing you must know is that many of these enterprises have been tax collectors other than tax payers, but we believe maybe this loan apex IV is going to produce tax payers this time. 

 I want again to ask the House to thank the committee. Thank you very much, please approve the loan request.

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana):  Madam Speaker and honourable members, I also want to join the Chairman of the Committee in thanking members for this lovely debate. I have just a few issues to respond to.  

I will begin with the last ones by my good friends hon. Okupa and hon. Odonga Otto that Government should provide the use of funds that were transferred to the consolidated fund since they were not appropriated. I am very uncomfortable with that statement.  

When we come here for appropriation, we indicate where the resources are coming from.  The resource envelope comprises of tax revenues, non-tax revenues, loans and loan repayments.  When the borrowers repay to Bank of Uganda, Bank of Uganda credits the consolidated fund and when we come here to appropriate the funds, the money repaid forms part of the consolidated fund that we appropriate.  So, I do not need two months to respond. It is very simple, the money that is repaid –(Interruption)

MR MAFABI:  Madam Speaker, the true story is that, Bank of Uganda has an account for Apex.  Now it has been transferring money to the consolidated account at some intervals.  It is true the committee asked the Minister of Finance to provide the details of how that money has been appropriated and the Minister of Finance has not yet provided.  Mr Minister, you cannot say that you gave us those details at this time.
MR RUKUTANA:  Honourable members, it is true that even before the recommendation of the committee, part of the repayments that did not go to the consolidated fund were used as revolving fund to lend other borrowers.  But anyway, I undertake that that account will be availed to Parliament.  

Now, honourable Awori- well, sooner than later –(Laughter)- Honourable Awori was making a strong statement that we are borrowing –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA: Madam Speaker, I would request your chair to help the Minister make a fixed date other than semantics of “sooner than later”. Even one year is at least a date other than saying “sooner than later”. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, since this request came from the committee and you have not yet complied, can you give us an indicative date.

MR RUKUTANA: Since we have agreed with the Committee that an audited report for apex will be provided in one month then we shall provide the account also in one month.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Committee of Government Assurances, please note that.

MR RUKUTANA: Honourable members, hon. Aggrey asserted that we are borrowing very expensive money when there is cheap money outside there. I want to challenge my good friend hon. Aggrey Awori to tell me where we can get money whose terms are as good or even near to these.  

Honourable members, you may remember if I may remind you of the terms. This is a loan whose maturity period is 15 years. It includes three years of grace and it has an interest rate of 1 percent per annum. I am challenging my good friend, hon. Aggrey Awori, to tell me the source of financing that is much better than these terms.  15 years including three years of grace with 1 percent interest per annum, if he brings it, then we shall go for it. 

A question was raised as to how the poor are going to benefit. Definitely, the poor may not be in the position to benefit from this money directly but they will benefit indirectly because if the firms who benefit from these loans perform as expected, they will pay taxes, they will offer employment and they will consume our utilities at a cost that benefit the poor. You may perceive it as indirect but still it is a benefit. 

As for provision for them, there are other interventions, measures like the Rural Micro Finance Schemes that will be utilized by the poor who want to engage in commercial business. The poor do not need to engage necessarily in borrowing of money they may not be able to utilize and to benefit from it adequately.  

Members have suggested that the loan should be a revolving fund and should not go to the consolidated fund.  The consequence of that is that we must get money and appropriate it to repay the loan.  The loan money goes to the Consolidated Fund from which funds for repayment are derived, but if it is the wish of this House that we use this as a revolving fund, first of all, we have to appropriate it for that purpose.

Secondly, we have to set aside some other money from some other source to effect the repayment. 

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable Minister. The repayment period is 12 years. Now what happens is that the Bank of Uganda does not go to the Commercial Bank to say pay, they just debit the account and get that money. But before the money is due to pay to the European Investment Bank, it should be used to revolve around the new borrowers. This is what it means; not that they should not be paid. 

MR RUKUTANA: As stated earlier, even before the recommendations of the committee, part of the money repaid was already used as a revolving fund. So that is not a new thing.  I think that is all I wanted to respond to.  I want to thank honourable members and to ask them kindly to pass this loan.

CAPT. GUMA: I want hon. Nandala, the Chairman of the Committee to- I am a member of the committee.  I do not want to raise any fresh thing.  My problem is that the foreign exchange rate is around 12 percent and is fixed by Bank of Uganda.  


Treasury bills, is it not possible, hon. Rukutana, that a commercial bank like Stanbic or any other commercial bank can access this money at a low interest rate and it instead goes and indulges in the purchase of treasury bills because it is safer; it is risk free; it is easy business; it causes no headache to the financial institution.  

Is there a mechanism by Government that if a financial institution bank X access apex funds at a cheaper interest rate that there is a follow up to ensure that this money is really accessed by economic players in the economy or the bank is really at liberty to remain with this money and it can invest in treasury bills which at the end of the day does not really cause any shift in the economy.

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you very much. That fear does not arise because disbursement of apex funds from Bank of Uganda is transaction based.  You get a firm, it applies for resources from its commercial bank, the commercial bank appraises the application, if it is satisfied, it places before Bank of Uganda and it is only then that Bank of Uganda disburses funds to cover the approved project. 

 It is not that Bank of Uganda gets a lump sum of money and sends to unapproved financial institutions, but it disburses the amounts of money basing on the transactions that have been approved actually by both the approved financial institution and Bank of Uganda and the European Union. So that fear cannot arise, hon. Guma. 

CAPT GUMA:  Excuse me, honourable Minister, you know as much as I do that there are some businessmen in this country who are in export trade, who have accessed this money.  I do not think for certain that if you read the operation of money of the European Investment Bank that is not the specific areas for which this money is intended.  Just importing ceramic tiles from Dubai here – surely are you very sure that that is what this money is intended for or it is supposed to be in economic projects that cause leaps and bounds in this economy?

MR KABAREEBE MUZOORA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members.  I would like to inform hon. Guma that you should not get stuck only on treasury bills because treasury bills are not necessarily very expensive simply because they want to punish the people who are using the money in terms of interest.  But it can also be used to control inflation. In case of excesses, if Bank of Uganda is to use one of the means, the best is the treasury bills.  

Therefore, if they would go for the money in the consolidated fund because it is accumulated from the apex, it would therefore cause inflation on the other side.  So, I want him to know that balance in the market. Thank you.

MR MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I think hon. Guma has a point and the only way to answer it is the Ministry of Finance. How is it?   If Fontana, which deals in spares borrowed 100 million at 6 percent and decided to buy treasury bills at 12 percent claiming that it is using if for the programme, it will make a profit from the money.  So, that is why I think the Ministry of Finance and Bank of Uganda has to very careful know that this money goes exactly for those long-term development projects, not for people engaged in trading.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, let us conclude this matter.

MR RUKUTANA: The recommendation is properly taken.  I may not be in position to guarantee 100 percent perfection. I cannot rule out cases of abuse here and there, but I can say that funds are borrowed on approved projects.  Those projects in order to be approved must be in line with the objective of the loan.  However, if for any reason there is an abuse, I undertake that we shall prevail upon Bank of Uganda to ensure that it is not oversight. We shall exercise it with a lot of diligence to ensure that those incidents of abuse are avoided.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter was debated on previous occasion and only a few matters remained for resolution.  I have listened carefully to the contributions of members. Only one member has opposed the motion.  So, I would now like to put the question that this House approve the motion as put by the Minister of Finance.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

5.05
THE MINISTER OF WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr John Nasasira): I understand yesterday two statements were required from me. One on Jinja-Bugiri and the other one on the accident by the wagon ferries belonging to Uganda Railways Corporation.  I would like to start with the Jinja-Bugiri. The other copies for the accident are being distributed.

Honourable members of Parliament will recall that on 3 March 2005, I made a statement to this august House following the termination of the contract between the Government of Uganda and Basil Read Bouygues Traveaux Public Joint Venture.  This termination was caused by the abandonment of works by the main contractor during December 2004.  

In my statement I informed Parliament that:
1) Preparations were underway to procure another contractor to undertake the works, subject to the European Union and the Government of Uganda as procurement guidelines.

11) That the Contracting Authority, that is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who is the national authorizing officer of the European Union would also put in place a short term emergency works contract to protect the works already done and maintain the road in motorable condition until a new main contractor was appointed.

iii) In the interim period prior to the contractor being appointed, my Ministry would handle any emergencies along the road with limited finances, plant, equipment and personnel available to the Jinja depot.

Following the procurement procedures, the Road Agency Formation Unit received tenders for the emergency works contract on the 31 March 2005.  Evaluations were made and recommendations submitted to the National Authorizing officer on the 13 April 2005.  Implementation of these recommendations has involved European Union and both the Solicitor General’s office and PPDA (Public Procurement and Disposal Authority) 
The final outcome is that the low bidder for the works, H. Young and Company, their Chief Executive, is expected to be in Kampala this week to finalise contract negotiations with a view of commencing the work early next week.

Honourable members will understand that European Union and the Government procurement procedures in place to provide transparency and to protect public funds are, of necessity, rigorous and time consuming, involving several Government departments and ministries as well as European Union offices in Kampala and Brussels.  So, much as one would want to do something as emergency will have to bear with this.

The challenges faced by my ministry in expediting the appointment of emergency works contractor have been considerable and not fully under our control.  The necessity of the involvement of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as a client is an EU requirement which prolongs the procedures.  All actions related to this project, which is funded through a 100 per cent grant have to have EU approval. This is the reality we have to face as a country still struggling to fund its development budget.  

Similar challenges are faced in the appointment of the new main contractor, but I can promise you that my officers are confident that the bulk of the preparations have been accomplished and that the remaining approvals required, and procurement procedures necessary can be processed within a reasonable timeframe.  We are still hoping to appoint the main contractor during June 2005 as I had previously advised.  

Government regrets that essential procedures to ensure compliance with procurement guidelines have delayed the commencement of the works on this important road rehabilitation project.  However, we are confident that we should see considerable activity on site during the week commencing the 15 May 2005.  

I would like to express my heartfelt regrets at the inconvenience caused to everyone using this road.  

My only promise is that we are trying to rectify a terrible situation that was imposed on us and should be seen as a force majeure.  We are, however, certain we shall overcome it. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, honourable members, I think the major answer, which you wanted have been given. So we only need a limited debate. Now you know the date when the contractor is coming, but we can have a few comments. 

5.12
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers Representative):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank the honourable Minister of Works for finally having the courage to come. We thought he would not make it this afternoon. We are your friend, you should not fear even when there are big mistakes like these.  

The Minister of works informed this House on the 3 March 2005 that some money had been paid to Basil Read. He made no mention about what Government has so far done to make sure we recover that money.  May I take it that, that money has been lost because you are not saying anything about it?  

As hon. Kibanzanga did inform the House yesterday, young children have taken over the role of the state. They are exposed to serious danger and I do not know what the Minister of works had done. They are young and kind; they are the ones who have taken over the responsibility of maintaining your roads. Honourable Minister, they are the ones filling potholes and for a fee ranging from Ugshs 50 to about Ugshs 200.  Now I do not know whether this is part of the arrangement and if you are not aware, what is it that you are going to do?  

You also told us on the 3 March 2005 that partly one of the reasons why Basil Read had to pull out was that you had some disagreements on the structural issues, you introduced new matters. 

I want assurance from you that all these will be sorted out and when work starts it will start without stopping.  Otherwise, for us who come from Bugiri, we think this Government does not take us seriously, and people are saying Government can only afford to break up a road and neglect it in Busoga.  Can you allay the fears of the people of Busoga that you take them seriously?

5.15
MRS JUSTINE KASULE LUMUMBA (Woman Representative, Bugiri):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I want to thank the Minister for having come with this statement. Honourable Minister, I want to commend you for having expressed your sympathy to the people who use that road.  As you expressed, the sympathy what are you going to do to the people who live next to the road, especially in areas where they had already put lime and cement? This is what they have been inhaling for all those months. Their life is at risk and their health is in danger.  What are you going to do for such people?  

I also want to inform the Minister that it is because we Ugandans, especially people in Busoga, we are very poor at litigation but otherwise there is a very sound case here.  You pray to your God that nothing happens. 

I also want to inform the Minister that as he promises us next week, he should know the cream of Busoga and Eastern Uganda uses this road.  The cream, I mean the people who can afford to board a taxi, the people who can afford to buy cars and these are the people who are sustaining families in these areas in Eastern Uganda. These are the people whose lives you put at risk for this long.  

Hon. Minister, please, as you promised next week, let it be next week because we shall be on the same road, and if it does not happen we shall be back here to ask the same questions. 

I want to ask the honourable Minister to really compensate these children who have really been doing his work. In your statement you said the ministry took it upon itself that they would use the meager resources to make sure that they handle the situation, the emergences.  The limited resources, plant, equipment and personnel are available at the Jinja depot, but he has done nothing.  Are the children part of your personnel as Government which is supposed to protect them? Can you compensate the children along that road.  You may not give them the cash but can you improve say the health facilities along that road? Can you improve schools along that road by providing what they require in school?  Thank you very much.
5.18
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank the Minister for the report given.  My point is not on this particular case, but it refers to roads. I wanted yesterday to raise this issue when hon. Babu was talking about the investments in Kampala, and I thought that he should also have considered how we could attract investment through roads.  

I live in Gaba and I use the roads coming from Nsambya through Kibuli. I find that the roads that are surrounding the roundabout at Mukwano Industries are in a very, very sorry state and since the Minister is handling the issue on roads, I would like him –(Interruptions)

MR MWANDHA: I nearly moved a point of order because the Minister who is the National Authorizing Officer for this project was just absconding.  I am glad that he is back and I hope he will stay here until such time when we are through with this discussion.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the National Authorizing Officer must be visibly present throughout this debate.

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  About two weeks ago, we had an incident on Masaka road and people planted banana stems in the potholes.  But I do not know whether the Minister knows what is happening at the roundabout at Mukwano Industries.  You go from Prince Badru Kakungulu road, which goes through Nsambya Police Station; you cannot pass especially when it is raining.  Then you take the 8th Street -(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Mugerwa, you know this statement is specifically on Jinja – Bugiri road.  The matters you are raising should be raised when you are discussing the budget or when the Minister brings the policy statement.  

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  But if we are waiting for that time we may not report for duty.  The three roads are all impassable.  If we have to wait for that- let me just invite the Minister to visit this area or somebody from Government to visit this area and see how we are struggling to reach Namuwongo and Nsambya.
MR MWANDHA: Is it in order for hon. Sauda Mugerwa, the hon. member for Masaka district who probably never uses the road we are talking about even once in two years to divert the House from the subject matter of the statement and begin introducing matters, which are totally irrelevant?  Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She is out of order.

5.22
MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County, North. Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank the Minister of Works for this Statement.  It gives us a bit of insight as to how Government is organized.  I am bothered about the red tape.  You have National Authorizing Officer; you have rough road information unit; then you have his officers in the ministry whom he is now telling us are confident.  Why so many of these people in between?

The European Union has a full Ambassador to this country, and the European Union knows how Uganda Government is organized.  Why should we insist on the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to be the National Authorizing officer when we know the Minister technically equipped in matters of works in this country is the Ministry of Works.  You cannot still call it an emergency when this whole red tape must be fulfilled before you embark on the emergency.

I am wondering because the red tape seems to be taking more time and eating into the emergency.  In fact the red tape has become the emergency.  We are talking about a road, one of its kind in Uganda, the highway road that leads us to the Port of Mombasa; the lifeline for this country. That is the road we are talking about, and everybody seems to be taking his time about such a road.  

One of these days we shall just dig potholes along the road and cut off, because we are tired. Those of us who travel to Bugiri on a weekly basis, you must understand what agony we go through.  We are replacing shock absorbers every month.  There is a week when we lost almost 30 people in accidents on this road.  Then you have got trailers travelling along the road without regard to any other road user.  They do not even bother to reduce speed in spite of the condition of the road.
Yesterday I was proposing- Madam Speaker, you said I should wait until today to make the proposal.  We have a diversion at Musita which could take the traffic in and out of Kenya.  In this emergency status that we are in, can we divert the heavy traffic to that diversion so that at least we can embark on repairs in the absence of the madness of the trailers.  The trailers are making it a nightmare on this road.

As for the small children who come to the road for the handouts, I do not know.  The Minister of Works can do better than this.

MR MULENGANI: Thank you very much, hon. Mwondha for giving way.  The information I want to give you is that, considering the diversion through Musita, the road Musita to Lugala is subject to renovation before it can be used for diversion.  Thank you.

MR MWONDHA: I do not know whether the Member for Bukooli Central would mind a renovation of this road.  I thought he would welcome the possibility of the renovation.  

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, I would like the hon. Patrick Mwondha to clarify to me- yes, the diversion from Busia through Musita is workable.  But the greatest amount of death is occurring between Musita and Jinja.  That is where most people are being killed.  So that diversion might solve the problem between Musita and Iganga, but I see a situation whereby a greatest hazard is actually between Musita and Jinja itself.  So I do not know what hon. Mwondha is going to suggest, or the Minister will suggest for that area.  I need to be clarified about that.

MR MWONDHA: But hon. Wambuzi, what formula do you use, because it could be the attention on the human mind; the attention on the drivers over the entire length of the road that results into these accidents.  Now if this tension is reduced they will drive with a lot of care between Musita and Jinja. So, what is the formula?  

We are thankful that the Minister – not necessarily the Minister because he has said his officers – the officers are now confident that procedures have been done and will get the repairs done.  I hope this time we shall keep to this time schedule because we are walking a long distance, from December to this day we have been promised emergency action.  But the contractor was terminated in December; I mean consideration should have started then.  We have walked a long journey up to this day and I hope the time schedule this time will be kept.

5.26
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  It is not an Iganga clique in as far as the Minister’s statement is concerned. I would like to mention that little has been done on that road in as far as small or some maintenance is concerned because the road signs are not there. They have instead been using stones; and of late people have illegally removed those stones to an impassable place. I think this is serious.  So, maybe the only time to save us is for us to have it in the week as he has mentioned.  

I am also noticing that the road between Wairaka and Mayuge has many ambushes. Last evening when I was coming from the village, there were some others who were now planning; they had put across their vehicles trying to carry out ambushes at Wairaka.  So, those deep ditches are now havens for thieves. Mr Minister, this is a serious matter.

Now about children, I would differ from my colleagues.  We have had a culture of children purportedly maintaining the road when in actual sense they just destroy.  It is not only on the Iganga or Jinja-Bugiri road, but even in rural areas.  So, it is a deliberate policy that children have taken upon themselves to purportedly be maintaining the roads at the expense of, say, some passengers or some people using the road that at the end of the day you have to pay Ugshs 500 or so.  I think I have been defiant on this. I would like to call upon parents to instil discipline into these children. It is not only on that road.  So, Mr Minister, whoever was saying that you should pay them, I think it is just indiscipline and idleness in as far as that is concerned.

The last one –(Interruption)

MRS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, I am the one who said the Ministry should compensate these children who have been doing the work of the Ministry of Works. I went ahead to say that I am not suggesting they give them money, but instead they should improve the facilities for the children along that road.  I talked of the Health Centres; I talked of the schools.  Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to say that I am suggesting that these children should be compensated?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter started yesterday and there are members who demanded that these children should be paid for the services.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you for that ruling, Madam Speaker. The idleness I meant was for the children who are idle on the road, not the honourable member.  I would like to put that one straight.

DR MALLINGA: The laws of this country prohibit employment of minors.  If the Ministry of Works starts paying these children, they would be employing minors, and there is no contract between the Ministry of Works and these children.  It is the responsibility of the parents of those children to see to it that their children go to school and do not go to maintain the road.  So, that question should not even arise, and the Ministry of Works does not maintain hospitals or build hospitals to provide health care.

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Speaker, if I heard my colleague across properly, he was saying there was no contract.  But you know this spirit of patriotism now being exhibited by our young ones. Is he in order to suggest that, that spirit of patriotism should not be encouraged in Uganda?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think –(Interruption)

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I have listened very carefully about children working on the road, who are under 15 years and should be in the Universal Primary Educations (UPE) programme.  

The information I am collecting here is going to help the Ministry of Education to visit that road. The girl or boy under age who should be at primary school will be queried, and if necessary pushed back to the school because we should not encourage these young small children by paying them to be on the road.  
So, Madam Speaker, I thought I would alert my colleagues here that probably those children are running away or dropping out of school and should be encouraged to go back instead of encouraging them to be employed by the Ministry of Works.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I can say on the point of order, honourable members, is that this country is party to conventions that protect children. So you cannot even say under patriotism that our children should be on the road collecting stones, no.  So, hon. Mallinga is completely in order.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Finally, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR WAGONDA MUGULI:  Madam Speaker, I wish to inform my colleagues that actually it is an offence for any individual to purport to be doing any repairs on a public road without authorization of the Ministry of Works.  So, really what it means is that these children could be rounded up and put in a remand home for undertaking illegal activities on a public highway.  

MR KUBEKETERYA: Finally, I would like to urge the Minister that as they enter into this new contract- Musita market was destroyed because of the construction- I would like to appeal to the Minister that the new contractor should put in place a market around Musita junction because that market was razed down. Let it be like other places in Kyenjojo-Kyegegwa road. We should have a market to ensure that our people are compensated along those lines.  I thank you very much.

5.37
MS MUNYIRA WABWIRE (Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to make a comment on a very risky situation that is on this road.  Because of the dig up of the road, what has happened now is that most people around the area have pulled away the big stones that had been put on the road so that vehicles try to pass on that side.  The very big risk on there is that there is going to be head-on collision and it is going to cause very terrible accidents. Everybody is trying to pass on the other side, you find vehicles coming from this side or the other side just coming as if they are going to collide.  
Concerning these holes that were dug up before you get to Musita, one time I was traveling and there were four accidents one of them involving a taxi that had fallen over in one of those holes that were dug. Maybe in the situation as we keep waiting for another contractor, it would be really good for the Ministry of Works to come and fill up those holes so that taxis do not have to fall down into those holes.  I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Madam Speaker, I want to believe that if there is any road in Uganda, which is of such great importance basic to the survival of this country; it is this road which comes from Busia at Kenya border or from Malaba via Jinja/Bugiri, Iganga/Bugiri up to Kampala. 

Honorable Patrick Mwandha has already talked of the life blood to this country and I believe that a government that is efficient and has vision and foresight would have known before hand that by undertaking the repair of this road together with the contractor which is going to be employed this road should be of such a nature that no interference whatsoever should have taken place. By doing so you are interfering with the life of the country. It is the whole economic activity the life-blood of the country that the goods from Mombasa to Uganda go through that road. I am shocked that we have a government which –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you taking information?

MR ATUBO: I will take it; let me conclude this.  I am shocked that we have a government that can go into a contractual arrangement, which totally collapses and the road is rendered impassable. I am also shocked that you have a minister coming to this House on the life-blood of a road for the country talking of an emergency and up to now nothing has been implemented.  

The Minister made a statement on the 3 March 2005, by today, two months later, what is called an emergency has not been implemented. What is an emergency?  An emergency means- doctors know better what an emergency means, you have an action in which you must act immediately. 

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you honorable member for giving way. I just wanted to inform the honorable member holding the Floor that maybe it is a problem of all African leaders. Last month, I drove a vehicle from Mombasa, which was new, but between Maria Khan and Mombasa- this is the same road you are talking about- the vehicle broke between Mutite and Nairobi, it was even worse than what is between Bugiri and –(Interjection)

MR MULENGANI: Madam Speaker, the issues we are raising are concerning the economy of Uganda, not the economy of Rwanda, not the economy of Kenya and not the economy of Tanzania. We are well aware that the infrastructure of these countries is different and there is no way that we should compare the infrastructures of Uganda with bad ones. 

 I would wish a member to rise up and tell us issues of roads like in those developed countries.  Is the Member in order, therefore, to rise up to tell us how a shock absorber can be broken in Kenya?  How can he drive from Mombasa to Kampala? Therefore to impute that in Uganda it is okay for shock absorbers to break from Busia up to Kampala.  Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honorable member, our national cake does not extend –(Laughter)- beyond Busia.  So, I would ask you to inform our representative in the Legislative Assembly to handle that issue of that joint road.  Otherwise, our national cake is only from Busia to here. Please do not divert this debate; you are out of order.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, honorable member for giving way. The honorable member has been wondering about the total collapse of contractual obligations and the statement says nothing about who is responsible and who has lost.  I know according the Minister’s statement he says this is 100 percent grant.  Now, whose money was this, should the contract just collapse? Who is responsible and what does the contract say?  Could be the honorable member- I do not know in your own references whether you have information so that you enlighten us more. 

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA: Madam Speaker, I would like to add on to what honorable Dombo has said by referring to the very first page of the Minister’s statement which talks about termination of contracts because under agreements such as these such termination would have attracted a penalty. 

 I would like to be informed as to whether in this particular case it attracted a penalty because this would act as a deterrent to any other entity that enters into contract with the Government of Uganda on very important issues such as roads.  

Madam Speaker, I am talking from a point of experience where the Kyenjojo/Kyegwegwa road also suffered a setback, but partly because of problems in Yugoslavia at that time.  But I would like to hear more on this in addition to what honorable Dombo has said because it is very important that we get to know whether we are compensated.

MR ATUBO: Well, can you answer that one later. please let me finalize this matter.  Can I end my contribution?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But if it is going to cause –(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: I am finding it procedurally right if a Member of Parliament requests a clarification while another Member of Parliament is contributing- I am preparing answers for Omara Atubo. I see it is better to clarify that immediately from honorable Dora so that honorable Omara Atubo can continue.  So, let me make this clear. 

These clarifications you are requiring are- I think hon. Dombo and hon. Dora Byamukama- I made it clear in my statement of 3 March 2005.  First of all, I made it clear that there was a valuation of the contract and we followed procedures of terminating the contract.  I also made it clear that we use the guarantees to recall the money that the contractor had taken both as advanced mobilization money and performance guarantee, but I will clarify more on that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable Omara Atubo, please conclude. 

MR ATUBO: Finally, I would like the Minister to be clear on his statement and to be understood.  In his first statement he is saying that the problem with the agreement was determination. He said, “Honorable members, I made a statement to this august House following the termination of the contract between the Government of Uganda –” This termination was caused by the abandonment of the works by the main contractor during December 2004.  

In his concluding statement the minister is saying, “My only promise is that we are trying to ratify a terrible situation that was imposed upon us as should be seen as a force majeure. We are, however, certain we shall overcome”. 

Mr Minister, I really would like you to tell the country if it is a termination of contract caused by the abandonment of works or not. Surely, it cannot be a force majeure. A force majeure is a Latin phrase, which means “act of God”. It is an earthquake, a war, or something due to all sorts of things. But I do not think, Mr Minister, you want to be on record in a contradictory way. 

If it is an abandonment of work, which has caused the termination of contract, surely it cannot be a force majeure, and I think you should be very clearly on record. You cannot have the two at the same time. I want the minister, when he is replying, to be very clear. It is either a termination based on abandonment of work or it is a force majeure, and then we shall know what to do after his answer. Thank you. 

5.48
MR ANTHONY YIGA (Kalungu County West, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for his statement and more especially the promises, which he has made that by 15th of May we shall be seeing some emergency works on this highway. 

I would also like to be assured particularly that the minister will do that because this is not the first time that this country has had cases of termination of contracts between contractors and the Government. And a good number of these contractors have been going around to sue the Government and they have been compensated or paid. I hope that in this particular incident this contractor will not go around and then goes to court and the Government loses further. The minister will elaborate more on that one.

The second issue, which I have observed, is that –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: My honourable colleague, thank you for yielding the Floor. I would like to inform you that if you look at page 3, the minister says among other things that the final outcome is that the low bidder for the works, H. Young and Company, is expected to be in Kampala this week. I would like to inform the august House that the same contractor, H. Young, was the one who did the road and not the other person who originally signed the agreement with the Government. The person who failed to do the job is the same who has been given the contract. There was a sub-contractor. The other man never even showed up on site at all. I challenge the honourable minister.

MR NASASIRA: I would like to inform hon. Aggrey Awori that his statement is misleading the House. H. Young was not the contractor on this job. H. Young was a sub-contractor on this job and he was doing his sub-contracting work well. That is why we are even taking this advantage because he is on site. Fortunately, he won also through tendering. He is on site, the equipment is there, and he will start the work tomorrow. Why are you trying to shoot yourself in the foot yet you use that road?

MR AWORI: Thank you for yielding the Floor. You have failed to explain the legalities why we failed to get the road done properly. The major component of the failure was essentially fiscal not physical. There was failure to do it according to specifications. I can go on to mention that on the previous occasions, on the road from Bugiri to Busia and Malaba, they failed to stick to specifications. In your monitoring unit you are supposed to have engineers from the Ministry of Works checking on those people every inch of the way, to make sure that the thickness answers to the specifications in the contract. You failed to do that.

Two, legally, does the element of 17 percent VAT, which nobody complied with and those people used as an exit close, come in? These are the things we want to know. And there is more to it, which I could say, but the occasion is not mine. On the right day I will say it.

MR YIGA: Secondly, I have noted that on this particular road we have been very much relying on foreign firms as contractors. And I know that we have some Ugandan contractors who could also be able to do some similar work. I would like to know why we cannot use our local contractors to work on this road because I know very many of them who have done some good work -(Interruption)

MR KAGIMU: Thank you honourable member for giving way. I remember there was a local contractor but I think it was in Obote II Government. He did very shoddy work. Some people approached him and asked, “How could you do such a shoddy job”? He said, “What can I do? I have to put five layers; the minister eats one layer, the P/S eats the other, I also have to eat another layer. So, I have to put two on the road”. I hope, honourable minister, this –(Interjections)- it was in Obote II Government not this one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order from the Minister of Works. 

MR NASASIRA: I have withdrawn my point of order since I –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, the point of order has been withdrawn. Hon. Yiga.

MR YIGA: Madam Speaker, what I am saying is that basically with supervision these local contractors actually can be able to do some good work for this country. I think we should also develop a policy such that we develop the capacity of these local contractors. Otherwise, we are going to find very big problems in relying on foreign contractors. You can even see –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Could you please protect me from hon. Okupa Elijah?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable revolutionary leader, could your corner let the very serious person in the form of Eng. Byabagambi, to contribute?

MR BYABAGAMBI: The information I want to pass on to my colleague who is holding the Floor is that - I am of course the Vice-Chairperson of the Works Committee but in this country as we talk now, we do not have any local company, which can handle a road of the class of Jinja/Bugiri road. 
A deliberate policy for this government should be made. The Ministry of Works has listed all local contractors and every year they are being graded according to classes D, C, E, and slowly is giving them jobs. Sometimes even they do not look at the quality of jobs they have done but they continue giving them expertise and holding workshops for them for the intention of bringing up these local contractors so that tomorrow they can also handle such big jobs. That is building their capacity. So, the Government is doing it, it is doing it diligently and it is on course.

MR YIGA: Thank you for that information. I also wanted to learn more from the –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Some other information from Mityana.

MR NYANZI: I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I also thank the member for giving way. The information I want to give you is that currently we have a local contractor on Mityana road, a company known as Motiplex, they are working between Muduma up to Tanda. Today I have just come from Mityana but where they started, I have seen already two potholes yet they have not even finished the road. So, it is really a shame. Although we want our local contractors to be given work, they are not yet up to the standard, which is required.

MR YIGA: What has actually been given as information is very good and basically it calls for capacity building. We need to have a policy to develop the capacity of these local contractors, honourable minister. One would be by seconding them to work with international companies such that we develop their capacity. Otherwise, if we are going to deny them work, if we are going to deny them capacity development by saying they have no capacity in the first place, they will not develop it. In Uganda we do not have to rely for very long on these foreign contractors. Time has come for us to develop our local contractors so that they are able to also do some of this work. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.58
MR OTADA OWORI (Kibanda County, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I read the last statement of the minister I was compelled to think that his report had fallen short of what he himself told us here on the 3rd of March about the legal problem. My other colleagues have already talked about it and I would not like to dwell much on that complication. But just for emphasis I would like to say that these fellows, I know, are going to go to court. I do not know whether the Attorney-General has briefed the minister that we shall win this case, but other contractors have gone to court before and we have lost. We are talking about a contract involving bank guarantees of foreign banks and the other time he told us about banks in France, South Africa and I do not know which other country. I do not think that this matter is going to appear like the minister’s report does. 

The minister’s report is actually presenting a situation as if we are in a new contract; as if we have not come out of the contract, which was cancelled and we have a matter to deal with in the cancelled contract. So for emphasis’ sake, I just want the minister to assure this House that the steps that were taken before cancellation were well thought out from the legal standpoint.

Secondly, I would like to say with reference to page 3 that there is phenomenon, which is apparent in Government and especially the Ministry of Works, of awarding contracts to the lowest bidder. Usually there are engineers’ estimates, which the ministry comes up with, or the consultant for that matter, but then you find that we usually go with the lowest bidder and –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sorry, hon. Otada but I think there is somebody who brought a telephone into this Chamber. Can he or she take it out?

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, we are aware that many companies usually bid for jobs and in light of the fact that we always consider the lowest bidders, many companies bid low just to get the job. So, consultants come up with what they call a reserve price but you find these companies bidding lower than the reserve price and that is how they end up abandoning the job, like the minister has said. They find themselves under-quoted; they cannot get any profit, and we shall remain this way if we do not revise the issue of the lowest bidder where you do not refer –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much. I am not very familiar with contracting technical jobs like in the Ministry of Works, but what I know that what is done under consultancies is that when proposals are called for, the financial proposal is only evaluated after the technical proposal has been approved. In the Ministry of Works, when you are considering bids, do you also take into consideration the quality of work and what is likely to come out, before you take on the lowest bidder? Do you just get the lowest bidder, like the statement says?

MR OTADA: I think the minister will clarify on that. All I am saying is that you find contractors bidding way below the realistic price but because we want the lowest bidder, that company gets the job. So, we will always have contractors who will bid for the sake of getting jobs yet they will not get any profit. I would like to thank you, madam Speaker.

6.02
CAPT. (RTD) GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda County North, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, for sure I know that in Uganda public opinion is not terribly important. It does not matter; in my considered view. If it did, the road to Uganda from our neighbouring country Kenya, the only route we have to the coast, which has an emergency aspect that the honourable minister is emphasizing, should have been attended to fast. 

The point of how economically vital the road is has been underscored by hon. Patrick Mwondha and hon. Omara Atubo. Ninety percent of the domestic revenue of this country comes from imports and the majority of these come in via that route. Very few Ugandans use air transport. So there is no need to underscore that point. A senior minister like hon. Nasasira knows it too well.

I am a Member of the National Economy Committee. Over 45 percent of the loans we approve for this country go to the road sub-sector. But it seems to me that there are bigger problems in this sector than meets the eye. I may be wrong, Madam Speaker, because you remember that when the Chairman of the Sessional Committee of Works, Housing and Communications was reading the ministerial statement we requested for the unit cost of the roads in this country. The minister stood here and promised that it would be given within three months and that there was a study in the region for comparative purposes. Maybe three months have not ended! 

The Bugiri-Busia road, Madam Speaker, you come from that region and perhaps once in a while you leave Kamuli and go there. We raised the issue and we do not know who footed the bill for the Bugiri-Busia road or to be exact, Busitema. We do not know who footed the bill because that road was a disaster. 

There was a statement here by the minister and the Committee of Transport, which never convinced a number of us, but government lost money. The honorable minister ought to note that there may be a problem with his monitoring unit, this unit they call RAFU. There may be a problem in that unit because one senior Ugandan, whom I cannot mention on this Floor, told me that Nebbi-Arua road is already peeling off. I do not know - he told me and I respect the man - that Nebbi-Arua road is already peeling off.

MR KAGIMU: Actually this is very serious. When they were constructing Tirinyi road, the Europeans wanted to put two layers but the engineer from the Ministry of Works refused. They tried to seduce him and force him but he refused. I wish I could mention his name; he is a patriot. He refused and they put in place six layers; he insisted on that. I wish that engineer had been sent to Nebbi road because Tirinyi road is the best road in Uganda so far. So, Mr Minister, thank you very much.

CAPT. GUMA: I do not know, Madam Speaker, but it seems to me that there may be some deep-seated problems in the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications. We are here waiting, I hear people call it an accident, this Lake Victoria thing, the Tsunami - which accident was that? It is total disaster. So my dear brother, your monitoring unit most likely has a problem in terms of supervision. For the Nebbi-Arua road I am told, I have not confirmed it, that it is already peeling off.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, even if he has finished, he is my neighbor and we have to put the record straight. Last week we had a meeting of the regional engineers of Northern Uganda. All the district engineers of Northern Uganda were here and the Engineer of Arua was also here. This allegation came to our committee that actually the road was peeling off and he was also wondering where the road was peeling off. We said we were going to visit that road. Therefore, our committee is following that matter up though the engineer in charge denied the allegations. He said that really that road is still perfect. 

This is the engineer on the ground, a resident engineer in Arua, who said that the road is fantastic. Information to the contrary was a rumour and we went ahead to say that, “We shall not take your message wholesale. This committee is organizing to visit that road to verify those rumors”. But the record we have today, the information by the resident engineer is that the road does not have any defect at all.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, my honorable colleague was actually misleading the House by giving the wrong reference. I can give a counter argument to his position. Why is he misleading the House and saying, “We are going there with the committee”, when we know very well that what he is telling us happened to the Bugiri-Busia road? 

The so-called resident engineers saw the road being damaged then they changed the story and they said the axle was the problem. Where were they when they were doing this road? Why could they not calculate that this road takes so many kilos per square meter to damage? It was damaged while they were watching and so do not give me a reference to people who do not have the capacity to tell the exact truth.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable member, I do not know, you have asked yourselves questions and you have answered them. So there is nothing for me to say. Mr Minister, please respond.

6.11
THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I want to thank honorable members for the points they have raised. 

Let me first make a general statement. When members are expressing their disgust at bad roads, I want to make two points about that. I feel happy because some years back almost all the roads in Uganda were like the roads you are complaining about and nobody was raising concern in this Parliament because it was technical that most of the roads were like that. 

The fact that honorable members are raising this shows that the roads are good where they have been done and where there is an exception, honorable members and the public are entitled to be concerned that a section of the road is very bad. To me that is a big achievement since 1986. We were all here; we know how those roads were right from Malaba up to Kampala, Katuna and Gulu.

Secondly, the section of the Jinja-Bugiri road, or at least the part of the road where work had started and was abandoned is very bad, I know. But I am sure honourable members realise that trailers passing through Kampala, and other vehicles, are going through a difficult situation. That is why I expressed regret on behalf of my ministry but the road is still passable, it is not closed. It is still passable but people are finding it difficult to pass. It is bad but it is still passable but the impression was almost as if on that road you cannot pass there now. So, I feel bad when my friend Patrick –(Interruption)

MR WANDERA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable minister to try and give the impression that the road is in good state and that is why it is motorable? In particular he is saying that those of us who are complaining about the poor state of the road are irresponsible. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable Members, if the road were completely impassable there would no traffic at all on that road. The minister is not saying it is in good shape; he is apologising and he is saying he admits that things have gone wrong but vehicles can still go through.

MR NASASIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker for your ruling. Let me quickly tackle some issues raised. My friend, hon. Martin Wandera, I have courage. I can never fear to come to this House to discuss matters concerning my ministry or my constituency. I always have courage and I know I have friends, so I do not fear this Parliament.

Has money been lost? At the time we terminated the contract – I want to repeat this because I discussed it in March and it keeps coming up - the only money that had been paid to the contractor was 30 percent advance mobilisation, which was equivalent to about Shs 30 billion.

What happens with advance mobilisation is that the contractor is advanced this money and every time he does work and puts it on a certificate, the 30 percent of that certificate is retained by the employer. So by the time the contract was terminated, Shs 7 billion had been paid and there was a balance of Shs 23 billion. In contracts of this nature the contractor has got to provide what they call an advance mobilization guarantee by a bank and if he defects, you call on the guarantee so the Government called on the guarantee.

This money was paid. Some of it was in Uganda banks and some more was in France, equivalent to approximately 6 million Euros. Six million Euros is almost US $12 million and part of it was in South Africa. You should realise that this company was a joint venture of a South African company and a French company. The one that was in France, when we called it, the contractor put on a caveat and blocked us. He did not want us to get that money. We took the contractor to court, the French company in France, and around 11th of last month we won our case and the money has been returned to the Uganda Government. (Applause). 

In fact the bank, which was resisting giving us the money, was threatened with being auctioned. It is the bank that had given the guarantee - I cannot remember the name but the contractor has gone ahead and placed a caveat in South Africa and the case will be heard on 31st of this month. I do not want to discuss more details of the matters, which are before court, but I think so far so good.

I was actually not aware that there were children working on that road but definitely the young kids are not employees of the ministry. As hon. Kubeketerya said, this culture is developing. As long as in some roads we have potholes, these young kids tend to come to the road. In fact we do not want them there because first of all the material they put on the road is very bad material and they do it as a way of trying to fundraise from the motorists. I want to appeal to my colleagues who come from that area to help the ministry and advise the parents to make sure that they tell their kids not to go on our roads and do what they are doing.  

Was the design sorted out? Yes, the design was sorted out. Can I alley the fears of the Busoga people –(Interruption)

MR OCHIENG: I thank the honourable minister for giving way. You have just talked about trailers coming to Kampala and I want to inform you that it is because the kids helped to patch up areas of that road that some vehicles reached Kampala. Madam Speaker, this road was in bad shape. They started working on it as far back as December last year. So when the minister talks about vehicles reaching Kampala, he should be aware that vehicles are reaching Kampala because of some form of affirmative action by these people helped. 

I am saying this because I reached the ministry and talked to them about that even before the cancellation of the project. I went to the ministry and said, “Why do you not talk to these people to first attend to areas where there are so many potholes”? They were marked areas and the ministry was aware of these before they cancelled the contract but when I reached them they said, “No, we cannot do anything. We have contracted the work out and we cannot use any more money and we cannot direct the contractor”. 

That is how the issue of these children came in. They are not really children. The areas where you get children are about two spots and the rest of the places have big people who come out of their own good will and sympathy for the traffic in that place. Those who move through these places will bear me witness.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Concerning the children, I do not expect the minister to engage children in labour. It is completely against the law. As for the adults he can tell us what – the children are out, completely.
MR NASASIRA: I thank hon. Ochieng for admitting that most of the people are not children anyway. I am very happy about that information.  

I hope that nobody is tampering with the lime. However, what is most important is that before all these contracts are awarded, they go through the environmental impact assessment analysis and this project passed that assessment. Definitely this is not the first road where we are using lime or cement and to the best of my knowledge, of all the thousands of kilometers we have done, we have not had any information that people who live along those roads were seriously affected by our work. 

For compensating children, schools and health centers, I am sure my colleagues through UPE and the health programmes, are building health centers in all parts of Uganda. These children will benefit from those programmes.

Hon Sauda Mugerwa, the Speaker ruled you out of order but those roads you were referring to really belong to the city council. They are supposed to be  done by the city council.

Hon. Mwondha, I hope you will not cut off the road as you threatened, because you will be adding insult to injury. I want to appeal to you hon. Mwondha, please do not dig a ditch across the road so that it is cut off completely, because that will destabilize our economy and the economy of the region.  

MR MWANDHA: There are two actions, which are to be taken, according to this report. One are the emergency measures by the minister, and the other one is appointment of a contractor to do some works to make the road more passable. Could the minister tell us what we should expect in the emergency measures that the ministry is going to take, as well as what we can expect from the interim works? The emergency works by the ministry are different from the interim works by the said firm. So we want to know exactly because you could see a situation where works are being repeated and people paid double. We would like to be assured about what is involved in the emergency works by the ministry and also the interim works by this new company.


DR TUMWESIGYE: Thanks a lot, Madam Speaker. Following what hon. Mwandha has just said, I am also seeking clarification from the minister. If the emergency contractor is supposed to start on 15th May but the main contractor is going to be appointed in June and in the meantime the Ministry of Works continues to do emergency works with the limited capacity they have, why do we need then to spend money on the emergency contractor who is going to work for only a few days? Why do we not use those resources to boost the Ministry of Works to have better capacity to handle emergencies? In future should emergencies arise they can be better handled by the Ministry of Works, instead of going through the rigorous exercise of getting an emergency works contractor and then a main contractor. Thank you.

MR MULENGANI: Madam Speaker, I would like the minister to clarify to this House how much more is going to be spent. How much more is the country intending to spend if the contractor pulls out due to accidents on that road or the extra work that is going to be done during maintenance? Would it not have been better to continue with the contractor who is due in terms of cost, vis-à-vis the extra cost that we are going to meet along the way until we procure another contractor? Thank you.

MR NASASIRA: We could not continue with the contractor who withdrew simply because he withdrew. You cannot continue with a contractor you do not have. He withdrew and we could not continue working with him.  

But let me explain the emergency. If you look at my statement of 3rd March, on page 2 - let us start with the ministry. My statement says that in the interim period prior to the contractor being appointed, my ministry will handle any emergencies. For example, if the road were cut off completely, we would rush over and make sure the road is opened. So, we are on standby for those kinds of emergencies because the amount of work to be done is different. Our unit is there for any emergency. For example, if a road is impassable or there is a culvert that broke or a bad place to fill, we will do that. That is all. We are just there for any emergency and not that we are on the road.  

On the same page I said that we are to put in place a short-term contract for emergency works. Of course you all agree that emergency work is required now because the road can close any time. That is why we need this contractor and even when you get the contractor in June, he is entitled to one and a half months of mobilisation. So, although you get another contractor now, by the time he gets on site, it will be around August. We did not want to risk that.

More importantly, even when a main contractor is on site, there is what we call maintaining the contractor ahead of construction. For example the section that had not been touched all the way to Bugiri, it is badly potholed. So, this contractor is there to do the emergency work in the areas that were dug up. Of course the situation has been compounded by the rain. The road was dug up and the rains came and trucks passed through, so we need that emergency work. There is no money that we are losing. If this process goes as we want it to, the country and the project will gain.

Hon. Mwandha was talking about this red tape. Well, there are some procedures you cannot avoid. Let me take the case of Parliament. Even if I want a Bill to be passed tomorrow, our procedure here is that when the Bill comes here it must first go to the committee. The committee will discuss the Bill and bring it back for debate after it has produced a report. Some of these procedures are necessary. 

In construction, if you can get a contractor on site in two or three months, that is an emergency. In the procurement process if you can get a contractor on site - and I can quote how long it takes to do the study, design tendering, the international bidding, the evaluation - if you can get a contractor within two or three months, that is an emergency contract in the procurement system that we have. So the red tape is part of the process of government.

I did not understand my friend, hon. Omara Atubo, who said that a visionary government should have known. Although I respect hon. Omara Atubo as the distinguished lawyer he is, I think force majeure goes beyond what he defined. Force majeure, in our conditions of contract, goes further than the acts of nature, to what happens that was not expected to happen. When you contract - even in my statement I made it clear and I first disqualified what happened. I said, “To ratify a terrible situation that was imposed upon us and should be seen as a force majeure”. I was very careful when I was writing this. Nobody expected that the contractor, when we signed the contract, would walk off the site, and these are the things I want honourable members to understand. 

We were caught in a situation where we had contracted somebody to do the work, we were paying him on time, and he just walked off the site. This is an unexpected situation - you wait for him to come –(Interruptions)

MR ATUBO: Madam Speaker, on the issue of force majeure, I have not read the contract, but it was catered for and I am sure that according to that agreement, if he abandoned work then the consequences are bound to be there. So, it is foreseen. Things like somebody abandoning work are foreseen within the contract and, therefore, you make the provision that if one abandons work, these are the consequences. So it is not something, which is not unforeseeable. 

Force majeure really deals with things, which are not possibly foreseeable within the contract. But I believe that in the normal contract of construction, of all these are catered for. However, you cannot foresee a situation in which war is going to break up in Bugiri or an earthquake is going to take place and the whole road is damaged. But if the bank refuses to release money, this is not a force majeure. That is something, which is foreseeable and normally catered for in the contract.  

MR MWANDHA: I am sure in most contracts of this nature the issue of force majeure would be provided for and even that particular provision could be defined in most contracts that we have see. However, it cannot be anything like the minister is explaining in his statement. Probably if the company was wound up before it seized the contract, maybe you can say that could be understood to be force majeure. But you cannot treat abandonment to be force majeure, surely.

MR AWORI: On the same paragraph, I am sure I heard the honourable minister clearly. You said “ratify a terrible situation”. You did not mean to “ratify a bad situation”. Definitely, you cannot ratify a bad situation. So I think you meant “rectify”. It is a typographical error.

MR NASASIRA: Thank you very much, hon. Awori. Actually, I had not corrected my copy but I agree with you. It was rectify, not ratify. There was a typing error. Thank you for that.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: The Speaker has given me the Floor, Mr Minister. Perhaps we are not in order because most of us who are discussing the issue of force majeure are speculating. The minister could have had it in the contract as defined to include abandonment of works. But since we are speculating, we may as well drop the topic unless the minister thinks that use of this word is of import and would therefore advance his case. If not, we might as well abandon the whole issue.

MR NASASIRA: I think my friends, the lawyers, are taking this force majeure too far. They see it in terms of the contractor. Force majeure is normally given for the contractor that for example if there is an earthquake, you cannot blame the contractor for not finishing work because an earthquake happened. That is why I said in my paragraph - and I wish we could leave this - you can see this situation as force majeure because for us as Government, this is not something we were expecting to happen from an experienced contractor. That is all. I am trying to use the word –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us leave the force majeure.

MR NASASIRA: Anyway, let me be allowed to finish because I have another statement to make. 

Hon. Yiga, yes, there is a policy for developing local contractors and as I stated last time, we are developing a policy where we shall have a local construction industry development agency. Recently we had a stakeholders’ workshop, which Members of Parliament attended, and I thank hon. Byabagambi for the details he gave. As the Vice-Chairperson of the Works Committee, he is aware of what the ministry is trying to develop.

Hon. Otada says we should not always award contracts to the lowest bidder, and there are always estimates. Bidding is done strictly in accordance with the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act. We follow it to the letter and we are not prepared to be sued. If a contractor is shortlisted, that means he has qualified to do that work. If he tenders and he is the lowest bidder and although he is the lowest he is still within the accepted margins - whenever you have your own estimate you allow about 15 percent above or below it. If somebody is within 15 percent below the engineer’s estimate, you cannot disqualify him because he is low. He will take you to court and you will pay. So we follow the Act to the letter and that is how these contracts are awarded.

As I said in both statements, we also follow the procurement procedures of the European Union and in this case really I would like members to appreciate the financial capacity of the country in making decisions, in doing work and in doing roads. Sometimes when I hear you honourable colleagues, it seems as if Government or the ministry is refusing to do the work. The ministry is weak financially; your government is weak financially. If you go out and get a grant, then you have to follow the procurement procedures of where you have got that money from. For example, this argument that this money of the emergency could be put in the ministry, the rules of Brussels do not allow this money to go directly into our budget; so what do you do?

As I conclude I once again want to appeal to honorable members and to the people of Uganda, especially the people of Busoga Region and Eastern Uganda who use that road, that we are doing everything we can to make the condition of the road better within the parameters of how we can procure the works. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honorable members, the minister had two statements: one we have just concluded and the second one is on the marine accident. However, I would not like a situation where members who have not heard his presentation debate from ignorance. So, in the circumstances, I will defer that report to tomorrow afternoon. Mr Minister, I understand the report on the marine accident has not reached the members. If it is here, let it be put on the table outside the Chamber; they can pick it as they leave. 

The House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.42 p.m. and adjourned to Thursday, 12 September 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)

