Tuesday, 10 May 2005
 
Parliament met at 2.18 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, I would like to welcome you back from the weekend and your various activities and I would like to bring to your attention an appeal from the Uganda Heart Institute. They have written to appeal to hon. Members of Parliament to buy tickets to attend the concert by the Soweto String Quartet. The tickets are on sale at various places in the city: at Shoprite Ben Kiwuka, the Lugogo Mall, General Post Office, Garden City, and some will be brought here to Parliament for your convenience. 

I would like to urge members to make an effort to not only attend but to also contribute because I am sure that many of you must have been receiving appeals from many people who have children and relatives who suffer from heart diseases, the majority of whom have been taken to India and other places. So, I would like you to help the Uganda Heart Institute on this matter. Thank you.  

2.23
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am standing here in my capacity as the Vice-Chairperson of the Sessional committee on Works, Housing and Communications to raise a matter of national concern.  

On 8th of May 2005, early in the morning, MV Kabalega, the ship, collided with MV Kaawa on Lake Victoria and at exactly 3.30 p.m. MV Kabalega gave way and sunk. The ship was carrying about 22 wagons of cargo, the contents of which cargo nobody knows to date. The Government of Uganda is to lose about US $8 million as the value of the ship, and the business community of this country has lost merchandise of about Shs 8 billion, according to the press reports.  

The Government of Uganda was in the process of concessionairing Uganda Railways and the ships on Lake Victoria are part of the assets, which were supposed to be given to a concessionaire by the end of this year. The committee, with concern, points out the following:

It observes that these ships were not insured. Therefore, the Government of Uganda cannot recover any coin out of this. When the committee was considering the policy statement of the Ministry of Works last year, it seriously pointed out that these ships must be insured immediately but the authority did not take our recommendations seriously and they did not insure these ships. And here we are, they are no longer there.

Contradictory statements have come out regarding how the accident happened. Some are saying that the captains were asleep; others are saying that the captains were actually drunk, with women, that they had women on board the ship so they were drunk. Maybe they were merrymaking –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable member, are you really suggesting that it was women who caused the accident?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I am saying the captains were happy, having their counterparts whom they were drinking with, but of course these are rumors from the press that they were having fun.  

Of recent we have observed serious problems in Uganda Railways Corporation. Issue one is about the strike of the workers. The workers were on strike and the committee has taken a step to resolve this problem, but not conclusively. Actually the Minister in charge of Privatisation was requested by the committee to meet the workers and he met the workers but still the workers are still demanding for their dues. This might be one of the reasons why there was such negligence and why they neglected their duty and the ships ended up colliding on Lake Victoria.

Our committee has resolved today - we sat this morning that we should work together with other authorities. This time we are not trying to leave them to do the work independently but we want to work together with them so that we get to the bottom of this problem. We beg, thereafter, that we submit our findings to this august House.

Other than the strikes in Uganda Railways, there are other issues, especially management issues. There have been wrangles between the management and the board. In other words, there have not been harmonious relationships in Uganda Railways and we pledge as a committee that all these facts concerning this accident will come out. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.29
MR FRED BABBA (Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In relation to the same, I stand to bring out my personal concerns and the concerns of the people I represent. 
You know that the people I represent cannot access any part of land without using water and without using navigation routes. So, we received this news with a lot of shock. Shock in the first place because we have never had such an accident of collision of ships on the lake. We have had other types of accidents but this one has been unique and we still wonder about the competence of the navigators and the captains of this ship.

Secondly, we got concerned about the loss that has been incurred in terms of loss of goods and the asset itself, the ship. This is a big value loss and as you know, many people opt to use the marine routes because they are cheaper, but such situations will scare them off.

We were more shocked when we got the information that these ships were not insured. And to make matters worse, the news has come at a time when our own MV Kalangala ship is about to sail off in a month or so. So, the people of Kalangala and other people who use water transport are very concerned. We would not like our maiden ship to encounter such problems. We would like government to allay our fears that the lives of persons who use marine routes are safe, and we would also like government to clarify about three things. 

One; government should clarify and allay our fears about the competence of marine captains and marine navigators so that when we use water, we are confident.

Secondly, we would like government to assure us that it is going to insure all the vessels that it has in use. It is us the leaders of this country and the Government that have been putting pressure on all Ugandans to make sure that they use well-licensed and insured vessels. But if government itself has not insured its own vessels, we get scared.

The third issue we want government to comment on is the communication: the radar system, the monitoring system, and the navigation systems of the marine vessels. I wondered as I read the news that the information could only be received at the headquarters after five hours after the ship had capsized! Five hours on the lake is too long. It is too long to save lives; it is too long to save the asset. 
Lastly, I would like to thank the rescue team that managed to save the lives. However, I would like government to come up and ensure us that we are going to be safe; that the assets of the Government are going to be safe, and that marine routes are going to be safe. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.33
MR JOHN KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was the Chairman of the Board of Directors of Uganda Railways for six years and I want to say that it is a nightmare to run a government corporation of the magnitude of Uganda Railways Corporation. I was not surprised when I learnt that the vessels had not been insured. For the six years I was chairman of the board we tried to get those vessels insured but the corporation was not generating sufficient funds to be able to insure those vessels plus the cargo on board; and that is something that has to be handled.

Secondly, somebody has asked about the competence of the workers. They are competent but they are also human. It is not surprising that a captain can go to sleep. But we want to be sure that the one who takes over when the other one is asleep is competent enough to handle the vessels.

Thirdly, the mapping of lakes; most of the maps that we use on the lakes were done about 30 years ago - or at least during colonial times - and they have never been up-dated. So, even the mapping of the lake is a problem. But on top of that the navigation aids may break down and the ability of the corporation or everybody concerned to have them repaired in time is always lacking. These are facts, which should be taken into account. 

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you, hon. Kawanga, for giving way. The clarification I am seeking from you, since you were Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Ugandan Railways, since that time are we sure that the trains and their wagons are insured?

Secondly, can you tell this august House, when you look at the railway lines, there are so many people who have put up kiosks and markets along these lines. Are they also insured; are they safe? 
Since it has happened on the waters, very soon it is going to happen along the railways lines. Thank you.

MR KAWANGA: I wanted to limit myself to the vessels because if we go into the rails, the problems are even greater. All I can say is that even the rails are very old. They should have been repaired a long time ago but of course even the discipline of Ugandans - they build very near the railway lines regardless of the accidents they can get into.  

I want to limit myself to the vessels and say that the loss is a terrible one to this country. The railway is of very strategic importance to this country, both economically and even security-wise so the loss of one wagon ferry is going to affect us tremendously. It is high time the committee looked much more carefully at this industry. Whether you want to privatise it or not, it is extremely important that this matter is handled urgently.

Finally, you should handle the issue of the workers of Uganda Railways Corporation. I think they have been shabbily handled throughout and it is necessary that their affairs are looked into because the situation being as it is, you can hardly blame the workers for conducting themselves in the manner they do. For example, if they go to sleep or things like that, how do you ensure discipline? Is there sufficient remuneration? Is there security of employment? All these are issues that should be taken into consideration. I think this country is not taking seriously the importance of the Uganda Railways Corporation in the economy of this country. I thank you.

2.38
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a few questions to the Government and also to my honorable colleague the Vice-Chairman of Committee on Transport. 

Number one is an observation. Generally in all democratic countries where governments have got powers to discipline their officers and ministers, the Minister of Works, the Chairman of the Board of the Railways of Uganda and other relevant officers in position of policy making, should have resigned; and I call upon them, if they have any guts at all or any sense of guilt or responsibility, to actually resign, for the following reasons:

For the Government to lose a property worth US $30 million, is definitely deplorable. So the matter is either sheer negligence on the part of the officers responsible, or sabotage. Whichever way you look at it, they are held accountable. 

Secondly, they have been giving us glib answers and statements. I particularly deplored the statement of hon. Nasasira yesterday, it is as if he were talking to some market men and women. The reason I am saying men and women is that usually whenever they take their wares and products to the market and there is an accident, nobody seems to care. Once again we are running into a position where nobody cares at all.

Madam Speaker, how come they have not given us the cargo manifest? What was on the ship? I saw with my own eyes on TV, a few hours after the accident, the person who was in charge of Luzira Port was Chief of Staff, Maj. Gen. Masaba. What has a Major General, the chief of staff, got to do with the Railways Corporation? What has he got to do with them? How come immediately thereafter 26 UPDF men were arrested? What is their relationship to the two ships colliding? That goes back to the old question: what was in the cargo haul?  

As I said, I saw on TV the chief of staff commanding the journalists that, “Do not take that picture, move this way, move that way”, yet some people were actually in a state of hysteria, “What happened to my relative who was on that ship”?  

More questions: how come some company can put their wares, their cargo worth two million pounds on a ship, which is not ensured? It is impossible! No businessman is that stupid and if you are working on the basis of an LC, no way can a bank allow an LC for merchandise on a transport system, which is not ensured. In the transport system we talk about CIF, Cost Insurance and Freight -(Interruptions)

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, in normal cargo and transport system, it is possible for me to insure cargo in Japan to go and be delivered in Kampala without referring to Uganda Railways. The issue is the insurance, which has chartered to take care of the risks, is the ship insurance. In that instance, the issue of Kaawa or Kabalega is just like a bridge or a road, which you do not know whether a bridge will be there or the road will be there but you want the cargo to be in Kampala or to be in Sudan or in Zaire. 

So, it is important for the hon. Member of Parliament to take note that it is possible for somebody who has no insurance to actually contract and participate in cargo transportation without really being hampered. It is the person who insured at the other end who will pay at the end of the day without necessitating somebody in the middle to also have an insurance policy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us focus on the accident. Let us not speculate about who might have been insured and who was not. There was an accident, so what do we do?

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you, hon. Awori Aggrey, for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker. As we talk in this House I think we should face facts. I know navigation of a ship is just the same as navigation of an aeroplane and the insurance hon. Aggrey Awori is talking about is the insurance of the vessel. The certification process insists that a vessel, which navigates must be airworthy or water worthy, and insured. Insuring goods is irrelevant to insuring the vessel, which carries goods and the people. So I still support hon. Aggrey Awori that the two - hon. Gagawala is talking of insurance, which also exists, but hon. Aggrey Awori’s insurance is paramount to this accident and should be talked about.

We also want to know if there are marine regulations governing the navigation of vessels on the water. When I was trained in flying, all experiments of flying are done under water; they use water to demonstrate the aero flow sections to generate lifts. So these are related and I feel hon. Awori is on the right track. I thought I should inform him that way so that hon. Gagawala also gets this chance of being informed about the two insurances.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Finally, the reason I am calling upon the Ministers of Transport and Communications to resign, this is not the first time they have caused us a loss of US $30 million. As I speak now the road to my constituency from Busia all the way to Jinja is in deplorable condition because they could not sign a proper agreement with the contractor. Once again we lost 20 million pounds. Why do we keep people in certain positions when we keep losing money all the time?

MR MBALIBULHA: Thank you very much, hon. Aggrey Awori, for giving me an opportunity to give you information on the same road. All along I wanted to speak, but this ship thing has brought a problem. Yesterday I was in Bugiri doing my politics, and I want to prevent an accident on this road, the road between Jinja-Iganga, Iganga and Bugiri. Why the work has been suspended, I do not know but I suspect corruption at work. 

What annoyed me yesterday is that the children who are under age have taken over government work and they are the ones maintaining the road by covering the potholes. What annoyed me more is that the stupid road users –(Interjections)- of course they are stupid, they find children maintaining a road and stop there and throw coins to the children. Someone is saying they are helping, I wish her daughter were on that road, expecting an accident. What I want the Government to do is that the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Gender and Community Development and the Ministry of Works should do what it takes to stop the children taking over your work. I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to inform you. 

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I would like to call upon hon. Nasasira to resign forthwith, until we complete investigations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honorable members, we have raised queries. What does the ministry say?

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRANSPORT (Mr Andruale Awuzu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to hon. Badda and the New Vision of yesterday, they have described this accident as a disaster. I think that is an under-statement. I would call this a tragedy, not a disaster. And I am sure all Ugandans have already talked about this tragedy. Tomorrow the Minister of Works, hon. John Nasasira, is going to make a substantive statement to Cabinet and to Parliament. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to request that the honourable minister also comes along with another statement telling us what is happening with that road, because we know that work began and then unfortunately, for some strange reason, all the machinery and all the people who were on that road left. We are very worried about the children who are filling potholes on that road. They are at risk from the trailers and the buses that come by. Is it possible for the honorable minister to come back and tell us that the children will leave the road and that work will continue? And it is not just the children who are on the road, our screens are getting broken every other day as we use that road. That is my request.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Alaso, I remember that a statement was made on the Jinja-Bugiri road. Minister of Works, did you make a statement or did you not?

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, yes, a statement was made but no work was done. The road has got worse and the children have taken over the road. I think we need another statement, if it is about making statements, because no work is being done on that road.

MR AWUZU: Madam Speaker, it is true that a statement was made in Parliament about the condition of that road. However, I can inform the House that we are putting in place a maintenance contract, that is, a contractor to maintain that section of the road, before a final contract is given out.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, last week on Wednesday the honorable minister sent engineers for the Eastern region to the Committee of Works to tell us the state of roads in the East. I remember clearly the regional engineer said, among other things, that they had no resources for giving out a new contract and they are just using half measures. We also raised the same concern that my honorable colleague from Kasese has just mentioned and asked, “What about these children who are using sand to fill potholes”? They said, “Well, that is the best we can do at the moment.” Those were your own engineers!
Honorable minister, are you in order to mislead the august House that indeed there is a contract in place to maintain the road, knowing very well that your people on the ground are doing nothing for lack of resources? Is he in order to mislead the august House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My difficulty is that I did not attend that meeting of the Works Committee, so I do not know what you discussed. What I can say is, I think the Government could make their lives easier by giving advance information. But if you wait to react to complaints, and this is what we are doing, it makes things very difficult. Do you have the money for this contract or do you not?

MR AWUZU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Of course I know -(Laughter)- about whether we have or we do not have money for this road, because I am a Minister in the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications and we interchange all information concerning all our projects -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When does the work begin?

MR AWUZU: I do not know whether –(Interjection)- I do not know whether hon. Awori prefers to take the information given to him by a regional engineer, who is not even in the headquarters of the ministry, or the information being given to him by a minister who actually sits on the top management and knows everything, which goes on in the ministry. But before I complete my statement, my colleague has asked me about money. The Finance Minister can answer the question about the money. So, I am giving a chance for the Minister of State for Finance to answer that part of the question. Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to explain. I want to assure honorable members that money for both items, one granting a new contract for the Jinja-Bugiri road; and for maintenance of the portion that is not yet worked upon, is available and the process of awarding a new contract is in progress.
MR AWUZU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was just about to give that information –(Laughter)- because you will remember very well I said that a contract for maintenance is going to be procured, before I was interrupted by hon. Awori. So, I was actually going to give that information. 

MR MBALIBULHA: Madam Speaker, I want to be clarified. From the Jinja roundabout to Magamaga, what are you maintaining and on what are you spending that money for maintenance? There is no road! What are you maintaining? Do not lie to us, we do not want to call you a liar, you an old man. What are you maintaining between the –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: We are talking here of an accident. Madam Speaker, you use that road. I really seek that government should immediately come up with guidelines on the use of that road because there are vehicles that drive on the left, there are vehicles that drive on the right, there are vehicles that drive in the middle, there are vehicles that drive in the bush, and the place is full of dust. Madam Speaker, you use that route; we should ban usage on that road unless the minister –(Interruption)

DR KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, I read in the papers the other day –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, members!

DR KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, I did read in the papers the other day that the British Government had cut 5 million pounds from our aid. I also read that some of our colleagues on the other side went wining and celebrating when that happened. Are they in order to come here and begin to clamour for roads, which require money, when the same persons were wining and celebrating when the British cut that aid? Are they in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, unfortunately I do not wine and dine with any of you. So I do not know who wined and dined when. Let us deal with the present problem. hen is a contract being awarded; around what time?


MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I was proposing that the Government should immediately start damping the road to avoid dust. What I mean is that they should use trailers to spray water so that if vehicles are driving on the right and left, at least drivers and road users will be able to see each other. But the way it is now, you have five vehicles crossing at the same point, some on the left and others on the right. If the minister could help us do that, it would be a good temporary measure. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when can you report back on the question of the Jinja-Bugiri road? That is what I want to hear now.

MR AWUZU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform hon. Kibanzanga that even a murram road needs maintenance. So, there is some maintenance, which can be done on the whole stretch of that road. I am going to request the minister to include a statement on this road in his statement to Parliament tomorrow. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay can I also ask our Committee on Works to continue monitoring the situation on both issues, in the normal way?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, the Committee of Works recently adopted a different methodology of how to interact with the officials of the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications. We decided to call the lower cadres, the engineers in charge who are implementing those policies on the ground and it is not true that the regional engineer does not sit at the headquarters. The regional engineer sits with you at the headquarters and this regional engineer for Eastern Uganda said that actually he has seen nothing on the paper so far concerning maintenance money. Therefore, sometimes somebody gets –(Interruption)   

MR AWUZU: Madam Speaker, is the hon. Vice-Chairperson of the Committee on Works, Housing and Communications in order to mislead this House just because the regional engineers sit at the headquarters? The regional engineers do not sit in at the top management meeting, which I was telling you about. In the top management meeting we have the minister, the permanent secretary and the directors. These are the people who know everything about what is happening in the ministry. The regional engineers deal with work after they have been given instructions by the top management committee. Therefore, as I had told hon. Aggrey Awori who believes in accepting information from engineers down in Mbale, is the vice-chairman of the committee in order to mislead this House?  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know how you run your ministries so I cannot rule on who goes to top management meetings or not. What we can do now, since the minister is coming to talk about the marine accident and this matter, let us leave it for now and the minister will come to us tomorrow.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I was cut off; I had not yet concluded. I understand the operations of the Ministry of Works very well. I have been vice chair for more than three years now but when a minister stands up and say that a regional engineer does not sit at headquarters, and then after one minute he changes it, that is a different thing altogether. That notwithstanding, the regional engineer said in black and white that on his desk he has not seen anything. Therefore, I am right. Whether it is still on the policy level, the engineer was not informed about that one.

The way we handle business in this House, we bring up proposals in committees and what have you, but the Executive does not implement them or does not taken them very seriously. Like the issue of MVs being insured, the Committee of Works spent hours interfacing with the management of Uganda Railways and we told them, “Do it immediately”. That was our recommendation. 

One year down the road, nothing has happened and here we are lamenting the accident, which happened on the lake. The Government is losing colossal sums of money because somebody has not taken a decision. Who is supposed to take the decision? This is negligence of highest order. This is the Government I love but I have to tell them the truth sometimes. (Applause). This is the negligence of the highest order. They must act. If they do not want to act, then let them relinquish their positions and  go away.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have already agreed that we are receiving a statement from the minister tomorrow on both the marine accident and the Jinja-Bugiri road. So, let us leave that matter for now, we will go back to it tomorrow.

MR MWONDHA: Guidance?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, let us wait for the statement tomorrow.

3.03
MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have two roads that lead to Kenya starting from Musita. Would it be possible for the Ministry of Works to divert the heavy traffic coming from Kenya to Uganda through Musita to save a bit of what remains of the Bugiri road for the time being? You were yourself in Bugiri in November last year and you lamented about the condition of the road. At that time we were being told that by December work would resume. Now it is May – coming to the mid of May and there is nothing at all being done on the road. This is a highway and it is the heavy traffic that is continuing to destroy the road. Why can it not be diverted in the meantime?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Between this afternoon and tomorrow afternoon nothing much can be done. When the minister comes tomorrow, you can repeat this proposal. I do not think anything can be done with this tonight.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF 
PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE 
GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 47,900,000 FROM THE INTERNATIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK FOR FINANCING THE SECOND PRIVATE SECTOR 
COMPETITIVENESS LOAN FACILITY

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker and honourable members –(Interruption)

MR ARUMADRI: Madam Speaker, only yesterday our leaders were telling us we do not need aid. Today here –(Laughter) 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order!

MR ARUMADRI: Today the honourable minister is asking us to approve loans. I thought it would be better to receive than to borrow. Is the honourable minister in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether someone who loans you money is a donor, or the one who grants you money is the donor. The minister will explain what category he is operating in.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I am glad to say that there is a clear distinction between aid and a loan. Aid is a grant; it is a handout where you have no obligation to repay. Borrowing is credit, which takes into account your ability to repay, and actually it is only somebody who is sound enough that can be given credit. We said we may not need aid but definitely, like any other business concerned human beings, we have to borrow. And what I am presenting today is a request for authority by this House to be allowed to borrow amounts, which we shall repay.

CAPT. GUMA: Can I be clarified by hon. Rukutana Mwesigwa? Up to end of this fiscal year the Government is not supposed to have borrowed more than US $203 million –(Interjections)- no, I have that specific figure in my head. You are not supposed to have borrowed, as a government and as a country, more than US $203 million. It is actually in the background to the budget, I have remembered, which I have up in the office. Hon. Nandala Mafabi, the Chairman of the Committee on Economy is here, we have approved more than that already. 

MR MWANDHA: My understanding of government policy is that the emphasis is on grants and not loans, because already we have borrowed and borrowed and we have reached a level, which has never been reached in this country in history. Has the policy of Government changed now and we should go in for borrowing as opposed to getting grants?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister has not even moved; why do you not let him move and then you can raise those arguments?

CAPT. GUMA: Madam Speaker, I request your utmost indulgence that before the minister moves at all he must explain. US $203 million is what was decided by this government to be borrowed. Let him deny it, he is here and I have the figure from his submission. So, why should he move? And even the money we have approved is not utilised. Why should we give him the Floor to move; move for what? We have other urgent business.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister has heard. As part of his presentation he will talk about that matter.

MR RUKUTANA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that a resolution be passed by this Parliament authorising the Government to borrow Special Drawing Rights (SDR) 47,900,000 from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group for the purposes of financing Phase II of the Private Sector Competitiveness Project. I beg to move.

CAPT. GUMA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for a member to request for vital information and for the minister to really withhold that information and we continue the way we are? Is it procedurally in order in this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have directed him to give that information as part of his presentation.

MR RUKUTANA: I am much obliged, Madam Speaker. The motion I am seeking this House to pass should read as follows:

“Whereas a credit agreement for Special Drawing Rights 47,900,000 is to be concluded between the International Development Association of the World Bank Group and the Government of the Republic of Uganda for purposes of financing Phase II of the Private Sector Competitiveness Project; 

And whereas under Article 159(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Government is authorized to borrow money from any source subject to other constitutional provisions; 

And whereas under Article 159(2) of the said Constitution, borrowing by Government has to be authorized by or under an Act of Parliament; 

And whereas in line with the above stated constitutional requirements, government has laid before Parliament the terms and conditions of the stated loan for their approval and authorization; 

Now, therefore, be it resolved by Parliament that the Government is hereby authorized to secure the said credit from IDA of the World Bank Group upon the terms and conditions therein stated.” 

I beg to move.

The objective of this loan is to create –(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, if I maybe protected.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, members! It was seconded by hon. Semakula.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, hon. Ssemakula has no vote.

MR AWUZU: Madam Speaker, I did second the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Andruale Awuzu has seconded it.

MS AMONGI: We do not have copies. Some members have the copy of the report, but there are many members who do not have it and we want to follow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How many members do not have copies? But if it is the motion you are talking about, you have copies of the motion. It comes in your pigeonhole everyday - (Interjections)- yes, it is here. The report? We have not reached the committee report yet.

MR RUKUTANA: I thank you. I can see honorable members have copies of the committee report. I have seen so many copies lying on the desk outside when I was entering this House. Those who do not have copies may take occasion to ask the clerks to provide them copies. The motion is on the Order Paper as Madam Speaker has ruled and I beg to talk to my motion. 
I have to say that the objective of the loan is to create sustainable conditions for enterprise creation and growth that responds to local and export markets in particular. This particular loan is intended, among other things, to cover these followings areas:
(i)	Construction of the Kampala Industrial Park at Namanve.
(ii)	Increasing medium and small enterprises access to  financial services.
(iii)	Providing matching grants to enterprises to enhance their skills, competitiveness and productivity.
(iv)	Assisting producers to brand their products so as to access markets in a sustainable manner.
(v)	To rehabilitate and modernize, by computerization, the land registry
Honorable members have raised a lot of outcry about this and I thank you very much.
(vi)	To improve access to markets by provision of standardization and certification of our products.
(vii)	To enhance public/private partnership in private sector competitiveness.  

Madam Speaker, we had a lengthy meeting with the committee; the committee has made a very good report and this is a very important loan for our economy. I pray that honorable members be pleased to support and pass it. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable minister, can you address the issue of the ceiling of indebtedness?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. The cap or ceiling of US $200 million is something that we, on our own as government, thought about in order to alleviate the problem of our debt sustainability. It was not forced on us by anybody. It is a self-imposed disciplinary measure by ourselves but when we were formulating it we knew that there are areas, especially in infrastructure development, which may not necessarily be bound by the cap that we ourselves put. The loans I am presenting today are for infrastructure developments and competitiveness enhancement. 

Having said that, these loans were contracted before we ourselves put in place that cap of US $200 million.
MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you very much for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday we had an HIV/AIDS workshop at Munyonyo and health workers of the Ministry of Health were complaining that actually the money is there, which we borrowed and some of the grants are not used because we do not want to destabilize our micro economy. 

He is saying that we are developing infrastructure and that this money is coming to save lives; the people who use the infrastructure are the ones we are borrowing for. Is the minister really - I do not want to rule him out of order but is he right in his policy formulation to allow people to die and then we develop infrastructure? I need clarification.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I am not really sure what the honorable member is saying because I am aware that there is what they call the Global Fund. The Global Fund, notwithstanding its impact on our micro economic stability, was accepted as additional funding. In other words, it was accepted over and above the provisions we had in our medium term expenditure framework. 

So, I am not sure - and I was not at that workshop. I do not know what the honorable member was told but the Global Fund is the money that deals with AIDS and related diseases like Tuberculosis and I know that we accepted it in addition to the provisions we had with MTEF and we are already benefiting from that fund. So, I will have to be provided with more facts on the funds that the honorable member is alleging to that were rejected by the Ministry of Finance.

MR LOLEM MICAH: Madam Speaker, I just want to get clarification from the minister and this is what I want to state. At this age of mine I am still useful and I will live in this country for another 50 years, but I am not ready to support this loan. Since I was sworn in in July 2001, I have never seen this government I love and I vote for come here and ask for a loan for any assistance to Karamoja. People are dying in Karamoja because of famine. There is no food in Karamoja but I have never seen them bring here something to say, “Let us ask for some money for food to support people in Karamoja”. People in Karamoja are dying!

Last month in March the Government promised in this House that, “We are going to ask for a loan to support you people of Karamoja who are dying because of hunger”, but now what are you bringing here, this -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us –(Interruption)

MR LOLEM: What is here, Madam?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Calm down, honorable Lolem. You will have an opportunity to speak. The minister is still on the Floor, please.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I have listened with amazement to the submission of my colleague from Karamoja. This loan is called Private Sector Competitiveness; it is for the private sector of the entire country, Karamoja inclusive. That is point number 1. Point number 2 – (Interruption)

MR LOLEM: Madam Speaker, Karamoja has got three districts, that is Moroto the mother district, Nakapiripirit and Kotido. Tell me how much money you have been sending there since? So, are you in order to say in this House that this is to assist the private sectors, what private sectors have you assisted in Nakapiripirit, most especially? So, are you in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I will ask the minister to explain to us along the same way what he has put in Karamoja.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, why I am also amazed is that the Karamoja region, since I became minister four years ago, has easily taken more money than any other region; not only for development but also for security, disarmament and all that. I am aware that there are so many projects that have been passed by this House specifically for Karamoja. If it is the wish of the Member, I will come here with details of the provisions that have been made for the Karamoja region. (Mr Lolem and Mr Apuun rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I can see that the level of operational discipline in this House has really collapsed. Can you allow the minister to complete his statement then you will contribute? You will tell him that he is a liar when I give you the opportunity.  
MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I had moved my motion and I had appealed to honourable members to support it and pass the resolution sought.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have the chairman of the committee?

3.27
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Nathan Nandala Mafabi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I present the report of the committee, I have the following to say: The Committee on National Economy presented a report to Parliament and this was a detailed report. But up to now, this report has not been discussed, and it has a big page or two pages about loans we have borrowed and their utilisation to-date. So far, we have borrowed about US$1.2 billion, and by the time we presented the report last month, we had utilized only US$200 million.  So you can see the problems, which we are facing as we borrow money. 

I want to make it clear to colleagues that every money, which you have borrowed and you have not utilised, even if it is on the account the other side, you pay what we call a charge for not utilizing that blocked resource. That is one.

Two, the Ministry of Finance itself in its wisdom said every year they will not go beyond US$203 million, and that one is before the committee and Parliament and it is in the background to the budget. But I do not know why they are changing their goal posts; it is up to Parliament to decide.

Now, I want to present the report of the Committee on National Economy on the loan request for financing the second phase of the Private Sector Competitive project. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I have also a minority report on this –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Excuse me, honourable members; are we on item 3 or item 4? I thought we are on item 3, but now what the chairman is reporting is on item 4. Okay proceed, Chairperson.

MR BANYENZAKI: The clarification I want to seek is, our chairman says he has a minority report, and we in the committee made a recommendation to approve the loan. Madam Speaker, we took a decision collectively. Now I would like to get a clarification from the chairman whose minority report it is. Is it his?

MR MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I think my colleague has not read the report clearly. We were 15 Members of Parliament who were on that committee, and if you look through the report, there are eight Members who signed it. Now I have a minority report, here it is, signed by two Members - hon. Harry Kasigwa and hon. Salaamu Musumba. (Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, when a minority report is supposed to appear here on the Floor and to be discussed, it is normally attached to the report. I do not know which procedure the chairman is following. Can we discuss a report that has not been put on the Order Paper?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, I think the rules are very clear. When there is a minority report, it should be appended to this report so that after you present, the Members giving the minority report also come and present it. But there was no minority report here.

MR MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is true. I wrote to you and I explained to you that this is the order we are going to present the loan request in Parliament because Members had expressed that they were going to submit their report. And because of that, we thought this loan request would be presented tomorrow and the Members brought in their report today, and of course I had to give it to the Clerk to run it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable members, how do you operate? I mean, the rules are very clear! We had a report here from the Social Services Committee, their minority report came, when the Chairperson of the Social Services Committee completed, we gave the opportunity to the other Members. But you do not even have to write to the Speaker because the rules are here. Present the report, which is on the Order Paper –(Interruption).

MR KASIGWA: Madam Speaker, I would like to apologize for having submitted the report late because I live in Jinja and by the time I got to Kampala, it was after midday and that is when I was able to submit the minority report. But it is just a one-page report and it is going to be circulated shortly. Honourable members, accept the apology.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, you know we have been having several debates about the Rules of Procedure of this House. When it is convenient for one side you say, obey the rules, when it is convenient for another side you say - please, the rules of the House are very clear, we approved them in 2002 and those are the rules we are going to use. Chairperson, present the report. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, this is a very important point. There are several occasions in the past where minority reports have overturned main reports. A case in point is a minority report I put forward before the land report. So, we should not ignore minority reports.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, your minority report was attached to the main report under the rules. Proceed, Chairperson.

MR KASIGWA: Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence on this one here because I have got a right to be listened to as a Member of this House. Actually the report is being circulated. What is wrong with discussing it and the chairman has owned it.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, we are not going to shift rules according to situations; everybody wanting to change rules here will ask for indulgence.

MR KASIGWA: But the chairman has owned the minority report.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, when a Member is absent and has not been privy to the report the chairman is going to read, he can be allowed to debate and articulate his views. But let the chairman present the report he has signed for the committee and we proceed. We are wasting time!

MR MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much and honourable colleagues. This is a loan request for the second Private Sector Competitive project of SDR47, 900,000, which is about $70 million.  

This loan was committed to the Committee on National Economy and the committee, therefore, wishes to report as follows:

This loan will facilitate the private sector to actively help in development of a sustainable economy. This calls for the creation of an environment, both political and economic, which is conducive for the private sector to act as the engine of growth. This enabling environment is, therefore, one of the major focuses of this project, which is a build-up from the previous project which has just ended.  

The previous project however, could not address some of the issues like availability of serviced land, inefficiency of land registry, unaffordable credit facilities, poor entrepreneurship skills to mention but a few.  

The performance of the previous project is highlighted in this report although the committee intends to visit some of those projects in the near future and report to Parliament accordingly.

Method of work:
The committee met with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and its team; Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry; Uganda Investment Authority; the Private Sector Foundation; and the National Planning Authority. The committee also visited the proposed Kampala industrial park in Namanve. 

The following documents were analysed:
· The brief from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
· The financial performance of selected projects since 2001.
· The implementation completion report for the first Private Sector Competitive project.
· The Business Uganda Development Scheme for Small Enterprises (BUDS-SSE).
· The project appraisal document.
· The draft credit agreement. 
· The plan for the proposed Namanve park and 
· The report of the National Planning Authority.
Members this one from the National Planning Authority came late; I will lay it on the Table after my presentation 

The performance of the first project:
The project was as a result of the identified constraints to the development of the private sector in the early 1990s. These constraints included:
· Poor infrastructure
· Unfavourable business environment
· Weak financial systems and legal infrastructure
· High taxes and political instability.

The above constraints led to the initiation of the first Private Sector Competitive project to address the problem of gaps and capabilities of the private sector. 

The components were:
· Shaping the business environment (PSF component)
· Enhancing know-how through markets(BUDS component)
· Enhancing know-how through financial partners (Equity financing component)
· Enhancing know-how through industrial partners (Investment promotion services).

The committee was informed that most of the objectives set out in the seven years project were achieved to commendable levels save for equity component, which was not implemented.

Private sector Component:
The following achievements were realized:
· Several recommendations were made to the government to address the identified constraints to the private investment like legal and regulatory environment, delivery of public utilities to mention but a few.  

· Private Sector Foundation has built a strong membership with about 50 active members, and is recognized as the apex body for the private sector organisations. It has represented private sector in high-level negotiations like COMESA, East African Community and WTO.

· Private Sector Foundation has attracted donor-funded projects in Uganda that are related to the private sector development. 

However, Private Sector Foundation has failed to address the sustainability issue effectively and there are cases of fallout in the private sector.

The Business Uganda Development Sector (BUDS):
Through the process of matching grants for eligible activities to the enterprises and associations to about 745 firms, about US$14 million has been realized through sales. This shows that the more the firms are exposed the more they can do better.

Observations:
· The committee could not ascertain whether 745 firms met their tax obligations. 
· There was no financial institution to do credit analysis other than the Private Sector Foundation itself.  

Our recommendations:
· Private Sector Foundation should review the performance of the 745 firms, and the taxes paid and submit the findings to Parliament.

· Approved financial institutions should manage the funds for this component.

Uganda Investment Authority:
By the end of the year 2004, Uganda Investment Authority claimed to have attracted about 636 projects with a planned investment worth US$2.5 billion. This translates into US$5.2 as additional investment of every dollar spent on investment promotion.  

The distribution of these investments per district is shown in Appendix 1. The level of employment created since is 4,790 people. Jinja, the oldest industrial town in Uganda, is also being revamped and has so far attracted 33 projects.

Observations:
- Uganda Investment Authority does not have a profile and accounts of the purported investors.

- There is inefficient monitoring and evaluation of investors by Uganda Investment Authority.

- The committee tried to contact some of these enterprises but could not confirm their existence as some were reportedly in their formation stages.

- Some of the firms have never paid their taxes.

- Uganda Investment Authority could not avail records on employment created by these firms to show their impact to the nation.
Recommendations:
- Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should urgently restructure Uganda Investment Authority with the aim of increasing output.

- The monitoring and evaluation mechanism by Uganda Investment Authority should be strengthened.

- The different entities/firms should be submitting their accounts and tax payments to Uganda Investment Authority on yearly basis.

- The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should submit to Parliament the performance of Uganda Investment Authority within three months. In fact, here the Chief Executive of Uganda Investment Authority gets over Ugshs 10 million, while the next person gets about Ugshs 2.8 million, which creates gaps.

- Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide the exact enterprises that have come in the country, those still existing and their location and this should be done within three months.

Equity financing:
As earlier mentioned, this never took off, it was cancelled in September 2000 because there was a macroeconomic condition at that time, which could not allow it to be implemented. It was claimed that it would affect the economy negatively.

Recommendation:
Appropriate macroeconomic policies should be put in place to create an environment that will enable equity financing.

Institutional development:
This was a very crucial component through the project. A good team of professionals has been built, who are knowledgeable in managing the multi-donor funded projects. The capacity has led to the growth of the private sector to about 50 business associations.

The committee was further informed that the following were some of the problems encountered:
- The predominantly weak institutional capacity of the business firms
- Insecurity in the country
- Untimely and inadequate disbursements of counterpart funding.
- Weak financial controls and record keeping in the early days of the project.
- Weak internal monitoring and evaluation systems also in the early days of the project.

Recommendations: 
- A list of these professionals should be presented to Parliament since they were not availed up to the time of producing this report.

- The quantified benefits and outputs should be presented to Parliament.

Actions to support indigenous Small Medium Enterprises (SMEs) in the private sector:

The private sector, the government and the development partners have consistently underscored the central role Small and Medium Scale Enterprises (SMEs) play in fighting poverty. They provide quality jobs, assist in attraction of foreign direct investment, help in generation of foreign currency and lead to the diversification of a country’s tax base.

While lauding the government for the market-oriented policies, the committee is convinced that the sustainable growth of the Ugandan economy is going to be directly related to the rate of enterprise creation and development. This in turn depends on the ease with which indigenous SMES can be started, financed and operated on sound business principles that ensure their survival and growth on long-term basis.

A strong case is being made for a deliberate effort to assist SMES through capacity building, as well as prudent access to capital. The macroeconomic achievements so far registered including privatisation, improved telecommunication, improved main highways and reasonable security in most parts of the country can be sustained through a vibrant indigenous SMES sector.

One of the crucial constraints facing Ugandan SMES has been widely acknowledged to be lack of access to credit, especially affordable medium-term finance. This however cannot be addressed in isolation as adverse experience of past public credit schemes may attest.
The Uganda banking sector’s reserved attitude towards local SMES in spite of fierce competition among banks for bankable projects is a testimony that SMES require both financial and non-financial support at a national level. 

This is further illustrated by the high failure rate of Ugandan-owned businesses, the attrition rate being attributed largely to lack of corporate culture in the running of family-owned businesses.  

The committee noted that the challenges of the SME sector, that is, capacity building and access to finance are inseparable. They require institutional-based approach as opposed to the quick-fix project route that is rampant in the country today.  
Vibrant and robust financial sectors follow a business community with good borrowing and savings culture and with general sound business acumen.  This takes several years of concerted effort to achieve.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, is the hon. Chairperson going to read the whole report or just give us highlights? Otherwise, you know the danger you are running.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, why are you intimidating the chairperson?

MR MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you gave us, as a committee, the mandate to do this. We have summarized and we have brought here the report.  Hon. Awori, please give us a chance. If you are tired, you can go and rest.

On the other hand, efforts -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I was just giving a friendly advice to my honourable colleague, and I was also asking him for guidance whether he is going to read the whole report or give us highlights. And I added, among other things, that if you keep reading, some of us might get bored - not necessarily tired, but bored and you run a very big danger when we are tired and bored. Is he in order to start accusing me of things I did not say, that I am tired? Do I look like somebody who is tired?


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the word he used was “risk” and he used it two times. I think the chairperson was really terrified.

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling. 

On the other hand, efforts to address business ethics and create visionary entrepreneurs but without a parallel endeavour to improve SME access to medium and long-term finance shall not generate positive results at a pace Uganda currently desires.

Elsewhere, India - Madam Speaker, we were given this by honourable Rukundo who came from India recently. That elsewhere in India, Malaysia and Singapore’s experiences are instructive in as far as central government’s participation in forging SME growth through institutions that combine financial and non-financial services.

India with its well-regarded state-supported 33-years old entrepreneurship development institute works on the principle that macroeconomic policies cannot succeed in the absence of a strong indigenous SME sector and, therefore, allocates at least one per cent of its development/capital budget to skills development programmes run by institutions rather than projects through short-terms solutions.

The committee proposes the following course of action:
Transforming Enterprise Uganda into a national enterprise development centre.

Observations:
 There is need for public resources to be allocated to the expansion of the activities of Enterprise Uganda, an institution established by Government with support of donor development partners.

 Enterprise Uganda is an institution that has provided solutions for business development programmes. It however has no facilities to extend its well-received services.

Recommendations:
This institution should be strengthened and provided with five-year budget support to enable it build its brand among SMEs and bankers. 
This support should cover the institution’s medium term strategy incorporating product development, extension of service throughout the country and securing of its own multi-functional enterprise development complex.

Enterprise Uganda should be mandated under the support to develop entrepreneurship products for fresh university and college students as a way of easing self-employment challenges for the educated youths.

The institution should develop products for assisting fulltime employees in Government, corporate private sector et cetera, to start side income-generating activities using savings from employment as away of assuring a decent retirement with integrity. Subject to review of a detailed strategy document this intervention should receive about US$7.0 million. 

Resuscitation of Uganda development bank:
The committee would like to see an unequivocal commitment from the government to get UBD bank into active lending of medium to long-term credit facilities. The bank should also be retained under public ownership and all privatisation activities put on hold. In the addition, the bank should be assisted, under the loan, to put in place a credit guarantee scheme for SMEs structured to operate in close liaison with Enterprise Uganda. The pilot guarantee scheme should be backed by cash collateral of US$5.0 million. This can be funded under APEX line of credit and the government of Uganda.

The components of the second Private Sector Competitive project: 
Developing infrastructure and financial services, which required US$25.9 million.
This is for construction of Industrial and Business Park at Namanve.
Increasing access to financial services by small and medium enterprises.

Enhancing enterprise competitiveness:

Providing matching grants for $10 million.
Developing and enterprising skills: $2.6 million.
Business environment and funding:

That is rehabilitation and modernization of land registry which need $23.8 million.
Enhancing the efficiency and reduce cost of business registration: US$ 0.6 million.
Enhancing SMEs access to markets through provision of standards and certification: $0.4 million.
Implementation of laws to aid business development: US$ 0.4 million.
Enhance public private partnership: US$ 2.7 million.

Observations:
The existing industrial policy is rather old and does not take care of the new developments in the sector.

Jinja, being an industrial area with the basic infrastructure such as rail line, water, airstrip etc should be developed urgently to avoid wastage of such infrastructure.

There is need for a harmonized policy to attract foreign investment in this competitive era.

In order to attract Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) the enabling environment should be created. Uganda has given a lot of incentives to foreign investors like tax holidays, against local investors, who sometimes go away after enjoying these incentives.

There is great need to empower the private sector and encourage the entrepreneurial development in the economy. Empowering the existing micro-and small-scale enterprises can help in implementing this.

The committee was informed that one of the impediments to attracting the FDIs was the current land tenure system. Government is launching an appeal to all district authorities to avail land for development.

The government land is not well documented and this project, under the land registry component, will address this. The committee was informed the land registry should be computerized and decentralized in order to create efficiency in land title acquisition and verification. This will enable many people to access land with development funds using the titles as collateral. This component will also include surveying all government land and opening up the boundaries of the already surveyed land. 

The 29 land registry offices countrywide will be rehabilitated and equipped. Rehabilitation and retooling of the survey school will also be undertaken to meet the growing demand of surveyors in the country.

The land in Namanve:
The total land to be developed in Namanve as Kampala Industrial Park is 890.9 hectares, which was gazetted for industrial use by instrument No. 1 of 1997.

The committee further observed that there are already investors in Namanve. However, the allocation of land to some investors is not transparent and the method of allocation is not known. For example, BAT was given 63.75 hectares for 99 years before any development was made.

Members also feared that the applicant from outside Uganda might disappear without investing yet she/he might use the title as collateral to raise funds even from outside Uganda.

Members agreed to the need for development of infrastructure in Namanve to attract investors.  However, concern was raised on how the land should be divided and eventually allocated to investors.  An example was given where a big portion of land of 63.75 hectares was allocated to BAT Uganda Limited for a lease of 99 years and Century Bottling Company allocated 36.23 hectares of land for 99 years from 19 April 2004. 

The committee was shown the record of compensation.  The land in Namanve was de-gazetted in 1997 where woodlot farmers had been issued with permits. The farmers were accordingly compensated in 2002.

The other piece of land was obtained from the Ministry of Agriculture. The committee was therefore assured that there is no more compensation.

The Members raised the issue of putting more funds in industrial park when some industrial areas like Jinja are still vacant. It was revealed that the project would extend beyond Namanve and cover all towns including Jinja, Gulu, Mbale, Mbarara and Arua to mention but a few. The industrial park to be constructed in Gulu is targeting the market in Southern Sudan and Eastern Congo.

Some funds in the project were allocated to programmes that are not a priority. Such funds include the one for awards and public dialogue.  Members noted that the government could use the machinery in the administration for public dialogue and information dissemination. It is not also a priority to award private investors because the market itself awards them by increased sales. 

The project will be implemented by the Private Sector Foundation, an umbrella organisation for private enterprises, because the capacity of Government to implement it is limited. PSF implemented the first phase of the project. 

Members noted that the disposal of industrial wastes need to be addressed before the project takes off. Namanve industrial park might pour all the waste, both human and industrial, into Lake Victoria. This is reportedly been done in Kisumu.  The committee was informed that each industry would clean its effluence in line with NEMA requirements. The NEMA report on the development of the park was not availed to the committee. 

The committee further observed that the developers in Namanve are not taking into consideration future developments like the oil pipeline, expansion of the road and some have built near the road reserve like one petroleum deport after Coca Cola. 

The committee observed that there is no clear provision for mitigation against pollution as is the case in the industrial area where BAT factory emissions and sewage are a menace to human beings. 

These are the recommendations: 
·To revise the industrial policy as it is overdue.

·Attractions of foreign direct investments should be well packaged and ensure there is a coordinated way of marketing Uganda.

·The private sector should be given some degree of affirmative action in order to encourage their growth instead of exposing them too much to competition to the well-developed multinational businesses.

·US$ 5.0 million be specifically allocated to Enterprise Uganda for transforming it into a visible national institution on SMES development. The South East Asian economies that have managed to mainstream their nationals into meaningful global economic trade and investment followed the same route, sometimes against reservations of external donor partners. The institution should further be allocated at least two hectares of land in Namanve industrial park. This should be the only way to promote SMEs growth on a structured and a sustainable basis.

·UDB should be restructured and its privatisation be put on hold. 

·The re-organization of land registry in Uganda is overdue. The land office should urgently be reviewed, computerized and decentralized, to minimize on the suffering of both locals and outsiders in securing land titles. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should explain what the resources earmarked for computerization of the land registry in 1993 were used for.

·The undertaking to train more surveyors should be expedited to help the district land officers to take on the surveying and mapping of land, including government land.

·There should be a strong monitoring mechanism to ensure that the investors allocated land in Uganda develop such land in line with licence given and the time limit should be enforced to avoid conmen acquiring land for investment and later disappear.

·The industrial development strategy should be extended to all regions to foster regional development. This will control rural-urban migration problem.

·The funds allocated to “Public dialogue” and “Awards” should be allocated to develop Jinja, Mbale, Tororo, Arua, Gulu and Mbale.

·The issue of industrial and human waste disposal should be adequately catered for and NEMA should be actively involved in the programme. Of course NEMA report about Namanve should be presented to Parliament within six months.

·The infrastructure component should be implemented through the line ministries, not through the private sector, as this will make the projects very expensive.
·The method of allocation of land in the industrial park should be availed to Parliament within one month.

·Future developments should be taken into account and all government sectors should take care of this. The issue of future road developments should be carefully considered.

·The grants/loans to the enterprises should be administered through approved financial institutions.

·Local investors/entrepreneurs should be given priority, as they are the engine for any country’s development.

·The Private Sector Foundation should provide Parliament with progressive reports on the implementation of the project every six months.

Project funding:
Funding of the project is US$70 million with an interest of one per cent, maturity period of 40 years with a grace period of 10 years.

As I said, I have a report of NPA (National Planning Authority) and I would pick just few recommendations from it, which are also in line with the committee’s:

·Umeme Limited and National Water and Sewerage Corporation should be the ones to undertake the course of transmitting the respective services to Namanve.  That means this will cut on the cost instead of giving it to the private sector. 

·There should be consideration of the possibility to capitalize the loan under the loan amount of US$25 million in Namanve. That facilitates the creation of a revolving fund for establishment of industrial parks in Uganda.  

·There is also need to expedite the enactment of EPZ Act. I think this is very important and the minister should take care of it.

·Reviewing the activities and increasing the budget allocation to sub-component (1.2), that is on Micro-Finance Institutions (MFIs), and working out details with Bank of Uganda and stakeholders because instead of PSF to be the one giving money, it should be given through the micro-finance institutions who are well gazetted in those areas through Bank of Uganda.    
·Changing the concept from awarding performance based matching grants to MFIs to one where soft loans are given instead. This would help create a revolving fund. What NPA means here is that, instead of giving money free to the investors, they should be given as soft loans and they should return them so that it creates a revolving fund.

·Scale down or even avoid the matching grant method as a means of enhancing enterprise competitiveness. Of course pursuing efforts for institutional capacity building to deliver the required service through established institutions like Enterprise Uganda and Uganda Research Institute. So, I will lay this on the Table. It will form part of our report. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the committee says this great facility will promote the private sector, which is crucial to the development of the economy. It will also enhance regional development and the development of local entrepreneurship. The committee requests the House to adopt the report and pass the resolution for the loan request, taking into consideration the recommendations therein. Thank you. (Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me give guidance on procedure. One, I have looked at the report and established that it has the required minimum signatures so it qualifies for the debate. 

Secondly, I have ruled that hon. Kasigwa did not comply with Rule 171(1) of our Rules of Procedure, therefore, there is no minority report. But when I checked the signatures, he did not actually append his signature to the report.  So, I will allow him to contribute as Member for Jinja West. 

4.11
MR HARRY KASIGWA (Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Madam Speaker, I do not think at any point in time in our Rules of Procedure does the rule state at what point you should submit the minority report.  But since you have made your ruling –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, can you read Rule 171?  Please sit down, hon. Kasigwa. I have given you an opportunity to speak.

Rule 171(1): “Any Member or Members dissenting from the opinion of a majority of a committee may state in writing the reasons for their dissent, and the statements of reasons shall, be appended to the report of the committee.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Read the next rule.

Rule 172 (2): “The Member dissenting from the opinion of the majority of the committee shall be given time to present the minority report at the time of the consideration of the committee report” 


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules are our rules. That report should have been on the main report. If you are insisting, I will not allow you to speak. I am giving you an opening to make your presentation and you are arguing.

MR KASIGWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I will read what I have on paper; I will refer to it.  I would want to make some corrections. In the first paragraph, replace the word “sort” with “sought” and then in the fourth paragraph it is not “initiate” but “initiative.”  

Madam Speaker, the private sector competitiveness loan being sought by Government is aimed at building and strengthening the private sector in the country as a prerequisite for nurturing a strong economy.  

However, in the financial sector (banking sector), the concept of private sector is unanimous with Kampala and its environs. It does not cover upcountry towns like Jinja, Tororo, Mbale, Soroti, Kumi and the like.

Madam Speaker, the National Objectives and Directive Principles stipulate as follows:

IX “In order to facilitate rapid and equitable development, the state shall encourage private initiative and self-reliance.”

XII (ii) “ The state shall take necessary measures to bring about balanced development of the different areas of Uganda and between the rural and urban areas.”

Madam Speaker and colleagues, since it is incumbent upon the state to enhance the rights of the people to equal opportunities in development, passing this loan in this present form as it is spells economic doom for the entire eastern region and in particular Jinja, which already has the requisite infrastructure in place.  

We oppose the deliberate policy to economically marginalize Jinja and other industrial towns of Uganda through this loan. We pray that Parliament stays the passing of this loan and provides a comprehensive plan and loan for countrywide private sector competitiveness on the basis of an in-depth study on the cost effectiveness of the project and its implications to the economy of the entire eastern region.  

Madam Speaker, you hail from the eastern region - but I do not want to bias you. I would like to beg for the indulgence of this House here, that currently as we do speak, the unemployment levels in Jinja, Iganga, Kamuli, Soroti are innumerable and immense. The basic activity in Jinja today is petty informal business like chapatti making and selling. You go round every corner you will find people making chapatti, boda boda; there are not serious industrial employment opportunities in Jinja.

Developing Namanve means a huge additional cost, because that will mean taking railway line to Namanve, building roads, taking power name it into the Namanve industrial area which infrastructure already exist in Jinja and is idle.

Madam Speaker, in Jinja there is a pier. The best internal pier in East Africa is in Jinja; it is lying idle. If we passed this loan and Namanve is developed, Namanve is only 45 minutes away from Jinja that means there is a huge implication on Jinja. So, therefore, Madam Speaker, I would beg that Members understand our plight as representatives from Jinja and Busoga in general and stay the passing of this loan here –(Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, the report is very clear. The construction of Namanve industrial park is, but a small portion of the entire project component. The project covers private sector competitiveness. Private sector competitiveness is handled, among other institutions, by Uganda Investment Authority. Annexure one to the committee report has projects by districts that Uganda Investment Authority covers and the honourable member has talked of Jinja. When you look at annexure one, Jinja has a whole US$203,011,200 million, Kamuli has US$4,961,000 and there are other eastern districts. Tororo has US$539,420,000.  

Actually the eastern districts take the lion’s share of the planned investments. Is the honourable member in order to say that the whole loan be stood over just because one component in his estimation is not extended to the eastern region, when actually the eastern region is taking the lion’s share with a –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not know whether you have contrary information on which you are basing your objection?

MR KASIGWA:  Madam Speaker, I was very clear. I said, passing this loan in its present form, that is all the components as it is, has a problem and specifically I am talking about the Namanve component of this project. I want to give information to this House here honestly. When Namanve was de-gazetted, an acre of land was bought at Shs100,000 speculatively. But today, an acre of land in Namanve costs over Shs100 million and I have got people who have bought land. So, basically this loan here is for speculative purposes, compensating people who have bought land there so cheaply.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you honourable colleague for giving way.  I wanted to inform you that the Annex one, that the honourable minister has quoted, is actually referring to the figures of the total estimates by the end of 2004 and it is not talking about the distribution or how the $70 million you are seeking to borrow is going to be allotted. So, I think the minister has not understood the report. (Laughter).

MR KASIGWA:  Thank you, Dr Epetait.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Minister can you explain that?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, the report is clear.  This project is a follow up on the first phase, that is why it is called second phase, and when you look at annexure 1, it says, “Planned investment.”  Planned both in first and second phases. It is not true that these are the accomplished projects.  Yes, the project is continuing, the figures quoted here cover both first and second phases.

MR MWANDHA: I think the minister should be honest to this House. From experience, you get much less than 50 per cent of the licensed projects actually getting established and investments taking place.  You can show that these have been licensed.  Somebody comes to Uganda Investment Authority and acquires a license to put a project in Jinja, but that does not show that he has actually invested in Jinja; it does not show that he has actually invested anywhere on this list. 

What should be really the correct story would be the actual projects that have been implemented, but not projects that have been licensed. Therefore, the minister should not mislead this House.

MR KASIGWA: Thank you very much for that information, hon. Mwandha. Madam Speaker, hon. Mwandha has put it correctly. What the minister is talking about are licensed projects, which are not there on the ground anyway because I come from Jinja, my colleagues are there, they can testify to this; on the front bench they can testify that there is a problem in Jinja as we speak.

MR MAFABI: Madam Speaker, as you can see, our report is clear. The US$2.5 billion, which is here in total, is planned investment. But Uganda Investment Authority could not provide the actual investment. That shows there is still a problem, even the US$2.5 billion is just a figure, which is not backed up with concrete factors.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the way I see, if we continue arguing on this matter we may not be able to come up with a correct answer. But we are privileged to have two ministers, who also come from Jinja and they are ministers of Trade and Industry, can they tell us the truth about Jinja?  Are these investments there or there are not there, hon. Migereko please?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me ask the vice chairperson of the committee; I saw her standing.
MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I think if this House follows this report clearly, there would be no need of what we are debating now.  We have asked you to pass the loan, which should take into consideration our recommendations. On top of page 5, the recommendation on Uganda Investment Authority says, “The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide exact enterprises that have come in the country, those still existing and their location, to Parliament within three months.’

Now, when you come to say that there is investment, there is actual, there is planned, of course many times planned or actual investment may not be what was planned. But why can we not be patient, three months is not a long period, and Ministry of Finance assured us that they are going to give us this information. If it does not happen then, we can take on Ministry of Finance, and in any case this might not be the last loan, we keep on asking for the performance and now we have been assured that we will be given information.  

Madam Speaker, why do we not really give a chance to the Minister of Finance to provide more information on these investments and the information, which was given, I am surprised my colleagues are bringing in the eastern sentiments because this is supposed to be a national project and that information was clearly given to the committee –(Interruption)

MS NAMAGGWA: Madam Speaker, when one of the Members talks in this House, he/she is talking on behalf of his/her constituency. Usually we are representing a national view, and I think somebody who stopped hon. Kasigwa in this case, who spoke about what is happening in Jinja, was speaking on behalf of a general view nationwide. What he said is actually what is happening in Masaka, and if I were given the opportunity to talk about this loan, I would request that we actually renovate the infrastructure, which is already in existence. 

There is so much machinery, which is being wasted and which is going to give a bad record to the President. So, is she in order to think that the man was speaking on behalf of Jinja, on behalf of his constituency instead of speaking nationwide?
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, I think she was misled by the minister because he enumerated places in the east and did not talk about the other places. I think the minister misled her. Please complete the information.

MS KABAKUMBA: I am really, Madam Speaker, requesting this House to give the Minister of Finance a chance and time to up-date us on the actual investments in the country, and you are aware this cannot be done in one day. Thank you very much.

MR KASIGWA: Madam Speaker, the Floor is still mine. (Interruption).  

PROF. SEMAKULA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give information to hon. Kasigwa by drawing his attention to page 8 of the report. Point 5.1, component of the second private sector competitiveness project is about Namanve. The rest, enhancing enterprise competitiveness applies to the whole of Uganda. Business environment and funding applies to the whole of Uganda and so, more than half of the financial component goes to the rest of the country. And by the way, Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MR LOLEM: Madam Speaker, I was listening to the minister, who is a non-voter in this House, properly. So, is he in order to say all the loan covers the whole country and yet on this list Karamoja is not there? Is he in order to mention the whole country than him specifying the districts? Is he in order to say the whole country and yet Karamoja is not on his list?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, it is out of order for any member to refer to another member derogatorily. Whether he is a non-voting member or not, he is a member of this House only that he does not vote. So, let us please have some decorum in the business of this House.

MR LOLEM: Okay, I withdraw that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, let us ask the minister to explain which parts of the country are in this.

Madam Speaker, the Minister has referred to page 8 of this report. I would like to refer the Minister to both page 8 and page 10 of the same report and to inform him that the amount allotted to development of infrastructure is US$25.9 million which on quick calculation comes close to 40 percent of the entire loan amount; for one component certainly this is a huge amount.  Yet when you refer to page 10, hon. Minister, at the very bottom of the report, No. 7, members actually raised this matter in the committee and they were informed that there would be infrastructure development beyond Namanve; no amounts are given, Gulu, Jinja and the others are mentioned in passing.  

Now the bone of contention, hon. Minister, is that why should we go and develop a virgin area and yet around the country we already have infrastructure that probably will require just renovation.  As an engineer I will tell you, it is more cost effective to look at infrastructure that exists already, that are in a repairable shape rather than thinking of providing entirely new infrastructure.  That is free information to you, honourable Minister.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No you are not informing the Minister, you are informing hon. Kasigwa.

MR KASIGWA: Madam Speaker, there have been so many interruptions.  Madam Speaker, I want to inform this House that sometime back in January last year the President did give a directive to the Ministry of Finance to source funds to carry out a study on the Jinja industrial area; we are talking about two years down the road.  That directive was never implemented.  Honourable Kabakumba – so for you to come and tell me to give Ministry of Finance enough time, how many resolutions have we passed in this House here that they have not honoured?  How many pledges have they made in this House that they have not honoured?

So, Madam Speaker, what I am trying to say is that we should give this economy clear guidance.  The people in Karamoja, as hon. Lolem is saying, desire services and industries; the people of Kamuli do the same.  I have looked at the industrialization policy as developed in 1994 and abandoned by Government – (Mr Mwondha rose_)
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let hon. Kasigwa finish and you will contribute.

MR MWONDHA: Madam Speaker, he has given way.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I just wanted to inform hon. Kasigwa that Jinja has not forgotten.  In the past Jinja was the natural trade fair city in this country, at the source of the Nile.  All of a sudden in the whims of individuals, the trade fair was transferred to a swamp in Kampala; the swamp had to be drained for it to become a trade fair.  Jinja has not forgotten. It is on top of this that Namanve became a forest; it is now being earmarked for industry. Jinja has not forgotten.

MR KASIGWA: In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I would want to inform this House that the Ministry of Finance has drawn out millions of dollars to study the Luzira industrial park in Kampala.  It has drawn up dollars to study Namanve in Kampala. Therefore, colleagues, when we took power in 1986 we talked of a self sustaining and well integrated- we should integrate all the districts of this country and more so since the kisanja project is on board and hon. Nyombi knows, you should consider the people of Jinja.

So, finally, Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is it, is it an order? I think, honourable member, you have finished. Let us go to the chairperson – (Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, procedurally when a report is being read, people should not give information or clarification.  The man should read the report and finish it. So, I think we should leave hon. Kasigwa to – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is no report; it is just a contribution.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: But he circulated it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have said there is no minority report. He is making a contribution and he has concluded. Thank you.

4.37
MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi): I thank you, Madam Speaker.  I want to begin with the issue of Jinja and Namanve. I want my colleagues to appreciate that Kampala is the capital city of this the country. It is a city for all Ugandans, and therefore it is not a surprise that we should develop Namanve industrial park.  
Secondly, Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

MR MULENGANI: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order.  When we come in this House I would not wish us representing interests of this country to start debating in a sectarian way – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, members.

MR MULENGANI: Madam Speaker, a member on the Floor rising up to say Kampala is a city of this country. Everybody, including a child of primary, knows that Kampala is the city of Uganda.  Is the member, therefore, in order, having known the history of country that Jinja was the industrial town; I believe in his science, he must have studied that the industrial town of Uganda is Jinja; to-date it is not an industrial town of Uganda.  

Is he in order to stand up and say that every member knows that this is the city and therefore other towns should therefore be – he is implying that all towns in Uganda should be deprived of their ability to own economic wealth because Kampala is the city? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to draw the attention of the members to our Constitution, in which we are expected to share equitably.  So, if you are saying that all the wealth should go to Kampala, you are out of order.
 
MR KALULE:  Madam Speaker, the honourable member misunderstood me.

DEPUTY SPEAKER:  So, explain what you said.

MR MIGEREKO:  Madam Speaker, I thought I should give this clarification.  Namanve, which is being debated here, is actually outside Kampala.  Namanve is found in the districts of Wakiso and Mukono. As far as we are concerned, the construction of infrastructure in Namanve is part of our Government policy of ensuring that industries reach as many districts of the country as possible.  I thank you.  

MR KALULE:  Madam Speaker, my colleague misunderstood me. I was still developing my point when he cut me short.

DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let us hear from the Minister of housing.

CAPT. BABU:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Whilst other places in Uganda have got representatives here, Kampala does have representatives here and we also represent the interests of the people who are found in the city of Kampala.  Therefore, if we are going to talk about the interest of each area, we also have interests and our people do have interests in some of these industries in Kampala. 

 Now if we are going to talk about Kampala, let us be fair. Namanve as you have been informed, honourable member on the Floor, is actually in Wakiso and Mukono.  Now every time something comes nearer Kampala, there is a tendency to say Kampala should not get this or should not get that. 

 As a representative who represents central business, district of Kampala, I would like to stand here on my feet and say that it is the businessmen or the entrepreneurs who chose Kampala; we did not force them.  They chose this place because of the facilities that are here. Therefore, as a representative of Kampala, I will not agree- (Interruption)
DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Order, order!

CAPT. BABU:  Whilst, Madam Speaker, I am sympathetic with Jinja and other places in Uganda, we have a free market economy in which entrepreneurs are free to invest and are free to choose the location where they put their industry.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR KALULE:  Madam Speaker, I stood up to support this resolution.

DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Order, order, order!

MR KALULE:  Madam Speaker, in the first place I am happy about a decision to develop Namanve industrial park.  One reason I want people to appreciate is that before you put up an industry you are always guided by the market. You will appreciate that Kampala is the most populated town in this country or the most populated city. Therefore, any businessman who is putting up an industry has got to put into consideration the population or the market of the people that are going to buy these goods.  So, it is not a surprise that industrial developers should prefer to locate near Kampala.  

In fact you will appreciate that businessmen or industrial developers were not sent away from Jinja. They just chose on their own to locate near Kampala where you have a market. You will also appreciate that this loan is supposed to transform the land office. For a long time we have been crying about the mess in the land office. 

In fact today, Madam Speaker, I was talking to one of my constituents who has been in Kampala for three days trying to get his land title but the records cannot be found in the land office.  So, if part of this loan is going to transform it, we should all support it. 

Madam Speaker, I also want to point out that people should be able to appreciate what the investment authority has been able to achieve.  Many industries have been put up through their efforts. They are ever moving around to persuade people to come and put up industries here. I think we should in all fairness give support to the Investment Authority because of the good job they are doing. 

I am sure if they are given more money this country is bound to see more industries being built in this country and more jobs being created for the Ugandans who are crying for jobs, and any attempt to support them should be fully supported by this House.  With those few remarks, Madam Speaker, I want to support this motion.  Thank you very much.

4.52
MAJ. (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I thank the committee for this report. I, however, want to make some comments. 
Honourable members, you must realise that the absence of collateral and forgeries in our disorganised Land Registry Office has been a very big problem as far as business is concerned. People do not have collateral; they do not access loans. This has been a very outstanding problem in our community and it has inhibited small entrepreneurs from carrying on business. 

The second area this loan is supposed to tackle as far as land registry is concerned is that- because we have not computerized our land office, if you have time to go to the land registry, all the files are on the floor. We are actually depending on their mercy. 

If you remember one of the problems NPART was facing is titles that were sometimes on the map appearing on lake Victoria.  Madam Speaker and honourable Members, if this loan is to cure this problem we should support it. 

The second issue is the unserviced land. Ever since NRM came to power we have been shouting and inviting investors but we have not created an enabling environment.  The environment of business is lacking. I will not join those who are fighting for Namanve to get plots or Mbarara, but I am looking at the net effect this country is going to benefit from wherever this will be done. (Applause)  

Madam Speaker, we have a problem of power tariffs.  We cannot compound it with unserviced land.  Investors will go where they can access water, where the utility is; they must go where their infrastructure is developed.  Market can be found, but the industry lay out plan must depend on the facilities around.  

Our city has suffered for a long time in that infrastructure follows development.  If you drive on the streets of Kampala every day, there are cutting in the middle of the road and once the road is cut, the road is spoiled.  Now that we are going to develop infrastructure so that development can follow, I think this must be welcome.

One of the areas to be addressed is entrepreneur development skill.  We have talented businessmen and women.  If Ugandans can survive at the interest rates of micro-finance, it is very important that these people receive skills –(Interruptions). Madam Speaker, I will not take information or clarification.  
However, I have a problem with Uganda Investment Authority.  It is very good they have done a lot; they have got a lot of good programmes. But a programme that is not monitored or the programme that does not show output is not a complete programme.  

I have seen the list on this report.  It is actually the plan investment.  Those who take licenses, when they appeared before the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, they were not able to give us the actual benefits in terms of employment and location in terms of tax.  We have to do a lot.  

I agree with the committee; we should strengthen Uganda Investment Authority and we should be able to monitor and evaluate our efforts as far as attracting investors is concerned.

On page 12, I have seen a very good recommendation that has tickled my thinking about divestiture and privatisation.  I want to remind members that we lost the Cooperative Bank and we put the cooperators at the mercy of the micro-finance institutions and we have actually lowered the ability to progress.  

I want to remind you that we came to this House and advised Government that they should not privatise UCB because we are still a developing economy.  We wanted a bank to create money a market.  When you create formal money markets, you avail credit to people for borrowing.  What used to happen with Uganda Commercial Bank is that it was not demand following; it was practicing what we call supply leading.  

The non-profit branches were subsidizing for profit making branches in this country in town.  But once the new investors took stage, they were interested where they make money and they have closed upcountry branches.  

It is against this background that UDB should not be touched.  We need a bank to fight poverty; we need a bank where we can channel money to develop our poor people.  If it is very difficult for a Member of Parliament to go and access money from these cooperate banks; how do you expect peasants to get money?  How are you going to help the cooperatives to run this economy?  

I recommend that UDB should not be privatised. Government should restructure it; it should use it as a vehicle through which development funds can be channelled.

Finally, I want to urge the House to pass this loan subject to the concerns of the committee.  Thank you very much.

4.52
MR FRED RUHINDI (Nakawa Division, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I rise to support the approval of this loan.  First of all, Madam Speaker, allow me to recollect one particular visit that we had in Kenya on the Athi River Export Processing Zone. By that time I was working in the UIA and the President of this nation was treated to that particular function. 

One observation he made was, “Why is it that people leave this very good infrastructure well laid out and come to reclaim swamps in Kampala?”  But I think what he was trying to emphasize is that development follows different partners.  It follows market, like hon. Ssengo was saying; it follows where there is infrastructure and many other factors.  So we can say that there is a deliberate effort to push investments in Kampala as against other districts.  

But that notwithstanding, I hear my colleague, hon. Salaamu Musumba saying, “How can you say that?”  I know the usual requirement that the Government should take deliberate efforts to make sure that the development goes all over equitably in all the other districts.  That is important and should not be taken for granted.  But investment, promotion and facilitation should not be the work of the UIA alone.  Every one of us should be an investment promoter and facilitator.  We in our own districts, we in our places, what have we done to attract investments in our own localities?  

I know there are some districts, for instance, which have demarcated big chunks of land.  They have put their infrastructure and they go and attract investments and say, “When you locate here, we shall not charge you premium for about five years”.  That is investment promotion.  What have we done? (Interruption) No, I am not allowing clarification because I have very little time.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable members, I hope that you are not really abusing our rules.  What rule has he violated before you raise that point of order?  Tell me the rule and the order.

MS MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, I beg your pardon.  First of all, let me excuse myself about the rule that he has violated. I think he is violating my right to assume that I have not done anything to attract the investors to my constituency.  I have done a lot.

In fact as I said, I did not have to attract anybody because there are so many infrastructure, which has to be renovated.  The things are there.  Most of the towns have got a pull effect, but Government has not given attention to renovation of those infrastructures.  

So, I think he is violating my right.  What mechanism does he have to assume or to use to find out whether I have made some attractions or not?  Is he in order?  As far as I am concerned I have done a lot to attract investors.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Namagwa, I have not been to your constituency. So, I do not know what you have been doing, but also he did not talk about Masaka. Please honourable members stop abusing the rules of this House. If it is information make it information.  But do not just say “order, order, order”, because there is no rule that he has violated.  Please, proceed.

MR RUHINDI: Thank you very much for your wise ruling, Madam Speaker.  One other thing I want to say is that as much as I support the approval of this loan, we still have a lot of problems in terms of our public administration. Some of the things we can actually afford without borrowing- I have seen US $0.6 of a million. 

Let me give you an example, if you look at our budget that we are now discussing, you would see that a substantial chunk of every ministry’s budget goes to rent. When I was in the UIA we were renting, but one time we said,” Why don’t we get this money.” Ministry of Finance would say, “No, there is no ready money to give you now so that you can perhaps build your own premises or buy your own premises”. Some of these premises are going at very, very, minimal amounts in some localities like Nakasero and Kololo, but there is no initiative.  
Ministry of Finance gave US $ 600,000 million in promissory notes; USID gave US$200,000. If we bought BAT building, we would even rent to others and generate money, but with us we want to keep borrowing. Public administration expenditure is very high. We want to ride in posh cars which are not maintained. Why don’t we address some of those issues?  

Finally, I want to support the approval of this loan because I am a lawyer and I am in legal practice.  Let me tell you, what we see in some of these places is a nightmare, if you go to Ministry of Lands. With all due respect, I have talked to the honourable Minister, they all know.  

The other day we had an annual general meeting of lawyers and they said the best thing we should do is to take Government to court because clients are losing confidence in the lawyers.  You lodge a caveat, the next day they tell you the white paper has been misplaced; it cannot be found. You move from the bank, you go to where, you go to here, by the time you finish, you are the Member of Parliament and an advocate. What about a commoner, a peasant, coming from anywhere in Uganda? What would happen to that person?  

So, I support the revamping, particularly of the land registry. (Applause).  The only problem I see, because we are talking about 29 land registries, there is a problem. When you go to the land registry, they will tell you they have a problem.  The land registry is supposed to be decentralized to Kampala City Council. Now do these 29 registries include the registries at the local district councils? I wanted that clarification.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

5.02
MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The concept of private sector competitiveness is very good because it helps all of us. It is only the strategy of achieving this competitiveness that causes me to dissent from the committee on which I sit.  

This is the second loan that we are requesting and we do not have an evaluation of the first. It is a mixture of USAID support. It is a mixture of so many grants that you cannot pick out the output of the entire investment. 
I and my colleague, hon. Kasigwa, really strongly believe that this loan in its present form should be stayed. I sat on the committee of Natural Resources in the 6th Parliament, the committee that was led by one of us, the late Dr Eng. Magezi. 

The first trip we made to State House for consultation was about Namanve.  The President said he wanted to degazete it and give it to an Israelite firm to be able to process salt from Lake Katwe.  He also wanted another chunk of land to be able to put industries and this is the genesis of this Namanve thing.  

This land was held in trust for all of us as a country and it was degazetted for purposes of an industrial area, but definitely starting with salt by an Israelite firm.  

Now nine years down the road we see land speculation assuming centre stage and diverting industrial planning in this country.  Industrial planning to the best of my knowledge should follow cost effectiveness where the products of those of industries will be competitive enough to be bought and I do not see that happening with this kind of investment we are doing.  

What hurts me most is that we are asking the peasants of this country to foot a bill of so called competitiveness, which they will not benefit from directly or indirectly. We are not sure that the products will come out on thermal energy, for instance, that they will be competitive enough to be sold anywhere.  So we are going to end up with white elephants and the products that cannot be sold. I say this in really good faith because as a land locked country we should be very mindful of the cost of production for any industry.  

I am concerned about Eastern Uganda because even in the statistics that we have on our books, it is the poorest region much poorer than even the IDPs if you cared to look –(Interjections)- yes.  I am really very concerned about the poverty rates in Eastern Uganda and the lack of investments. This is why I am supporting the staying of passing this loan in its present form. 

To economically marginalize an entire region for two decades is to kill a society. I can understand parts of Northern Uganda cannot attract this kind of facility because there is no peace. I can understand, but they have come to the areas like Eastern Uganda where there has never been war and yet the infrastructure looks exactly like Northern Uganda.

I want to look at Kaberamaido. For instance, when you are going to Kalaki, the road to Soroti in between Kioga County and Kalaki, the infrastructure is dead and the people there deserve to be competitive because that infrastructure did exist. The cotton industry there cannot be competitive because you have not paid attention to it. The maize crop cannot be competitive because no effort has been put there. So, how on earth, even if you added mangoes to the menu of competitive crops for Eastern Uganda, how on earth do you expect the people of Eastern Ugandan to ever come out of poverty? 

I am glad this is happening when the very ministers from Eastern Uganda are in charge because we will have nobody else ever to blame, because they have not paid attention to the region from which they bear their primary mandate.

Madam Speaker, Jinja is an economic mortuary. The first – for you if you went to Jinja, you will only know you have gotten to Jinja by the smell of bats; the smell of staleness; the smell of death in Jinja. 

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, I did not like to interrupt hon. Salaamu Musumba because our interests are the same except maybe politically –(Laughter) The whole of Uganda as a place for industrialization using imported materials overseas, slowly is becoming unviable because of the strategy of Mombasa and Dar–es-Salaam. This is slowly becoming a fact which has got to sink in our heads and very many industrializes will have or may have to relocate as soon as the perimeters change as I see them changing. 

In fact in Kenya, when Moi left, the situation in Kenya is such that Uganda is no longer a desired destination because of the vantage location of the ports. So, the first point which I would like to information hon. Salaamu Musumba is if you are importing raw materials from America, India, Arab countries, Australia via Mombasa and Dar-es-Salaam, the person who is locating his processing factory in Dar-es-Salaam or in Mombasa or anywhere around there will produce at a far lower price than somebody who has put a factory anywhere in Uganda. Whether it is in Gulu or in Mbarara or Jinja or anywhere; that is the first disadvantage. We suffer as an inland country. 

Now with that we should not as leaders start arguing that Jinja has no advantage or Kampala has no advantage. Certainly the city of Kampala per se today is attracting all Ugandans here and we should hesitate to start saying that it is not your city because there are very many people who have come from Nebbi who see this as the only Mecca. There are very many people who have come from Rwanda who are here; this is the only Mecca where they can see. 

Now the problem is, Kampala is a vantage point for light industries. Light industries, I repeat. I am an industrialist by training and light industries is a different game from heavy industries and basic industries. Kampala can never compete with Jinja on issues of basic and heavy industries. So, we must lead our people into a direction that different locations will need different types of industries for the two cities. I beg to inform my honourable member.

MRS MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I am actually surprised. I am shocked that if this is the kind of engineering that I must learn today, this country is in trouble. We all know that Kampala cannot be a vantage. What makes it so? It is by policy and failure to redirect resources and balance development elsewhere. My colleague cannot treat me to this kind of information, which he knows for sure does not benefit the industrial development of this country. He has told me different things in private which are more viable than what he is sharing with me now –(Laughter). 

Madam Speaker, this nation is depending on all of us to put our best brains to deliver private sector competitiveness because I am not against the concept at all. 

Madam Speaker, if, for instance, you put a coca cola industry in Mbarara and you are busy transporting water from Kampala to Mbarara, transporting empty bottles from Mbarara to Kampala and you cannot – the cost of soda should even be less –(Interruption)
MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I would like to clarify to my honourable colleague that actually they do not transport water; they transport the ingredients that make pepsi cola. Water is got from Mbarara.

MRS MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, whatever constitutes coca cola, it includes the water and the concentrates. The concentrates are imported from America. The water - no wonder the coca cola of Mbarara does not taste like coca cola –(Laughter)- because the water there is not the right quality for coca cola. And whoever did the feasibility there knows for sure that it was wrong. It was a political thing, a political vantage point which did not work.

My concern is to look fairly on the industrial plan for this country- [Mr Wambuzi: “Information”] Please, I will give you time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not have a battle of Kamuli here, please.

MR WAMBUZI: it is not a battle of Kamuli, Madam Speaker. It is simply actually keeping the debate on course for all of us to debate. When somebody makes a point which is obviously so oblique that the debate is likely to slide in a direction where it will not actually recover, it is incumbent on us to put her to order so that we steer the debate back to course. 

Why I stood up to put an order to the honourable member who actually I treasure because of our dynamic debate, you know very well that they tried to start a coca cola bottling line in Mbarara and in Mbale, they did not take off. Why? Because the market preferred Kampala. 

Is she really in order, Madam Speaker, to push hard that it was politics which is forcing the coca cola plant to Kampala and when it is a Musoga who actually has been the champion of locating a factory here in Kampala, knowing very well that Hajji Bagalaliwo decided to put the factory here because of the vantage point of locating the factory.  

Is she in order to actually try to suggest that it was political gimmicking which forced the factory to come to Kampala, yet it was actually the banking society of Uganda who actually pushed the pluralisation of industrialization to this Kampala city. Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I did not read the report proposing location of that factory, so I do not know.  Honourable Musumba, please conclude.

MRS MUSUMBA:  Madam Speaker, I finally want to conclude by pleading with the entire House to really understand that what we are doing here concentrating all the industry in Kampala –(Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA:  The biggest agro-processing industry the movement has attracted to date is the BIDCO Palm Oil Industry.  It is well over US$500 million. It is located in Jinja; Madhivani Sugar Works is a multi million dollar institution, it is in Jinja; Kibimba Rice Scheme is a multi million scheme, it is in Kilembe –(Laughter)- There are a series of hotels, which this Government has assisted in bringing up in Jinja.  

Is the honourable member in order to keep on lamenting and almost crying that this Government is concentrating industries in the central part of the country? Is she in order considering that what we are considering now is a mere 70 million project of which only 25 million is going to be utilized in Namanve, when there are multi million or multi billion industries in Jinja. Is she in order, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  There are some developments in Jinja, but please abandon that line, concentrate on the -(Laughter)

MRS MUSUMBA:  Madam Speaker, I am not aware that I must be told what to debate.  What I want to debate is Jinja and I debate it with a lot of emotion, because it was known as the industrial town of Uganda.  It was and for me Jinja is dying by policy design.  It is dying because of policy design and I am sure it is in the interest of the Movement for Jinja to grow -(Interruption) Is it not?  It is in the interest of the Movement for Jinja to grow. Is it not?  And if this is, I am only pleading that Jinja as an industrial base with the appropriate infrastructure should be fast tracked for rehabilitation and for resuscitation as an industrial area.  
Let me inform this House that a market burnt in Jinja – a market and you know the poverty in our area, everything is concentrated around the market - petty trading.  I want to ask the Minister of Industry, has that market been rebuilt four years down the road?  A mere market! 

The neglect of Jinja as an industrial hub must be a concern for the entire nation because it is going to create –(Interruption)

MR MIGEREKO:  I thank you, honourable member, for giving way.  Obviously the honourable member is taking a lot of interest in issues to do with Jinja and we appreciate that concern.  

Regarding the issue of reconstruction of the market. I am sure the honourable member is aware that an initial sum of Ugshs 1.6 billion has already been committed to the reconstruction of Jinja Central market. (Applause).  

It is also true that other markets, which require reconstruction have received commitment such that in line with time, we can have modern markets in as many towns of this country as possible.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, please conclude.

MRS MUSUMBA:  I am sure the people of Jinja have heard and I want them to continue hearing the pledges and the promises and to take note.  

So, I would be glad if affirmative action was given to Jinja industrial town because it is not anything I am creating. It is a thing that is crying for help from all of us legislators and all of us who pass loans to end the economic marginalisation of an entire region.  

I am hoping that we can get a comprehensive plan for Jinja, for Tororo, for Mbale, for Soroti and for the entire wasted infrastructure that lies idle in Butebo, Kalaki and on the route, which just symbolizes the death of an entire region.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.22
MR ALEX NDEEZI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I support the loan request and I support the motion.  
However, I have one serious concern to make in relation to the loan request we are about to authorize today and those we shall authorize in the future.  

I beg my colleague, Minister of Finance, to please lend me your ear.  It is a serious concern and do not be disappointed if in future I refuse to support you if you do not take into account this concern.  

My concern relates to the empowerment of women in this country in relation to the loan requests we are approving in this House and we shall be approving in future. 

Under Article 32 of the Constitution, we have an obligation for the empowerment of women and other marginalized groups in this country.  We have an obligation to ensure that gender issues, the issues of women and other marginalized groups are high on the agenda of our economic policies of economic development.  This would also include the loan request we are talking about or those we shall talk about in future.

I must emphasize that we have had affirmative action in this country, but affirmative action without economic empowerment will never be a reality.  Under Article 32 of the Constitution, there is a provision for affirmative action but looking at this document, looking at reports and the requests, the conclusion we take is that no attempt or effort at all was made to incorporate this element.  

I made an analysis of all the loans approved by the Sixth Parliament and also those approved by this Parliament. My conclusion is that all these requests are gender insensitive to the tune of 95 per cent. This is a serious matter, which we must address if we are to sustain the momentum of empowerment of women in this country.

I have also made a careful perusal of the report of the committee. My conclusion is that there are no news, no news for women in this country, no news for my people in this country, in regard to this loan request.  In order to address this challenging task, the task gender mainstreaming issues in our development programs, we need knowledge, we need experience and we also need an institutional framework.  
Looking at the documents we have here, it is quite clear that nobody in the Ministry of Finance is advising the Minister how to mainstream issues of concern for people with disabilities and other marginalized groups in the development programmes or even in these loans.  If you do not have the skills, call me; if you do not have the experience, call many women Members of Parliament; they can help you ensure that we actually address our constitutional responsibility in mainstreaming issues of concern to the many and other marginalized groups in this country.

I propose to the Minister, I propose to you in good faith; I also propose to the Chairman of the Committee National Economy, next time, please, let us have a gender analysis of each loan request whenever the report is being debated or whenever appraisal is taking interest.  

Please, honourable Minister, this is a humble request. We have a lot of skills in this country, many women Members of Parliament can help; there are many other women who are ready to assist in this important task. This analysis must also include the marginalized groups outlined in Article 32 of the Constitution.  Madam Speaker, with these few remarks, let me once again retaliate my support for this motion and hope that the Minister has noted my concerns.  Thank you.

5.27
PROF. BAZANA KABWEGYERE (Igara County West, Bushenyi):  Thank you Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity to stand here and support this motion.  As I listened to the contributions, it occurred to me that Uganda is like a family where you have ten members, all of whom have no blankets and the new one has just been donated and everybody in each room wants a piece of it and the debate in the family is how this blanket can be shared among the members.  Obviously, if each takes a piece, it will neither cover anybody nor will it remain a unit and at the end of the day the donation will have no meaning.  

When we are discussing a request for loans, I think the fundamental question we should always ask ourselves is, why do we go begging for loans?  We should ask ourselves, when shall we stop begging for loans because a country like Uganda will not survive, will not cover all the districts, will not develop Jinja, will not develop Tororo and indeed all these other areas on loans. 

But more importantly it does not make sense where a drop has been put to justify for example a postponement of this loan. If it so happens that in some place there has been some development, you do not therefore stop this loan as if that corrects the imbalance.  

I was listening to hon. Musumba’s very eloquent contribution, but I was looking for a cure from her contribution and I was at loss.  If you have stagnation across board in the whole country, how do you solve it?  You may find that, oh, yes, that one is dressed but he only has a shirt, of course, that is something on him. But if you also say that he should take off the shirt so that we are all naked, what solution are you providing on clothing?

I have looked at page 9 of this report and the Committee of this House was very, very clear; they did their job. Hon. Kasigwa was not in but it was very clear. There were remarks made which this House should take seriously. The existing industrial policy is rather old and does not take care of new developments in the sector. This is a very valid point, which this House should take seriously.  

Jinja being an industrial area with basic infrastructure such as railway line, water, airstrip should be developed urgently to avoid wastage of such infrastructure - a point well taken.  There is a need for a harmonized policy to attract foreign investment in this competitive era. It is from there that I want to make my two remarks. 

The next point No. 4 says, “In order to attract foreign direct investment, the enabling environment should be created”. They are the very members of this House who decampaigned Uganda not to attract investors. They do it purportedly for the good of Uganda and many of them are the ones talking of how there is unequal development in the country.

Madam Speaker, the last point is No. 6 – (Interruption)


MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Is it in order for the hon. Minister in charge of Local Government, Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere, to allege that many Members of this House frustrate and discourage investors, without substantiating? Madam Speaker, I would rather he substantiates so that we know, so that the rest of us are ruled out of this negative argument. If not, is he really in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, isn’t it a fact that certain organisations have actually lobbied that this Government should not get aid? Isn’t it a fact – (Interjection) – I do not know whether they are in this House.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We live in this country, we are Members of Parliament, and I think we read newspapers, listen to radios, and watch television; how can we be unaware that there are some people of political importance, who de-campaigned Uganda, that it should not get loans and aid?

The last remark, Madam Speaker, is number 6, where the committee was informed that one of the impediments to attract foreign direct investment was the current land tenure system. Government is launching an appeal to all district authorities to avail land for development. Madam Speaker, is it a novelty that people have come up to say that Government is taking land, or that land is being stolen from certain people, from certain districts and so on; and yet at the same time we are talking about industrial development, even not industrial, but to grow crops that can be materials for industry. 

Madam Speaker, let us not be in that Uganda of one blanket; let us not cry of using one blanket instead of finding out why we are crying of one blanket, and when there are collective measures like giving a tax holiday or attracting investors, let us all be one and recognize that the situation we are in can improve. Uganda does not belong to the government; it is not just a policy of this Government that created a deserted Jinja.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, HOUSING (Capt. Francis Babu): Madam Speaker and honourable members, thank you very much. There is an organisation called the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor, which is being funded by Kaufman Foundation in the United States. They have carried out the monitoring of entrepreneurs throughout many countries, and Uganda is one of those countries. 

In two successive reports, Uganda has established that they have a lot of entrepreneurs who are doing very well; we are in fact number 2 now in the whole world, which means, Madam Speaker that there are entrepreneurs throughout this country and they are found in Jinja, Kampala, Gulu, Arua, and Mbarara. These are local entrepreneurs who are on the ground and doing certain types of businesses. These are entrepreneurs who have got ideas, who do not have to be created, but who have to be identified. Enterprise Uganda, which is one of the institutions, which is going to be funded, has got a track record of having identified entrepreneurs in this country, and they trained and counselled them on how business should be done.

Madam Speaker, from that point of view, any organisation which is started, be it in Kampala or Jinja, and it is going to work with all the entrepreneurs of this country and give them a direction on how they should work, that organisation should be supported. And this organisation, Enterprise Uganda, which was initially supported by the United Nations and the Government of Uganda to come here and do that work has done some pilot projects, which have done very well. It is from that point that we should pick it now and say if it is given a second tranche of this money, could it expand its work to other points of this country? The answer is yes, and I do not think there will be any problem, if there is a successful entrepreneur anywhere in this country; and they are there. This is the crux of the matter.  

They have talked about industries. In the olden days, most of the industries were put up by the Uganda Development Corporation and certain types of entrepreneurs, and therefore we could direct Government to go and put up an industry in different parts of this country. 

Today, we have gone into free market economy; we have got an economy that is private-sector led, and the people in the private sector can only be attracted by certain incentives put there by both the areas –(Interruption)
MR ISSA KIKUNGWE: Madam Speaker, while I agree with my colleague that this is a free market economy where the forces of supply and demand are at play, the reason why we are debating this is because there is Government intervention. So, I wonder why he overemphasises free market economy when there is an intervention. Is he in order for that matter then?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think the Minister should address the matter in totality. Who are being supported and where?

CAPT. BABU: Madam Speaker, in fact I was not yet there and my friend jumped the gun, but there it is. I was about to say that as a Government we must agree when we are going to make interventions so that entrepreneurs could have an infrastructure in which they can put up businesses that can help our economy, and these supports come in different ways.  In countries where this has been done, they have had the same problems we are talking about now. 

If you take a country like the United Kingdom, at one time there was a big problem between Scotland, Wales and England because most of the industries were concentrated in the South, and then they developed what they called regional development organisations, and there is one in Wales now and in Scotland, and these have got special intervention that they do for only those regions. 

We are going to get there, Madam Speaker, and as the Chinese adage says, when you are going a thousands miles you must make the first step. This Government has made the first step; we have set up the institutions that are going to enable us to come up with these regional organisations that are going to make sure that there is development in different places. You cannot have it at a go; you cannot pull it out of a hat like a rabbit and suddenly there is development; it requires money, planning and a little bit of innovation.

I agree entirely that Jinja is a very important area that we must look at as a country, and if possible we should invest so that we can make it more attractive to the investors; I have no problem with that. The question is, can these organisations that have been set up do exactly that job that we want them to do? I think they can. 
Therefore, Madam Speaker, I want us to support this particular loan and ask these organisations that we are setting up that if it is possible, let us establish more attractive that are going to pull investors in areas like Jinja, Tororo, Mbarara and many other places. We can even have research done on what sort of industries we could put in these places. There is no problem at all; I think we are on the way, and we will be able to get there. I do not think anybody is marginalizing any part of this country; it is just a matter of time and it should be done. Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I support the motion.

5.44
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much.  Madam Speaker just for the record, I agree with the Minister of Finance that a loan is not donor aid. I also want to add, for record purposes, that investors are therefore not donors and that organisations are not individuals so that if organisations say, they should cut foreign aid, they are not saying investors should not come.

Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification because in doing my oversight role I really need to get the facts right.  The committee talked about the Ministry of Finance coming back here after three months to provide information on what they should have got to facilitate us in approving this loan. Madam Speaker, -(Mr. Migereko rose_) Let me just finish what I am – Hon minister, you will be answering all these things afterwards, so be patient.  

I also heard the minister talk about this being Phase II, I therefore, get the impression that there was a phase I which had beneficiaries yet the beneficiaries have not been presented to this House. 

Madam Speaker, about a month ago, we again approved two loans with similar gaps. We were asking the minister to come and present to this House the breakdown of how the loan had been utilized. We approved that loan expressing that reservation. Tonight again we are going to approve another loan expressing the same reservation. What is the difficulty, why is it that Ministry of Finance deliberately, I am beginning to think, keeps out some of this very vital information? 
As a people’s representative, I want to know how Soroti district faired in Phase I. I cannot just come here every other day approving loans, which the children of Soroti will pay after 40 years when I do not know how they directly benefited; it is very difficult for me, Madam Speaker. Unless Ministry of Finance is a direct beneficiary to these gaps in information, I think it is only prudent that the next time - and I am assuming that if we sanction these three months Ministry of Finance will not come back to us with another loan request until they bring in this information, because the peoples’ representatives cannot be kept in this black out; it is improper.

The second observation I want to make is this one about Namanve. A lot has been said about Namanve and I want to hasten to make this one observation. The question of Namanve represents a departure from established policy. Namanve is not the first; for instance we have seen so many things shift from what they are actually. Because if we were following, the constitution obliges us to ensure that development in this country is equitably distributed. 

I share a feeling similar to that of my colleague from Karamoja. Karamja looks like a zoo, some part of some world which is not Uganda. If we as Ugandans were committed to equitable distribution of economic and whatever wealth, I am sure Karamoja would not look like that. So, when we highlight the issues of Namanve, we are emphasising one thing; let us get back to the right policies; let us stop jumping about on directives on wishful thinking. 

Today is Namanve, the next day it might be another place. The whole of eastern Uganda has land which can be useful to industrial development provided the right procedures are used. We can find land for industrial development; so why are we thinking that it is only Namanve that can provide land? It is very difficult to understand the explanation that I am being given when the rest of the country also has the same facilities.

MR BASALIZA ARAALI: Thank you hon. Alaso for giving way. Madam Speaker, according to these figures, we feel that some areas have been marginalised. The whole mid-west has got plenty of land for industrialisation yet you find there is little about Kabarole, Kibaale and these areas. 
Madam Speaker, I feel that, if we have congested Kampala, there should be affirmative action to put industrial towns like Fort Portal, Kasese and others in mid-west. Thank you, Madam Speaker and my colleague for giving way.

MS ALASO: Thank you. Madam Speaker, the final clarification I want to request for, is this aspect of public dialogue and awards? I would like to be helped to understand what this chunk of money is going for in a public dialogue and ward. This to me creates an impression that we are asking for money on a thing that we have not carried out an assessment and then we think that the public is going to dialogue to give direction to money, which we have already borrowed. I thought we would have carried out an analysis and come up with what the people actually require. 

What is the justification for this money on public dialogue? I do buy the committee’s proposal that this money should be invested in some of those other districts that are not going to directly benefit the Namanve way, but I will be happy if I am educated on this public dialogue and awards provision.

5.51
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. Madam Speaker, I would urge government to appreciate some of the views of the Member and recommendations in this report. In fact, what the committee has recommended is basically something that would have cost you money to do research on, but the committee has exposed the gaps and Members are raising pertinent issues, which can help you if you want to retain power in 2006.
  
Madam Speaker, I rise to support this motion because if Government does not fulfil the recommendations of this committee, for example in Tororo the President promised the people of Tororo a coffee processing factory better than what Nescafe does. He also promised the people of Tororo a starch processing factory that would be supplying the whole of East and Central Africa. He has also promised the people of Tororo a factory to process fertilizer that will be supplying the whole of Sub-Saharan Africa similar to what used to be done during  –(Interruption)
MR MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to inform my colleague that the true story is, Tororo does not grow coffee, so there is no way it can have a coffee factory. The coffee factory should in Bugisu.

MRS HYUHA: Madam Speaker, hon. Ekanya is a member of this committee. Is it procedurally right for the two to begin dialoguing when there are many other people who would have wished to contribute?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, I allowed the Members dissenting from the general report to contribute in their own capacity.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity because there are Members who dissented, and for us who support the report should be given the opportunity to explain. Madam Speaker, allow me –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member; that is not our procedure. I allowed the other Members because they dissented.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, allow me to explain.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are going to be strict about the rules of this House.

THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY, (Mr Daudi Migereko): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the Members and the committee for the support they have lent to this very important initiative, whose ultimate effect is to bring about the desired transformation of this country from a peasantry to an industrial society.  

Madam Speaker, the issue has been raised in regard to industrial policy. It is true the industrial policy we have is outdated, and I want to assure the Members here that we have been undertaking consultations. A new policy is ready for Cabinet consideration, and I am sure very soon we shall be in a position to use the new industrial policy that takes into account the emerging realities on the ground, which provide the necessary incentives for more investment to come into the country and into the various parts of the country.  
Madam Speaker, another issue was raised in regard, particularly to Jinja. Yes, it is true Jinja needs a lot of support so that it can regain its past position. I would however like to observe that last year Jinja was recognized by Uganda Investment Authority as the one town that has got the best investment incentives and packages, and therefore was rated number one destination in as far as the towns of this country are concerned in regard to attracting investment. 

So while it is true that Jinja still needs a lot of support, it is also true that its rating in regard to attracting investment has been recognized all over the country, and particularly by the centre that is responsible for attracting investors in the country.

Government and my Ministry are focusing on how to simultaneously undertake industrial development in the country. In that regard, we are busy, together with the Ministry of Finance, trying to source for funding for the development of requisite infrastructure for the development of industries in the country. 

Our main thrust however, has been that as we develop industries, as we pursue industrial development in the country, we must look at the various factors that influence industrial location. Our thrust has been to see how we can take advantage of the local raw materials in the country and within the given various areas in the country.  Therefore -(Interruption)

MR KASIGWA: Hon. Minister, I want to thank you for giving way. The clarification I want to seek from the Minister in charge of Industry and Trade is, what harm will it do if Namanve is set aside and these funds are invested in the requisite infrastructure, which is existing, so that after that infrastructure then Namanve could come on board after using the existing infrastructure? 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, we are moving in a very programmed manner. At the moment we are trying to see how we can develop requisite industrial structure for the districts of Mukono and Wakiso. We are steadily also, as I have pointed out, procuring funding for the development of industrial infrastructure for other parts of the country. I can reckon that maybe now Jinja will be next in line, followed by Mbale, Kanungu, Kabale and so on –(Interjections)- We are moving in a very steady -(Interruption)
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, just before I was transferred from Ministry of Energy, you may remember that we had a very clear programme for electrifying different parts of the country so that those who wanted to set up processing industries in those parts of the country could be in a position to do so. We have a very clear programme as Government and I can see we are moving very steadily and we are gaining results on the ground.

Madam Speaker, the other issue, which was raised, was in regard to the issue of discouraging aid to Uganda Government and being in a position to separate that from how it can attract investment into the country. My view is that one would do a lot of good service in this country if we were generally positive about aid and investment to this country, because often times those who bring their investment here bring on the comfort provided by their countries of origin, who may at times be also the foreign donors. 

I want to thank everybody who has supported this initiative, which will permit us to move a step forward in transforming this country from peasantry to modernity, and I know my brother from Jinja, hon. Kasigwa, will ultimately give us support. I thank you.

6.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mr Nyombi Thembo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and this project. 

Madam Speaker, as you may realize, this particular financing touches the centre of our economic development strategy, export-led growth driven by private sector initiative. It goes ahead to point out areas, which have caused a lot of concern in this country like land and business registration. Those are critical areas of concern in as far as investment in this country is concerned.  

Madam Speaker, I have heard a lot of sentiments being flown around here concerning the industrial gaintry of Jinja in the 60s and 70s. All of us understand the factors that were responsible for that.  Some of us who come from areas like Kassanda would not say that because Kassanda did not have industries in the ’60s and ’70s, it was being marginalized. 
Today we can attract very big plantations; maybe we are the only district in this country which has big chucks of land that can attract Kaweri Coffee Plantation in Mubende District. I don’t think a person from Wakiso would say they are being marginalized because they have not attracted that plantation. 

Madam Speaker, we have to understand that the economic wind changed. When you go to countries like the USA, you will find that places like Detroit, at one time was the industrial giant of USA, it was the driving force of industrialization in USA, but the economic winds changed. For Birmingham, the economic winds changed - when the economic winds change, you have to seize on other opportunities. 

Jinja in particular - I have been saying this and I repeat, Madam Speaker, Jinja has an advantage over all other parts in this country. It has a natural advantage, which made people travel on foot 100 years back to come and see the source of the Nile. I have not heard anybody saying we should seize this opportunity of tourism to turn-around Jinja. I can see Jinja will stand a very high competitive edge in tourism not industrialization because we are talking of foot loose industries. With footloose industries, the critical driving factor is the market and with that you will not compete with Kampala and its suburbs in the near future. We can keep lamenting on this but we can frown over these economic realities, but we may not be able to change them.  

Madam Speaker, I also challenge some of these colleagues of mine. When you look at their own investment portfolios you will find them investing more in and around Kampala other than other areas. I challenge them. It is good we have the leadership code we can access some of the investments of our colleagues, I will challenge some of these colleagues. When we look at their investment portfolios, why are they investing in and around Kampala and not in Kamuli and Kassanda? Because there are some factors driving this: the market, accessibility to communication, forces of inertia, localization. I thought this was simple economics.  

Madam Speaker, I will support this project and I do not see anything wrong with locating this especially the industrial park in Jinja. Many colleagues of mine have said, why Namanve? Nobody has come up to say why not Namanve because a project of this magnitude by the time they decide that it should be located at point X, there should be studies made. But colleagues who are against this have not said they have parallel studies made to prove this one otherwise. So, Madam Speaker, I support this project; it should be financed. It is a very good project supporting production; it should go on. I thank you.

6.05
MR JOHN REX AACHILLA (Jie County, Kotido): Madam Speaker, thank you. [Mrs Sarah Nyombi: “Motion”] Yes, we can have the motion after this side also contributes, otherwise, that would be imbalanced debate in the House.  

Madam Speaker, just three things, I would like to seek clarification on. On page 3, the committee stated very clearly on the private sector in the relation to the private sector foundation. In bullet 2, and I read verbatim,
“Private Sector Foundation (PSF) has built a strong membership with about 50 active members and it is recognized as an apex body for the private sector organizations. 

The PSF has attracted donor-funded projects in Uganda that are related to private sector development.”  

The Committee goes ahead to say the “PSF has failed to address the sustainability issue effectively and there are cases of fall out in the private sector.” 

I would like to seek clarification, what is the committee saying exactly? Does this imply that the PSF has failed? By saying that it has failed to address the sustainability question, does this mean to say that it has a substance of household income strategy other than having the investment strategy? Do they get this money and use it for mere consumption, is that what you are trying to portray that the PSF is performing? Or is the problem capacity or high taxes, or are we saying it is political instability or corruption as you mentioned on paragraph 3 on page 2? 

Madam Speaker, the distribution of the investment per district is shown in appendix 1; it is also showing the employment created. These are very serious issues and we know very well that issues of economy are the backbone to development.  When you look at that appendix, Madam Speaker, you can raise eyebrows. On behalf of the people I represent in Jie County, it is so alarming that the criterion used in choosing those 43 districts is not very clear. I see that 13 districts are missing and all the districts of Karamoja are not there; that is just to say the little that it pains. Yet Madam Speaker, our national objectives and directives point 12, 2 and 1 in our Constitution – It is there in the Constitution.  

Madam Speaker, when you look at these issues, I emphasize on point number 3, that the state shall take special measures in favour of development of the least developed areas. Now we are talking of old areas Jinja, which is our old glory, that is okay. But my question is, do we have an investment policy in this country? Do we have a development policy in this country? What are the contents of this investment policy? Does it cater for growing and marginalized areas? What do we have for them? What criterion was used to choose the 43 districts and leave out 13 others? What are we going to do for those, which are missing? 

Madam Speaker, we know very well the potentialities we have for a rare region like Karamoja. It is undoubtable that in Karamoja we have areas where we can multiply wildlife very easily. We have riches in gold. Fourteen minerals are lying dormant in Karamoja where government has put money to make sure that a survey is carried and it is a well-known fact. The hon. prime Minister has all this information in the data bank of Karamoja available in his office. We are all aware that government knows that we have first class sand and gold –(Interruption)

CAPT. GUMA: Madam Speaker, I want to inform hon. Rex Aachilla from Kotido that if you look at the structure of the Ugandan economy, we should not deceive ourselves; for the time being it is unavoidable that there will be crowding of certain industries on the major towns like Kampala our city and then Jinja, Mbarara, Mbale. That is inevitable bearing in mind the structure of our economy, which is predominantly peasant based. 

To think that you will attract resources or that government will inject a lot of resources say in Kanungu where hon. Amama Mbabazi comes from, or Ibanda far away from Mbarara in the direction of Kamwenge, and that you will attract an investor to go there with Shs 5 million is not only deceiving yourself really, it is failure to look at the reality as it is. 

So, I really have some sympathy for the government that for the time being; it is inevitable. (Interjection)- Well, you can say, “no” a million times, but the reality on the ground is that that is how it is. I see that it is a government position and it is the dictates of our economic set up that they can really begin with Kampala because for the time being government cannot marshal enough money to put the necessary infrastructure in Kanungu, Kamwenge, Nakapiripirit and Kotido in order to ensure the unjusticiable provisions in the Constitution under the directive of this chapter – it is not possible. So, I call upon Members to pass this loan and we go ahead. 

MR AACHILLA: Madam Speaker just to finalize. What my hon. Friend has informed me is redrawing another map for Uganda. This is demarcating a new Constitution for Uganda, which I think politically, will be very unfair for the people of Karamoja to hear that Government has no intention to lead investments into Karamoja. That will be a very terrible political mistake that this country is heading towards.

Madam Speaker –(Mr. Byabagambi rose_) I have no time. You are my friend but give me a little time. 

Madam Speaker finally, on page 6, there is another serious statement in paragraph 2, in the first sentence from the point where it reads that the economy is going to be directly related to the rates of enterprises creation and development. 

So, Madam Speaker you see that if the planning of this country is not going to be guided, it will be very disadvantageous to other areas. If Government is not going to make a deliberate policy to attract the natural resources in certain areas and only concentrate in areas like Kampala, it will be very dangerous. 

Madam Speaker, Government should really show seriousness to balance development in this country lest we shall have a big problem. Let us not lie and say we have something. I know, hon. Migereko, what you want to say about electricity. Where is electricity? You cannot lie.
6.15
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion. First, I thank the committee for the report. However, I have a few observations. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform Members that as far as Uganda is concerned, most of the industries we talk of are input substitution industries whereby everything is actually imported apart from maybe the manpower. In such circumstances, industries will tend to be located near the market. I come from Mukono and when you talk of Mukono, people will think things are okay, but I represent Buvuma where we do not even expect to see electricity in the near future, may be in the next 30 years.  Telecommunication is not there, but I cannot really argue that I want an industry to be set up there, because first and foremost the key objective of the investor is to make a profit. 

However, I want to call on Members that when an industry is set up, for example in Namanve, it has forward and backward linkages. Take an example of SCOUL. When you go to Lugazi, most of the workers come from the North and these people have actually managed to develop their home areas using the income generated in Lugazi. We know the employment policy; you cannot say that when an industry is set up in Namanve it is only the Baganda who will be working there, no. People will be looking for credit, qualifications (Applause). Another example is, if people are working in an industry, they would need to be fed, which means Mbarara can still supply the food and the milk. The farmers in Mbarara would be empowered and even the farmers in Buvuma Islands would be empowered because they would be supplying fish. 

So, I urge Members that as legislators we should advise our people how they should benefit. We should not wait for industries to come to our constituents in order to advise our voters on how they should benefit. We should lay strategies to make sure that our voters really benefit.

MR KUBEKETERYA: I am seeking clarification from hon. Nsubuga urging politicians to lay strategies on how industries should go to their constituencies. Can we share this information jointly that we can have industries attracted to our factories beginning from Buvuma. Thank you.

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you Madam Speaker. With due respect, hon. Kubeketerya did not get me properly. I was telling him that when an industry is set up in Namanve, there is a way the Buvuma can benefit. How? We are traditional fishermen, we shall be supplying fish and you cannot tell me these people would not love to eat fish. Likewise, Mbarara will be supplying milk and banana. So, I will not wait until an industry is set up in Buvuma to empower my people. 

We talk of market, how do you create market? There is no way you can create market when the population are poor. Let these industries be set up in Namanve, then for us we shall be supplying the inputs. (Applause).

Madam Speaker, I would like to urge Members and maybe the minister. Most of our roads have been affected by the digging, maybe when putting water pipes or electricity.  I appeal to Government, since this time people are going to be allocated industries in Namanve when all the structures are in place, they should minimize the destruction on the road. 

As we talk, there is the old Kampala-Jinja road, which joins near Namanve and passes via Namataba up to Mukono. I think before they set up the Namanve industry, they should think of working on that road as a priority, because as we talk, you can see the crowd we have in our roads. So, before you set up these infrastructures, if you can work on that road fast, then you will empower all the people of Buvuma and Mukono in general.

MRS BALEMEZI: Thank you honourable Nsubuga for giving way. Madam Speaker, I wish to give information to hon. Nsubuga. Much as he is worried about the roads around Namanve, the people of Mukono are not yet quite happy about the way this industrial market is going to be put up. There are schools at the peripheral of Namanve, and this being an industrial park, the people would like to know how the drainage system will be in that area and what type of pollution would be in the area. 

Maybe what the minister failed to tell us – (Interruption)- I am informing him, that much as you are saying that the people of Mukono will be benefit, it was just an intended statement by the minister to say that this is a Kampala Industrial place. But where the industry is going to be located is right inside Mukono with Wakiso neighbouring it. 

Government has persistently tried to marginalize Mukono by making all the industries belong to the neighbouring districts. For example, they call Nile Breweries a Jinja industry. Now this industry is being called a Kampala industry.  So, we would request the minister to correct those statements and locate the industries in their proper locations. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you my sister. I want to make one correction. Actually, it is not true that Mukono is marginalised. When you talk of Mukono, it is only Buvuma, part of Mukono, which is marginalized, but Mukono in its entirety is not marginalised. 

Madam Speaker, we all know that before an industry is set up, an environmental impact assessment is supposed to be carried out and I think with Namanve, it was carried out.  And there is no way – I respect honourable Nandala, he cannot really approve a report when an environmental impact assessment was not carried out. It is a pre-requisite. 

Madam Speaker, I support this report because it has the component of developing the registry. We all know that the pride of the people of Uganda, especially Buganda, is in land and when you talk of land, you are talking of the heart of the people of Buganda. As we talk today, most of the land registries are in shutters and I am just praying, because within this loan, there is also an item of re-surveying Government land.  

Madam Speaker, not long ago, we received a report from members across the country of forest officials evicting people. But even these forestry officials do not know the demarcations of their forests. So, I will urge government, the moment we get this fund, to re-survey all its land such that we drive out the encroachers. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, this matter has been spoken for and against.  Can I ask the chairperson to respond?

6.26
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Nandala Mafabi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I thank you very much for supporting the report, but I want to make one simple correction. For any development to take place, like in upcountry places like Karamoja where there are no markets or where people are not willing to develop, it should be the government to lead that development and not an individual. And how does Government lead? It provides incentives for all people who are going to invest in that area maybe by giving them free money or money at low interest rates.  So, I do not agree with my brother Nsubuga that the government should not invest in Buvuma or Karamoja.

Honourable Aachila asked, why did we say this? Well, we have even gone ahead to recommend – you see PSF has been giving grants, and grants means money is taken away, it is not brought back. What we are advocating for is that the money to be given to the so-called investors should be on loan basis on soft terms so that they can be rolled over to the next person, and this will be security sustainable. Otherwise, I believe our report was well balanced, and the Ministry of Finance has agreed with all our recommendations. I beg the House to support this loan request and recommendations.  I thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, this is very important, I just need a clarification from the chairman of the committee. Madam Speaker, I was looking at the documents the committee perused and I did not see the environment impact assessment report being one of those considered. Why was this not considered? And why was an environment impact assessment was not done on this project?

MR NANDALA MAFABI: I thank you very much. In our recommendation number 10, we agreed that the detailed National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) report on Namanve would be presented to Parliament within sixth months, and we believe when it is presented it will be put here to the House.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think our Committee on Government Assurances should note that one and call the Government to order if that report does not come in six months. I think there was another report expected within three months. I hope our Committee on Government Assurances has also taken note of that one and will bring Government to order if it does not come. 

I now put the question that this House do approve the motion as moved by the Minister of Finance. 

(Question put)

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are some voting members who are sitting in this House and have neither voted for, nor against, nor abstained. Please take your position; I do not want to name you. 

MAJ. JOHN KAZOORA: Madam Speaker, this issue was brought before this House, and the Speaker ruled that a member cannot be forced to vote either way.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, how do I record you?  

MRS IDAH MEHANGYE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On this issue, a precedence has already been set. We voted in this House and some Members indeed did not vote for or against or even abstained. But we counted the number of Members present in this House and considered whether they raised a quorum. If they do, then depending on how the voting is taken, then the vote is either carried or lost. So I wish to suggest, Madam Speaker, that the same procedure be taken into account and we count and vote on this motion. Thank you.

MR ISSA KIKUNGWE: Madam Speaker, I am just reminding you what you stated at the beginning of this session that we cannot bend the rules of this House just for the sake; and the rules, Madam Speaker, are very clear. Let us undertake physical counting and establish whether there is quorum or not.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these are the results: There are 99 Members in this chamber; those for the motion are 95, one against, one abstaining, and two Members who did nothing. So, the vote is carried.

(Question agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House is adjourned to tomorrow 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.35 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 11 May 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)


