Tuesday, 11 May 2010

Parliament met at 11.30 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this morning’s sitting. I would like you to join me in welcoming students from the Roanoke College in Virginia, USA. They are students of political science and they are led by their professor, Joshua Rubongoya. They are here to observe the proceedings of Parliament. You are welcome! (Applause)

Secondly, last Thursday we adjourned to 10 O’clock this morning. I have been watching from my office. You know we had agreed that we should complete the legislation that is related to the elections. So I do hope Members will come and we deal with that business.

Thirdly, I do not see the Attorney-General here yet. This weekend I was in my constituency and in a number of sub-counties the voter registration exercise had not started; the machines are not there. I hope that we will get an explanation today from the Attorney-General. 

The Electoral Commission said they would want to meet Members of Parliament in the Conference Hall tomorrow perhaps to explain some of these issues, but that is what I found from my constituents. Thank you. 

11.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to apologise on behalf of the Members on this side, and I was requested that immediately you sit, I call them within a minute. Allow me to proceed and call them. There was another meeting taking place.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are going to telephone them?

MR BAKKABULINDI: No, they are just nearby, so I will go and call them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. 

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you.

11.34
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you. On the issue of the Electoral Commission, way back, the chairperson of Kabale District resigned to contest for a parliamentary seat, which he successfully won and he is now a Member of Parliament. Since then that seat of Chairperson in Kabale has been vacant; other than the vice-chairman who has been taking care of it.

The issue of how to handle by-elections is stipulated in the law but the Electoral Commission has kept the people of Kabale in the dark. They do not know whether there is going to be a by-election; they do not know whether it will be there or when it will be. Even the council, as I speak now, is contemplating petitioning the Electoral Commission. 

Madam Speaker, I am requesting the minister responsible for the Electoral Commission to come and tell the nation or the people of Kabale whether they have cancelled the by-elections in those areas because people are in the dark; the council is not guided. There is basically no guidance on that matter. I seek guidance from you, Madam Speaker, on how this is going to be handled. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think I will ask the minister who is present here to inform the Attorney-General that there are issues being raised about the by-election in Kabale.

11.35
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I just returned from Gulu this morning. For three days I have been in Gulu; we have a lot of problems with this registration. The Electoral Commission has to be a little serious because if they are not serious, then a lot of people are not going to be registered. First, in some places the cameras are not there; for example, Pece Division in Gulu Municipality had a lot of problems. 

People have been calling me asking where they will go to get registered and yet the period for registration is just a month. And in the one month I visited Acholi Inn B, that is also in the municipality in Laro Division; the process is very, very slow. I asked them, “How about if ten people came at once, would you really handle them as quickly as possible?” They told me, “No.” And they also told me that the process needs to be given more time. 

MR OKUMU: Thank you. The information I also want to give and to add on what my sister is giving is that in Gulu, the people who are recruited by the Electoral Commission to go and register people, have started complaining. They claim that they were told that they were going to be paid a certain amount of money, I think about Shs 30,000 to Shs 40,000 including transport, lunch - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Per day?

MR OKUMU: Per day. That is, transport, lunch and everything. They say they were promised this in a workshop when they were being trained and those figures were given to them.

When they started work, they received appointment letters and in these letters, it indicates Shs 10,000 both for transport, lunch and allowances. They are really disgusted and this is going to affect the registration process unless the Electoral Commission clarifies the terms of the people they recruited.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As I indicated, honourable members, they have offered to come here tomorrow to speak to Members of Parliament in the conference hall. So, tomorrow morning we shall not sit. We shall go and meet them and we raise all these issues because I spent four days in one of my sub-counties but nothing had started.

Members, 10 O’clock tomorrow, we go to the conference hall and we have a meeting with the election officials to brief us on what is happening and we chart a way forward.

11.37
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I seek your guidance and indulgence. I am looking at the Order Paper and I notice that the report of the Committee on Public Accounts Committee is in the business to follow. I am aware that last week the Speaker did tell us that the House will be prorogued on Thursday. I am also aware that this report is ready; actually I thought it was going to be on the Order Paper today.  

I would like to implore you that we amend the Order Paper to provide that the House receives this report so that we can put off the anxiety – even our Members have been on tension for sometime and keeping a ready report with them – a report that has generated a lot of interest. So, going beyond recess, I think would be such a long time. If we could, if time does not allow us to discuss, just receive it and ponder over it subsequently. That is my prayer, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Members, I do not know why you want to insist that it should be on the Order Paper today. Even if I put it there, we are not going to handle it. A number of those reports were received, but not debated. So you leave the issue of the Order Paper to me. I am aware about those reports that are pending, and I also know that we are going to prorogue on Thursday. Let us finish what has already been started and not completed, get it off the Order Paper before we go to the other items – business to follow can even be here tomorrow. 

What I have listed on the Order Paper up to No.8 is what I intend to finish today. No, hon. Members, please – all the committees of this House are important – let us leave the Order Paper as it is. What is the use of laying it on the Table and not having it presented? All those items have been partially presented and I want them to be completed. That is why we are sitting in the morning and afternoon of today, tomorrow afternoon and Thursday morning and afternoon. Let us get to the next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL WOMEN’S COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008

11.40
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill, 2008” be read for the second time.

Just as we did last time, I have a statement to clear some of the queries that might come up during the debate. As you will recall, last Thursday, Parliament passed the National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill. Now allow me to present to you, for consideration, the National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill, 2008.

The National Women’s Council is an autonomous body established by the National Women’s Council Statute of 1993. Its objective is to bring all women in Uganda together for development purposes irrespective of their religion, tribe, origin, status or political affiliation.

Prior to the formation of the National Women’s Council structures, there was no forum through which all women could be mobilised and organised to benefit from development programmes. The absence of such a forum created a big gap between women, government and other development actors.

The establishment of the council therefore provided an independent and united forum through which women could participate in decision-making processes. It also provided a channel through which social economic amenities could reach the women.

Madam Speaker, the objectives of the National Women’s Council were to organise the women of Uganda in a unified body and to engage the women of Uganda in activities that are to benefit them and the nation.

The functions of the National Women’s Council are as follows: 

    a) To inspire and promote, among women, a spirit of unity and national consciousness;
    b) To provide unified and integrated system through which the women may communicate and coordinate their ideas and activities;
    c) To establish channels through which economic and social services and amenities may reach the women in all areas of Uganda;
    d) To encourage women to consolidate their role in national development, political, economic, social, cultural and education fields;
    e) To promote relations within the international women’s organisation with similar objectives or interests;
    f) To all such other things as they are incidental or conducive to the attainment of the objectives of the council under this Act.

The purpose of the Council

Madam Speaker, from the above objectives and functions, it is clear that the intention and purpose of creating the council was to provide a non-partisan, non-discriminative and all-inclusive body through which women concerns could be addressed. 

The council was also intended to act as a channel through which to instil a spirit of patriotism, national consciousness and the spirit of unity amongst women. 

The idea was further to ensure women all over the country, irrespective of their tribe, religion and ethnic background are able to meet  and objectively discuss their common concerns and initiate activities and programmes for their own development.

The genesis of the current amendments

When the councils were established, the country was under the Movement System of governance and therefore it was important all leadership positions within the council structures were accessed through individual merit during the electoral process rather than through appointment. It was, therefore, provided within the law that women were to elect their own leaders from the village to national levels.

However, with advent of the multi-party political system in 2006, Maj. (Rtd) Rubaramira Ruranga petitioned the Constitutional Court on the constitutionality of the National Women’s Council Act and the National Women’s Council Elections Guidelines. The Constitutional Court ruled as follows:

    a) That the National Women’s Council Act should be amended to provide for participation of political parties in the election of councils. The argument was that under the multi-party political system, all political parties are free to sponsor candidates in all public elections. The court also noted that the current National Women’s Council Act did not provide for participation of political parties and so that law was inconsistent with the Constitution;

    b) The court also decided that sufficient time had not been given to candidates during the women’s council elections at village and parish levels where a candidate was only given five minutes to introduce themselves to the electorates and withdraw from the sessions. The court ruled that campaigns are the very essence of an election and, therefore, any law that did not provide for adequate time for campaigns was inconsistent with the Constitution;

    c) The court also ruled that the compulsory membership of all women aged 18 years and above into the women’s council at village level tantamounts to conscription as it was inconsistent with Article 29(1) of the Constitution on the freedom of association;

    d) During the women’s council elections, the chief administrative officer is the returning officer for the whole district, the sub-county and parish chiefs and the presiding officers in that respect – yet all of them are civil servants and employees of Government. The court ruled that this contradicts Article 1(4) of the Constitution and Article 62 on the independence of the Electoral Commission. It further ruled that the present law retracts from the independence of the Electoral Commission and so it was therefore necessary to amend the law for the commission to use their own staff;

    e) During the elections of women’s council leaders, nominations are done orally. On this, the Constitutional Court ruled that oral nominations of candidates during elections under multi-party politics were inconsistent with the Constitution. The court observed that political parties not being human beings could not nominate orally. The court, therefore, ruled that the National Women’s Council Election Regulations be amended to provide for written nominations in order to enable political parties participate;

    f) The current provision in the National Women’s Council Act regarding the membership of the village women councils stated that the women’s village council shall consist of all women aged 18 years and above present in that village. But court observed that that membership that considered residents in the village did not exclude non-citizens from membership of the council. So, the court ruled that that law be amended to exclude non-citizens from participating in the elections.

Following the court ruling, the Attorney-General advised Government to amend all the sections of the law that were affected by the ruling. I would like, therefore, to call upon honourable members to support the amendment as presented so that women’s council elections are conducted in a multi-party political system at all levels. Failure to do this would mean delay in conducting women’s council elections, and LC I and II to incorporate the chairperson of the women’s council who is an automatic woman representative.

The way forward is to follow and implement the command of the Constitutional Court to the effect that all women’s council elections are conducted on the basis of multi-party politics at all levels. Madam Speaker, hon. Members, I beg to move.

11.49
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Beatrice Lagada): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members, The National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill, 2008 was read for the first time on 14 October 2009 and referred to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for consideration. 

The committee considered the Bill in accordance with rules 116 and 133(a) of the Rules of Procedure. I beg to lay the minutes, which considered this Bill, on the Table.

Object of the Bill

The object of the Bill is to amend the National Women’s Council Act:
a) 	To remove compulsory membership of a woman resident in a village to the women council.
b)	To make the decisions of the village women council binding on all women in the village.
c)	To exclude non citizens from membership to village women council.
d)	To provide for the Electoral Commission to compile, maintain, revise and update the voters’ registers for the village women’s councils. 
e)	To empower the Electoral Commission to designate a period for registering citizens who would like to participate in women’s council elections.
f)	To provide for the multi-party system of election to the women councils. 
g)	To give the minister power to make regulations regarding the election of members to the council.

Methodology

The committee held dialogue and received written memoranda from the following stakeholders:
a)	The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development
b)	The Electoral Commission
c)	Opposition Parties in Parliament

The committee made reference to the Constitutional Petition No.21 of 2006 (Rubaramira Ruranga v the Electoral Commission and the Attorney-General) and the resultant Constitutional Court ruling of 03 April 2007 that challenged the constitutionality of certain provisions of the Local Government Act, the National Women’s Council Act and the National Youth Council Act. Reference was also made to the principal Act and the National Women’s Council Act, Cap 318.

Observations

The committee observed that the Bill once enacted into law, shall rhyme with constitutional provisions and related legislations; formally legalise village women’s councils and address the concerns as raised in the Constitutional Court ruling.

Notwithstanding the general voters register, the Bill introduces parallel and separate women voters’ registers for each village in respect of conducting elections to village women’s councils. 

Critical Government institutions particularly the Electoral Commission indicate readiness to manage the electoral process at village level. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Electoral Commission emphasised the need to have village women’s councils in place for the country to have complete legal administrative units at parish and village levels.  

The Bill does not mention how the electoral process shall be managed in respect of female youths eligible to vote and be voted for, to women as well as youth councils at village level. 	

Recommendation

The Bill should specifically pronounce itself on the relationships and inter-linkages, roles and responsibilities of female youths who may happen to be elected to both the youth as well as the women councils. 

The committee wishes to recommend that the National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill, 2008 be passed into law, subject to the proposed amendments. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

11.54
MR GEORGE WOPUWA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the chairperson for the report. This issue of women’s councils and youth councils is really long over due. Last time when we were handling the LC I (Amendment) Bill, we thought it would have come together, but I have my reservations.

When you look at page 2, which provides for the exclusion of non-citizens from membership of a village women’s council, at one time we were handling the issue of dual citizenship. I do not know how far we went but I thought we made it legal that somebody can be a citizen of more than one country; you can be in Uganda, you are a Ugandan, and then you can hold another citizenship.

Then two, the women’s council in my view at whatever level is a legal arrangement of an interest group of women to handle interests of women, whether you are a Ugandan or non-Ugandan, you remain a woman and therefore women in a village when they are discussing interests of women, I do not see why you should be excluded from participating or being elected because some of us tend to have neighbours who are non-citizens. So, the rationale of excluding women from a women’s council just because they are not citizens does not appeal to me. There was a proposal (Mr Bakkabulindi rose_) I am just concluding.

There was a proposal at one time to link the women’s councils to LC III and LC II councils, and it was argued that a chairperson of a women’s council III should automatically be an ex-officio or a member of the LC III council -(Interjections)- because the chairperson of a women’s council III represents interests of women in that electoral area either at LC I or LC II level. This proposal became very prominent but in this presentation I see that it has been dropped. Is it possible for the minister and the chairperson to capture it?

Lastly, I really like this report and I think we should be able to pass this amendment today so that the women can be able to elect their leaders, but in future we should also have a proposal so that the men also have a council specifically to deal with men’s issues. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, on the issue of dual citizenship, you do not just wish it. You must, by an overt act, demonstrate that you have taken citizenship of Uganda; you are living here but you have now become a citizen either by naturalisation - there is a process not just by being here. If there are foreigners who want to have dual citizenship, they must go through a process not just by residency.

11.58
MS GRACE TUBWITA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand up to support the amendment of the Bill. I know it has been long over due because most women have been complaining because the leadership which has been in place has been there for some time. Now that we are here as Parliament to consider the amendment, this will enable them to elect people whom they need to lead them in the current situation.

I have one concern where the courts ruled that there should be a provision to pick forms. So, for those who need to occupy this position, I see there is going to be a problem unless it is going to be done at a particular level. But if they say it is at village level, I do not know at what level these forms are going to be because there will be a problem where people will not be in position to fill in the forms in order to contest for these positions although we are in a multi-party dispensation. 

Earlier on in the first elections where people were nominating candidates orally, you would find that even some women would stand down and say, “No. We are not interested.” What about now where they are supposed to pick forms and then show interest and participate? I do not know how it is going to be done but at least they should be brought nearer to the women so that if the distance is reduced - I feel we, as Parliament, should decide where these forms should be, considering the levels of the elections. For example, if it is at village level, the form should be picked at parish level and if it is at parish level then the forms should be picked at the sub-county, and if it is at the sub-county, they should be picked at the district. This will at least ease the work of these women from moving long distances in order to pick these forms. 

Another issue where emphasis should be put concerns the Electoral Commission as it is being given this mandate of conducting these elections; they need to do a lot of sensitisation to these grassroots women in order for them to understand the law. At times we make these laws but the people are not told the essence of the law and you find that they are ignorant of the law. This time round I feel that the Electoral Commission should move very vigorously to make sure that at least this law is understood by the women. Otherwise, I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I support the amendment.

12.00
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start by thanking the minister for yet another clear explanation as to why we need this amendment. I also wish to thank the committee for the report.

After discussion of the Youth Council Bill, I think this is also a straight forward Bill and I do not think we have a lot to say. It is only that I keep on wondering why Government never appealed against the court ruling; maybe everything was okay but there are questions now and then about the implementation. 

The honourable minister has been given the responsibility to come up with the regulations. Madam Speaker and hon. Members, we have passed Bills before and it has taken years without us getting the regulations and guidelines. I do not know whether this time this will be a special case or some work has already been done in this area, because I still see many questions on how these elections are going to be carried out. If the same process of delaying to bring out regulations and guidelines happens in this case, then we shall never have these women and youth council elections. I want to urge the minister or maybe the minister could assure us as to how soon these regulations are coming out.

Looking at the report, honourable colleagues, you can see that the consultations were limited to three whom they say are the stakeholders: the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the Electoral Commission and opposition parties in Parliament. How about the women? There is no women organisation that was consulted. There are even old councils that could have guided us to see where there would be problems in the implementation of this law. 

So, we are going to come out with recommendations that are not well researched just because the concerned people were not consulted. I hoped, with this law, my mother would also be a member of the village council [HON. MEMBERS: “Of which party?”] Definitely, I would advise her to be NRM. My daughters are also wondering how they should participate, whether as women or as youths, but this is a law that has come and we hope -(Interruption)

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you hon. Kif’omusana for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform this House that the constitutional definition of a woman is a person who is a female and aged between the years of 18 and above. A female youth is a woman much as she is a youth. Once she is 18, then she is a woman. So, there should not be any controversy as to whether female youths who are above 18 years should participate in women issues. Indeed they are full women just like a woman of 40, 60 and 100 years. Thank you. 

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you hon. Nalubega for that information. Of course every society has its own definition of a woman, let alone the constitutional definition. 

On this issue of registering, I think the honourable minister should tell us what he has in mind about this process of registering and what the process should be. Will it be an organisational registration? Will it be just for election purposes? Shall we have special registration cards for these councils? Who shall we consider to be registered as a willing woman and registered by whom? (Member timed out­_)

12.05
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I am really in strong support of it. We all know that women are still a little bit down and so we need a lot of affirmative action for them to be at the same table with the men; and I think this is the purpose of the women’s council. 

I also would like to say that much as the youth council and women’s council were supposed to be on the same line, the women’s council is now a little different because it is not going to provide the electoral college as it was before. It is now there for the objects that were read and so we must all support it very strongly. 

My concern, and why I am up, is observation No.4 on page 4 that talks about female youth eligibility to vote in the structure of the women’s council. Are we not mixing up the two, because the structure of the youth council should really be the structure of the youth council? I know the women who are 18 up to 30 can fall under the women’s council and also under the youth council but when it comes to the election of the youth council, then it is the structure of the youth council that should be used instead of bringing it to be highlighted in the structure of the women’s council. So, I need some clarification on why this No. 4 on page 4 is here. I feel that it is really misplaced otherwise I strongly support the motion. Thank you.                                  

12.08
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for the work done on this Bill here. I have concerns in two areas: 

On page 2, about the membership of the women’s council, part (a) says the object of the Bill is to amend the National Women’s Council Act: “To remove compulsory membership of the women resident to a village women’s council.”  

Again when you come to (b), it reads, “To make the decisions of the village women’s council binding on all women in the village.” This means that becoming a member is voluntary and receiving the outcomes made by any association is compulsory. There is need for some clarification there. How can an association of which you are not a member make decisions that are binding to you? 

Madam Speaker, I would also like to seek some clarification on how the women’s council can be linked to the district council and the sub-county council? These are the bodies that are governmental and are mandated to make by-laws and are, therefore, binding to everybody. How do we link the Women Council to a sub-county council? 

In Obongi constituency, we also have a question of two sub-counties represented at the district level by one woman. And there is another sub-county, Aliba sub-county, which has only one person representing it - Gemara and Itula sub-counties are represented by one woman. So, this clarification of how the women’s councils can be related to the district council and the sub-county council needs to be made very clear in this Bill. Otherwise, I support the motion. It goes a long way in improving the conditions of our women. But these clarifications are very necessary. Thank you.  

12.10
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the motion but I just want to make some three observations. One is that the Ministry of Gender should really not just be a ministry that is not in touch with the responsibility that it has. Because just being a minister - actually there are very many ministers in that ministry – but if you see the contribution of that ministry to the ordinary woman at the grassroots, it is wanting.

MR KIBANZANGA: They are only doing work for the royals.  

MR OKUMU: It is not enough just to be on top and talk on behalf of somebody and yet you do not deliver. For example, this court ruling was done way back, what have you been doing? Why didn’t you effect the amendment so that the women would have an existent council to solve their problems? Why did you wait until - let us say last year to bring it to Parliament? Why didn’t you do it earlier? You should be responsible and also sensitive. 

But even before that, didn’t you have legal advisers to advise you that we had already moved from Movement to multi-party politics and therefore there was need for an amendment? Did you need somebody to go to court to raise the issue and then you turn and initiate an amendment? These are some of the signs of lack of sensitivity that some of our leadership in Government have. You should be sensitive enough. You have so many people that you have employed as legal advisers; they should be perusing through your books and advising you from time to time so that you don’t wait for someone to go to court to block you and then out of a court ruling you run and say you can make this amendment. 

So, my appeal to the ministry is that it should not just be a ministry to convince women that they have a ministry working for them.  But the women should get an impact and feel that there is a ministry responsible for them and that would go a long way in addressing the concerns of our ordinary women. 

On page 2, the object of the Bill: I also want to raise a similar concern to what my brother, hon. Fungaroo raised on (b). Assuming there is a decision by the sub-county council which also has within its structure women represented and then here we are saying that the decision of the women council of the village will remain binding. (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members that matter of the village councils was extensively discussed last week when we were dealing with the youth councils and I think we agreed that the institution that makes the binding sanctions is the local council; it is not these youth councils and the women’s councils. I think that is what we agreed. 

12.14
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the minister and the chairperson for this report. But there are concerns I would like the minister to clarify. For example, before Rubaramira Ruranga v the Electoral Commission and the Attorney-General, the women’s councils in many districts were active only when we had elections. After elections, there would be a silence in the activities of the women’s councils. I would like to know what difference we are going to have now that we are not going to involve these councils in our electoral process. 

You know, when we used to have an electoral college, these women were part of the colleges that were electing the Woman Member of Parliament then. So this time we do not need them because it is a universal adult suffrage for the Woman Member of Parliament. I am wondering, because as you know these women’s councils have not been well funded and because of lack of that funding, their activities are hardly available. 

MS AOL: Thank you for giving way. Madam Speaker, I want to give some information on the activeness of women’s councils. Women’s councils have not only been active in elections but more especially in the development process and Women’s Day activities. I think that even to date, the women are really very active in –(Interjection)– no, not only in Women’s Day celebrations. The Women’s Day celebrations are not only for celebration but to mark a lot of other things sometimes emphasising entrepreneurship, which the women have been very active in. Thank you.
  
MS BOONA: Can I finish my allotted time? I was continuing to explain that I do not really think that women celebrations are an economic activity for our women. In my opinion, I think that we need to give them more funding in order for them to be economically active. Waiting for 8th March to celebrate and knowing that you are a women council is not being active enough; that is what I mean.
 
Secondly, I would wish to improve the link between Parliament and the women’s councils at the district. The link between a Woman Member of Parliament and the district is that a Woman Member of Parliament is an ex-officio member of their meetings. And if they choose not to invite you as their Member of Parliament, you are not likely to follow up the little money that goes to the district and the activities it is doing. I would like this relationship improved as we think about this Bill.

Finally, on page 3 –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is some information from the Chair of the Uganda National Women’s Council, hon. Najjemba.

MS NAJJEMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Boona. I just want to re-emphasise the point you were making that we need to have Members of Parliament who are women – I am actually changing it; not Woman Member of Parliament but even we, who are on direct representation, should also be part of you because we are one. There should be a link between us and the councils. 

Also, the chairperson of the women council at sub-county level should also be an ex-officio like my brother said, because we need to link the two so that we do not have parallel structures; so that they follow up on the resources that we send them; they follow up on the programmes; they get information on what is taking place; and in order to stop the clashes between these two – the woman councillor and the chairperson of the women council - because they will have come together and they will be working together. So, I want that to be put in the Bill so that we harmonise these two structures. Thank you. 

12.19
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairman and the minister for the brief they have given us. This has been overdue and I am very happy that it has been brought here. We have been told that this is going to bring our women together. It is going to be an avenue for mobilising women for development, and that it is going to be a channel for social and economic activities for our women. 

When you look at the brief by the minister on the functions of the National Women’s Council, I totally fail to appreciate why we are saying that non-Ugandan women shouldn’t be members. I could concede that they cannot be in leadership positions, but honestly, these women could even be more useful to the committee than many of our women. There is an organisation that I know very well – the Uganda Women’s Efforts to Save Orphans – and I was very close to it at its inception, and I can assure you that the majority of people who were making viable contributions were the ambassadors’ wives. They were making a lot of contributions towards the development of this organisation – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Byandala, which ambassador’s wife lives in your village? 

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, where I stay, I am not very far from the ambassador  -(Interjection)- No, you are going to waste my time. In my view, I think if we allowed these non-citizens, they could even bring in more enriching information to our ladies for development. So, I do not see any problem with somebody participating. They are just meeting and sharing as women. A woman from UK has some similarities with a woman in Uganda. So -(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I am forced to rise on a point of order. My good friend, hon. Byandala, gave a very good example of an NGO called UWESO, but NGOs are different from institutions of Government. What we are trying to establish here are institutions of Government according to the Constitution of Uganda. Is it, therefore, in order for him to repeatedly think that we are creating NGOs in this House and yet we are establishing institutions of Government? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byandala that is why I asked you whether any ambassador’s wife actually lives in your village in Luweero that you represent. Please, let us discuss the issues of Ugandans. 

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, I was just trying to show that foreigners can assist as well as these Ugandans. I was not trying to say that NGOs are the same as Government institutions. I thank you. 

12.23
MR ELIJAH KYETUNDA (NRM, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I also stand to support the Bill and I also thank the minister for this report. But with due respect to your guidance, I still need clarification on the seeming contradiction of the two areas, that is on the object of the Bill. We have (c) and (d). You guided that we should ignore it because it has been handled and that it will be taken up by the binding principle of the council. Why are these two contradicting issues still appearing in the Bill? These non-Ugandan women have to be bound by the decisions of the council and yet they are not members; how do you get bound by an institution that you do not subscribe to? I need clarification on that and if it is not there, we should delete it and know that it has been handled. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you were not here last week. Let the Attorney-General respond. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, as you rightly pointed out, this matter was very well conversed in last week’s debate on the youths Bill and there was a proposal that the decisions made should only bind members of that particular council and not beyond, and that was found not to be prudent, because if you look at the objects of the youth councils and the women councils, you will realise that these objects and the mandate given to these bodies go beyond the councils in terms of benefits to other persons outside the council itself, and because of that added advantage, we thought that the decisions made by those councils should be binding on the respective persons they serve down and outside the councils. 

MR KYETUNDA: Thank you, honourable minister, for that information, but then I request that this be put clear so that it is not taken by implication. It should be express and direct so that they know that that is their area and that is where they fall within being bound by this clause. 

My second concern is on the Electoral Commission vis-à-vis the minister making the rules and regulations governing the election of these councils. I would like to know where the borderline will be. Where are the points of reference? We know that the Electoral Commission of Uganda is empowered to organise and run the elections of this country, and it is a popular view; and now that the minister also comes in to regulate this and make rules, where is the borderline? Who should do what? Why don’t we separate these powers so that we know that the Electoral Commission in this regard will be doing this and the minister will come in here? Don’t you see a conflicting situation sometimes between the Electoral Commission and the minister? I thank you.

12.27
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the minister and the chairperson for the report. My problem is still on object 2(b) and (c). As a person who comes from a border district, I find this very unfair to some of the voters, including those of the honourable minister, because there are so many women who have come from across including Bukonzo and all the border areas, and are married in Uganda, holding positions in women councils, but they have not registered as Ugandans. Therefore, some are not married and it will be very difficult for –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Bukeni, you come from the border. Can you tell me whether you are able to go into Kenya and do activities there on the Kenyan side without a permit? Without regulations by the Kenyans? Tell me whether this is possible even in Tanzania?

MR OKUMU: I am also seeking further clarifications because the way my colleague is debating is as if there are gentlemen on the Ugandan side who sometimes have families across because he is talking about “temporary” - can you clarify whether you on the borderline have some families across and that when it comes to some activities here, you expect them to join the families on this side of the border.

MR BUKENI: I think my friend is not serious with the question. The issue is that there are people who are Ugandans but have families in Kenya and there is nothing wrong with that. There are some people who are Ugandans but are also Kenyans –(Interjections)- yes, after all, the law allows it here. There are women who are even leaders in women councils and are married in Uganda, but they have not registered according to the law. 

My request is that our people be helped to be lawful Ugandans, after all they have been here with us and they continue being with us and they are continuing to come. Some of them are even in the district councils and are from Kenya but married here, and they are not registered. They are also on the women council at the district and they have not been helped to become citizens. Since we are promoting the East African Community, they should be helped to register so that they are full members.

The other issue is about the relevance of women councils. What do women get by belonging to women councils? What do the women benefit by having women councils? It is something that is not so convincing, especially when the funding was at one time there, but has been reduced to zero yet they are just expecting nothing –(Interruption)

MS NAJJEMBA: I thank you, hon. Member.  The money is there, especially when we got a woman minister for finance; the funding of the councils improved. I do not have the figures now, but the funding improved and we hope that after this amendment when we get the new structures, the funding will even improve more­. 

MR BUKENI: I am surprised that the former –(Interruption)

MS NAJJEMBA: It is not zero like you are putting it.

MR BUKENI: I am surprised that the former chairperson of the women council is saying that there is funding which is coming and she is forgetting that at one time, the women councils were getting no money. I was an accounting officer and I know there was no money being received. It is true now that money is coming, but what I am saying is that can money be there consistently for the women councils so that they can plan and use it? So that the money is available for them to go and attend the national women’s celebrations and the Women’s Day? So that they can have activities for their councils?

12.32
MRS LOI KIRYAPAWO (NRM, Budaka County, Pallisa): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I am also standing to add my voice to the others to thank the minister and the committee for bringing this amendment Bill and I support it. I have a few things to say: 

First, when we are talking about funds, we want councils to have a budget which comes right from the village up to the national level. If you send funds either to the district and these funds do not trickle down to the council of the village, then what are the village councils doing? We want this budget to start just as you see in the local council where the planning is at the sub-district and goes up to the district so that when funds come, the district will just send money according to the plans of the sub-county. We also want these councils to have their planning at the sub-county so when the funds go, these funds have to trickle up to the village level. But when you go there, they cannot even meet at the village level because there are no funds to even call a meeting. I do not think that they even have stationery; there is no office. When you go to the village and ask, “Who is the chairperson of the village council?” Others have even forgotten her because of not having any meetings.

Another thing I want to talk about is the council decision, which should be binding to every woman in the village. People are asking, “Why, if I am not a member?” To give an example, supposing the council sits and decides that, “Our well needs cleaning.” And they decide that every woman on every Friday should go and clean the well – whether you are a member or not, you draw water from that well. So, why is the refusal that because you are not a member, that decision does not bind you when you know that you go and get water from that well? So, I think there are decisions which are general and concern everybody in the village that must be binding to every woman. They have these burial groups in the village where at every burial you find that the members pay. But it is also binding for non members to see that if somebody has died, I have to pay Shs 200 or I have to take firewood or I have to take some bit of food. Let us look at it in that way -(Member timed out.)

12.36
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): I rise to support the Bill. We have really been working as women and most of us who came to this House originated from the lower level. We are today seeking to empower the women’s councils and I know that power goes with authority – you cannot just be empowered and yet you do not have authority. 

First of all, I would like to agree with my sister that the women councils down at the grassroots really do not have funds to enable them even organise any meaningful meeting among themselves. Leave alone that on celebration days, they go begging for funds to run the activities like a few crates of soda and maybe the dancing and the meeting – they really do not have money and if we seriously want to empower and give authority to these councils, it must be attached with a meaningful budget and not something which is meagre. I am happy to note even from my honourable colleagues - the males – who are crying that they do not have any stationery, an office, and they do not have a budget. Seriously, we need to put this record right and enable the women from the grassroots to organise.

Secondly, much as I support this Bill, I am at pains because when we celebrated Women’s Day in my district, we had a lot of problems and I brought this issue to Parliament. The issue at hand is that when the women’s council and the CAO sat down, they decided that being a Women’s Day, it is a woman to preside over that function. The women were happily waiting to receive me as a Member of Parliament. We had a big war of words with the RDC who said that there is no way the Member of Parliament can preside over a national function because he is the President’s representative –(Interruption)    

MS AOL: Thank you my colleague for giving way. I would like to inform you that it is a very big issue if we want to empower women. Maybe, we also need to put something there. We are tired of fighting where women have to be seen in the forefront and then it is the men who come and sit on the women. I am an example because I had to fight with an RDC over this. So, if it can be put in the law, that will be very helpful to all the women. It is not only me. We fought in Palaro and many other women also fought. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Members, with that kind of amendment, we shall be excluding our minister who is here; we shall be excluding the President of Uganda; we shall be excluding any other man who may be invited - even the Member of Parliament. I think do not make those drastic things. 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, we appreciate your guidance on this matter and we would like our minister and our President to officiate at this function. But we would like the RDCs to get the bare minimum that in terms of protocol, the Members of Parliament in this House are higher in hierarchy than them. I cannot be going to talk to them expecting them to report to who –(Interjection)- when I am the decision-maker in Parliament. That is why for me in Soroti District –(Applause)- I sat on that chair and I told them: “You guys are going to carry me from this chair. I want to see - and I will dismiss the women if you carry me.” And they did not carry me; and, “I am the guest of honour until my colleague, a Member of Parliament or a minister, comes to the function.” We need it to be driven home. You cannot take the women of Uganda for granted. We are tired of it, Madam Speaker.

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague for the information. This is a very serious issue because when I raised it in Parliament, the Speaker directed the minister to come back to this House and clarify that issue. As I speak, the assistant CAO of Kitgum has been given a written letter from the RDC for disciplinary action, yet the CAO explained, even in public, that the committee, which was set up to organise the function, deemed it fit for the Woman Member of Parliament to preside over that function. As I am talking now, the poor lady is under threat by the office of the RDC to show cause why –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not think we are going to listen to all the complaints about the RDCs. There should be a different forum. Can the minister, if you have policy issues to answer, please wind up and we move on? No, let us not disturb the Bill. I think we shall have an occasion to address that one with the Minister for the Presidency. Let us not disturb our Bill.

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, when this issue was brought to the Floor of Parliament, the minister who is before us in the House was directed to come and give this explanation. He is here and aware that the explanation has been overdue. Probably in his submission, he could put this record right because it is a very serious problem and we are to continue fighting for our space. You cannot empower the women and do not give them authority. We need this, Madam Speaker. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who was directed to sort this out because I was not here?

12.43
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR & SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you, Madam Speaker. After the meeting, I contacted the hon. Member because the Member had stated that there was a letter written by the Prime Minister giving directives on who should be the guest of honour. I went to the ministry, looked for that and I have not – and I asked the Member of Parliament to assist and up to now, we are still in dialogue. I do not know why Members of Parliament do not get -(Ms Anywar rose_)- I am speaking.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, you are protected.

MR OPIO: I think the Member of Parliament should work together with me other than bringing things to the Floor. We have been discussing and I have asked her to give me information; now she is – I think we better work together. When there is an issue of dialogue, we discuss other than bringing issues before we have even completed. So, I would like to say that we have been in touch and I have requested her to give me the information. So, let me continue with what I came here to do. Thank you.

MS BAKO: Madam Speaker, I am really in one way or another disappointed with the minister. The minister is a cabinet minister; he knows the direction our protocol takes and he is here telling us, as Members of Parliament, to negotiate as to who is going to be in what position. Yet he is even seated next to the Attorney-General and some ministers there who can advise him. Is he in order to claim that we, as Members of Parliament and most especially the women, must negotiate with the RDCs?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, can I ask you to put on your jacket? Yes, minister, please conclude. 

MR OPIO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of pacification of the women council, I would like to state that what we had under the conditional grant last financial year was Shs 700 million. And in our budget now, we have requested for more; so we hope we shall get more to assist with the running of the councils and in performing the functions of women councils. 

Madam Speaker, when it comes to the issue of non-citizens, there was a ruling by the Constitutional Court to the effect that non-citizens cannot participate in the women’s council, so we cannot go against the ruling of the court. So, there is no room here to bring in women who are not citizens of Uganda to vote. I think if the women have married some of our people on the Ugandan side, the law states how they can become citizens and then they can participate in the women councils. 

Why did the minister not act earlier on the amendment of both the youth councils and women councils? I would like to state that if you look at this Bill, it is dated 2008. So, the ministry did a lot. But we had problems of funding and I could not bring the Bill to Parliament or to Cabinet because the certificate of financial implications had not been provided by the Ministry of Finance. The reasoning was that the financial implication as given by the Electoral Commission required Government to put aside Shs 50 Billion for running the youth councils and the women councils. 

So, there has been a struggle to get the money and, therefore, bring the Bill to Cabinet. Now we have got the certificate of financial implication and that is why we have come to Parliament. We started around 2008 - even my predecessors worked on it. So, the minister did not just sit there and say, “We cannot get the Bills amended.” 

One Member stated that women would have problems if they have to obtain forms to fill in before they can participate at the village level. I would like to state that the Electoral Commission is going to provide sufficient funds and we expect them to run the elections efficiently. So, if the Electoral Commission thinks that having forms at the district or sub county for women who would like to contest at the village level would affect the proper running of the elections, then they will provide the forms. It will be in their interest to provide forms at the lower level for the women to fill in and, therefore, participate in the elections. 

On duo citizenship, once one has gotten it, then they would be free to vote, but before you do that, there is a process. I would like to request my brothers who come from the border like me, to bear in mind that we cannot overlook the laws and succumb to pragmatism; that would amount to breaking the law. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.51
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Beatrice Lagada): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to observe that the issue which has been raised on the Floor of linking the chairpersons of women councils levels III and V to the local councils is a very pertinent issue and I think it would make a big difference to the operations of councils in as far as women are concerned.

Madam Speaker, for about eight years, I was director of women in the then Movement Secretariat and one of the major concerns, which we did raise with the Ministry of Gender and the Ministry of Local Government was the de-linking of activities of women at local government level. You would find that money is sent from Ministry of Gender to women councils which, as has been observed by Members, is definitely insufficient. Actually this money is only used by councils for their meetings. 

But the question which I have always raised and would like to raise here again is, how do the women benefit from Government programmes at the local councils? Take a programme like NAADS; when the farmers are being identified in the parishes, how many of those six in each parish are women? I have often asked that question and up to now I have not got gender disaggregated data either from Ministry of Gender or from Ministry of Agriculture to inform us how women are benefiting. 

This debate raises the question of gender mainstreaming. When the programmes of Government go down, do the women and girls benefit as much as the men and boys? We should not look at this little money which comes from the Ministry of Gender alone; we should look at all monies from Government programmes to see how women benefit. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would request that at the committee stage, somebody moves an amendment to link the chairpersons of the women councils at levels III and V to the local government so that we do not have a situation like the one we are having now. The women in the local councils are part of the locals and they do not relate properly to the women councils, and that is a disconnection as far as I am concerned. 

I want to inform our male colleagues that these councils are very important to the women; it is not just celebrating the Women’s Day. Women are distinguishable because of the women councils. For example, when you go to Kamuli and you want to meet women in some sub county, the most obvious women you meet first are the women in the women council structures. And if you want to pass on messages, whether about maternal health, safe motherhood or water, you would still go through that leadership to be able to reach the women at the grassroots. So, let us not look at the councils as just a decoration; they are not a decoration; they are important in empowering women. 

Somebody asked about the issue of why election of women and female youth – the committee was bothered by what happens in case the elections take place at the same time. If the elections of the youth councils are running at the same time as the women councils, an active female youth who would want to be elected at the youth council might still be the most active woman because by virtue of being 18 years, she would also qualify to be elected on the women’s councils. This is what bothered the committee and that is why we made that observation.

Madam Speaker, people were talking about the issue of non-citizens; why do the Members want non-citizen women to vote in the women councils and yet nobody has wanted non-citizens to vote in the general elections. I have never heard anybody saying that they want non-citizens to vote in general elections. In fact, it is a very big issue that non-citizens should not vote. So, why should Members argue that non-citizens should vote in women councils? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the point raised by Members on linkage is important. I do not know whether the Attorney-General could be thinking about how to make the chairperson of the women council at the sub county an ex-officio member of the council and similarly at the district so that they are able to put in their contribution, because the other women are very lonely; they are very few. So, maybe you would think about it as we proceed. 

Hon. Members, I now put the question on the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
 COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL WOMEN’S COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008

12.57
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General, the Members have been speaking about the absence of a linkage between the women council structures and the local councils; they are dealing with the same women in the same sub county, planning for them, but they do not have a voice in the LC III Council - actually they just come as observers if they are invited. So, can we make an ex-officio position of the chairperson of the women councils on the LC III councils and also at the LC V? 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, that is an important contribution, but as you are aware, we are about to consider amendments to the Local Government Act. The hon. Minister of Local Government is about to come here. I do not know where the chairperson of that committee report is, but he is aware. There are amendments before their committee and I was expecting that in fact we could debate them before we adjourn this session. But I take it seriously and I will follow it up to have them included in those amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Would there be any harm if we made that amendment here and then we follow it up in the Local Government (Amendment) Act.

MR RUHINDI: No, you see, we are amending the local council laws and that is actually the proper home for those amendments. That is where we are providing that the chairperson of the women councils shall be –(Interjection)- Yes, the proper home is the other Bills that will be coming to the House any time. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But if it is not already before the committee, it may not be part of their report. We are looking for a safe way of securing this position and then doing the needful in the other law – 

MR RUHINDI: This is a matter we can take up with the minister even if the committee has prepared its report, and I will ensure that I talk it over with him and I will also keep you posted. But the proper home is those other laws not this one.

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

MS LAGADA: Clause 1(a) and (b), I would like to propose that instead of the words, “A person” it reads, “A woman who is not a citizen of Uganda shall not be a member of a village women council” because with “person”, it appears as if its men, boys and other people who are not women. So, we substitute “person” with “woman”.

MR RUHINDI: In the report, the amendment being referred to seems to be relating to Clause 2(6)(a).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 1 be amended as proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 1 as amended -

MR RUHINDI: Let us get the amendments clearly. I see the amendment is to substitute the words, “Uganda citizens,” with the expression, “women” appearing in the first line of the paragraph. If you see the adjustment down there, the provision should read as follows: “The Electoral Commission shall, (a) by statutory instrument designate a period of registering women who want to participate in women council elections at all levels.” That to me takes me to Clause 2(6)(a) - “The Electoral Commission shall by statutory instrument designate a period for registering…” instead of “Uganda citizens”, I thought they wanted to put there, “women who want to participate in women council elections at all levels.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is Clause 1(b)

MR RUHINDI: This is the report I have. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, can you inform the Attorney-General where you are.

MS LAGADA: Attorney-General, in the process of typing this thing, the numbering was completely mixed up. I am on Clause 1(b) subsection (i)(a) where it reads, “Without prejudice to subsection 1, a person who is not a citizen of Uganda shall not be a member of a village women’s council” and we wanted to amend the word, “person,” with “woman.” So, we are talking about women. “A woman who is not a citizen of Uganda shall not be a member of a village women’s council.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. I put the question that Clause 1 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MS LAGADA: Under Clause 2, we are proposing that 6(a) where there is “Ugandan citizens” it be replaced by the word “women” so that it reads, “… by statutory instrument, designate a period for registering women who want to participate in women council elections at all levels.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MS LAGADA: Madam Chairperson, Clause 3, we want to add at the end, “…or political organisations”, so that the clause reads: “Under the multiparty political system, nomination of candidates may be made by a political organisation or a political party sponsoring a candidate, or by a candidate standing for election as an independent candidate without being sponsored by a political party or political organisation.”

MS NAJJEMBA: I am looking at the principal Act, comparing it with what we are amending and I feel something is missing out on the amendment under 7 of the principal Act, which is, the establishment and composition of women’s committees. When you look at the composition - No.(f)- it states, “Women’s representatives in Parliament in the case of district women’s committees” and we know that these are not women’s representatives in Parliament. So, I would like to say, “Women Members of Parliament in the composition of the women’s committee” at (f), instead of having, “Women’s representative in Parliament in the case of district women’s committee.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now that is an additional amendment. 

MS NAJJEMBA: Yes. It should be before what the chairperson has just presented. When you look at the parent Act, No.7, “Establishment and composition of women’s committees” at (f), there is the women’s representative in Parliament in the case of the district women’s committee, but we know that Women Members of Parliament here do not represent only women. So, we cannot call them “women’s representatives”. And we also want to cater for other Members who become Members but are directly elected by everybody.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But everybody is directly elected.

MS NAJJEMBA: Actually, everybody is directly elected, so in this case let us say, “Women Members of Parliament” as part of the composition.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That would also bring in the Members from the youth, the Members from Workers -

MS NAJJEMBA: Exactly, who are women? Maybe before that, I would like to create another one, which is, linkage with the local councils. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that also in 7?

MS NAJJEMBA: I thought so because when you go to 7(a), when you start talking about sponsorship of candidates, then I do not know where we shall put the linkage between women’s councils and local government. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think we have agreed with the Attorney-General that he will bring it up under a local government amendment and we shall be away.

MS NAJJEMBA: Madam Chairperson, why don’t we have it now so that we do not lose it? Let us capture it now so that when we get to the Local Government’s amendment it will be a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That was what I was trying to convince the Attorney-General about.
  
MR RUHINDI: I am advising as a person from the office of the Attorney-General and, Madam Chairperson, if Members really insist, I may have to consult the Office of First Parliamentary Counsel because he is responsible for drafting these laws. I have advised that the proper form is the other law; not this one. That is one.

Two; on the issue of amending section 7 of the Women’s Council Act, I realised that if you said that women MPs – there are women MPs who double; they represent districts and our traditional constituencies. Do you want to capture both? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Why not? They are all women.

MR RUHINDI: In addition, have you looked at the Constitution – I believe the Constitution still provides for a representative of women at the district level, but of course, that person is elected by adult suffrage – the designation is still as provided for in the Constitution. You have to be a little bit careful when you are making this kind of amendment; you have got to bear that in mind.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there any policy objection to the other members being part of this? Yes, hon. Alaso.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think to take care of that, we may then – I do not have the parent Act – make a simple breakdown, which clearly portrays that for example, “(a) there will be a woman representative in Parliament for every district.” I am saying this because the Attorney-General’s concern is that we must capture the wording as provided for in the Constitution. We can then go on to insert (b), which can say, “all female Members of Parliament who represent constituencies.” I would like to think that if we broke it up like that, it would become very clear.

Secondly, I think let us for now take the advice of the Attorney-General because Members of Parliament are also ex-officio members of the local councils and those provisions are actually in the Local Government Act. We could keep an eye. I do not think he will let us down when we get to the amendments in the Local Government Act, where we could capture that as it is done for Members of Parliament by providing for their ex-officio status in the council meetings.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But would that capture the women MPs, PWDs MPs? Would that capture the nominated women MPs? Would that capture the workers’ MPs?


MS ALASO: Madam Chair, my thinking - again just trusting the advice of the Attorney-General – is that the Local Government Act actually defines the composition of who is there. We cannot define the composition of membership of the local government councils in this particular law; we have to define it from there. If we want the youths to be there, we have to wait for amendment to the Local Government Act to provide for the youth, women councilors and any other person as ex-officio members. I am saying this because now we are not dealing with the composition of the local government councils.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, let us trust the Attorney-General with our ears and eyes, and remain awake. Let us wait for the Local Government Act – it is also on the Order Paper; we will try and see. In order to make them part of the local council –

MS KABAKUMBA: But Madam Chair, there are two amendments. We have agreed that we will wait for the linkage in the Local Government Act, but hon. Najjemba’s amendment was to clearly define and provide for all women MPs to be able to participate in the Women Council meetings in the districts they come from. Hon. Alaso just improved on hon. Najjemba’s amendment to say that we leave the women representatives, but we add other women MPs from that district to the Women Council.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is why I asked whether there was any policy objection to the other women members participating.

MR OPIO: Madam Chair, we have discussed with the Attorney-General and agreed that as we prepare for the amendment of the Local Government Act, we should review our policy so that – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, hon. Minister. I would like the Women Councils to be able to accommodate the other women leaders, especially those who are in Parliament and from the different sectors. For instance, the female workers may want to participate in the meetings for these Women’s Councils. The members from the smaller constituencies may want to be part of this. That is why I asked whether there was any policy objection.

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, I am even wondering how the minister could come up with a policy objection. Is it that they would go in and participate in their status as Members of Parliament? I am asking this because the primary definition of membership in the National Women Council is that you are a woman. Whether you are red, green, pink, a teacher, a nurse, a doctor or a peasant, as long as you are a woman, you qualify to be a member of that council.

MR OPIO: Madam Chair, after consulting, I would like to say we have no objection.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. I put the question that clause 7 (7) of the parent Act be amended as proposed by hon. Najjemba. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Section 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed by the chairperson of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chair, if you may recall, this same amendment was proposed in the Youth Councils (Amendment) Bill. In fact, it was you who guided us that those two sub clauses provide for different things and the amendment was not sustained.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: On clause 4?

MR RUHINDI: Yes. On page 4 of the Bill there are two – clause 23 – terms of regulations are:

    1. “The minister may, after consultation with the council, by statutory instrument make regulation for better carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.
    2. Without prejudice to sub section (1) the minister shall, after consultation with the council, make regulation for the implementation of the provisions of this Act regarding election of members of the council.”

You can see that whereas the other is for bringing into effect, this one is specifically for elections. Therefore, your guidance was that the consultation still remains in both. In other words, there is no need to have it deleted – they are proposing deletion.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Were they proposing deletion? But nobody has brought it – she has not said anything of that sort. Okay, I put the question that clause 4 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4 agreed to.

Title

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the —

MR MUGAMBE: I need guidance on 3. She sat down; she never came up; but we passed it as amended.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: She moved; She added, “And political organisation”. That was her amendment.

I put the question that the title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Title agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

1.18
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.19
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill, 2008” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT 
FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.19
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE NATIONAL WOMEN’S COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008

1.20
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill, 2008” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE NATIONAL WOMEN’S COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2008”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us suspend the House for one hour; we resume at 2.30 p.m. promptly to deal with the report from Agriculture and we shall start even if there are two Members. 

(The House was suspended at 1.20 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.03 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON ASSESSMENT OF THE FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (ADB LOAN)

3.04
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Oliver Wonekha): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I am here to present a report of the Committee –

MR EKANYA: Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under what rule? What rule? Hon. Members, we sat this morning. I gave an opportunity to everybody, but no one raised anything. Agriculture, please read your report. This House sat in the morning, but you did not present your matter. 

Hon. Chair, read your report on agriculture (Mr Ekanya rose_)

Hon. Member, please sit down. Hon. Members, I gave you an opportunity in the morning but you did not use it. I do not know about it. Agriculture, proceed. Hon. Ekanya, please sit down.

Proceed with Agriculture. I addressed all issues in the morning but you were not here.

MR EKANYA: I was here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, this House sat in the morning. Hon. Wonekha, please read you report.

MS WONEKHA: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I am here to present a report –(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed with your report.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I have a matter of procedure -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, I addressed that issue in the morning. You were not here.

MR EKANYA: I was here, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I addressed that matter in the morning. Proceed! 

Can the Sergeant-at-Arms remove this Member from the House. Remove this Member from the House.

Proceed with your report.

MS WONEKHA: Madam Speaker, I hereby present the report on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, on the assessment of the utilisation and implementation of the Fisheries Development Project ADB loan. (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: We have a matter of emergency.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed with the report on Agriculture, please.

MR EKANYA: What Sergeant-at-Arms; we can even carry that one out. Do not joke around with democracy. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed with the report on Agriculture.

MS WONEKHA: Introduction to the report. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, procedure. 

MS WONEKHA: Madam Speaker and hon. Members - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed with the report.

MS WONEKHA: On the 16 September 2008, the House requested the Auditor-General to make a special audit into the utilisation and implementation of the African Development Bank Fisheries Development Project loan. [Mr Ekanya: “Procedure. It is very clear. A matter of procedure takes precedence.”]

The Auditor-General on 20 March 2009 submitted a report to Parliament. The committee was directed to scrutinise it -[Mr Ekanya: “Madam Speaker, procedure”]- and report to Parliament at the earliest possibility. 

In accordance with Article 90 of the Constitution, Rules 133 and 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries now presents its findings to this august House. The report covers findings on key issues in the Auditor General’s report on the utilisation of the Fisheries Development Project, the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2008 and the committee’s field visits to selected project areas. 

(Thereupon, Members of the Opposition withdrew from the Chamber.)

The background

The Fisheries sub-sector is supervised by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and it is also guided by the National Fisheries Policy. 

Objectives of the audit
The overall objective was to assess and evaluate the performance of the Fisheries Development Project loan extended to the Fisheries sub-sector.

Methodology

The Committee interfaced with the Minister and officials of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; and the Office of the Auditor General. It undertook field trips to the following selected project areas: Mukono, Kamuli, Bugiri, Mbale, Amolatar and Masindi.

During the field trip, the Committee visited the following: Mr Mulumba Fred, an aquaculture farmer in Mukono District; Bukungu Fish Landing Site in Kamuli District; Namasere Integrated Fish Farm and Bugiri Fish Farm in Bugiri District; Nkoma Fish Fry Centre in Mbale District; Namasale Fish Landing Site in Amolatar District; Masindi Fish Market in Masindi District.   

The committee also held meetings with the area local leaders. 

The committee’s observations

The Committee noted that the project was funded by the African Development Bank and Government of Uganda. The total loan component was 22,000,000 Units of Account, an equivalent of US$ 33 million. The loan agreement was signed on 14 November 2002 and declared effective May 2003.

Project objectives

The major project objective was to increase income from fishing through availability of higher quality fish products and aquaculture production through strengthening of aquaculture research and development. 

The project is composed of five components namely: 

    a) Fish infrastructure development and quality assurance
    b) Aquaculture research and development
    c) Capacity building/technical assistance
    d) Credit fund
    e) Project coordination

Achievements 

The Committee noted the following achievements: 

Kajjansi Aquaculture Research and Development Centre (KARDC) had been rehabilitated. 

The construction of the laboratory, a library block and hostels at Kajjansi was in progress.

20 fish markets constructed had been commissioned.

Six out of the 12 fish landing sites had been completed while the remaining six were still under construction.

Construction of regional hatcheries in Mbale, Bushenyi, Kajjansi and Gulu had started and were at different stages of construction.

The contract for the supply and installation of ice making equipment had been signed and delivery was expected before February, 2010.

Eight patrol boats were procured and were already in use by the enforcement, monitoring and surveillance unit of the Department of Fisheries.

Madam Speaker, I have a file here containing all those documents. I will lay the file on the Table.

Challenges

The Committee noted that in spite of the achievements mentioned above, the project experienced some challenges which contributed to the delay in completion of some of the project activities among others:

Gaps in the project design, where the projection of different levels of prior requirements was later found to require adjustments. 

Inadequacy of counter-part funding by Government of Uganda 

Difficulty in meeting the ADB conditions as embedded in the loan agreement, for example, the need for securing proof of land ownership for the sites before commencement of project civil works. These made the project to lose much time before take-off. 

Limited capacity of local contractors to fund and manage the civil works leading to delay in completion of works contracted out. Some contracts had to be terminated, leading to re-procurement, hence further delay.

The escalation in costs for building and other construction materials leading to a reduction in the scope of works being undertaken.

Difficulty in operationalising the credit fund component

Micro-finance institutions were not interested in handling the facility because the cost of the credit interest rates was found to be too high for the intended beneficiaries.

The low budgetary (MTEF) ceilings for MAAIF which frustrated the budgetary allocations required to implement the project.

The requirement to adhere to both the ADB and GoU procurement procedures made the procurement process long. 

Project design and, therefore, implementation strategies were later to contend with new process requirements including the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act No.1, 2003.

Field visits of the Committee

We started in Mukono where we visited Mr Mulumba, an aquaculture farmer. 

Observations 

The farmer was one of the 14 beneficiaries in the district and Shs 4.5 million was extended to him as a grant under the project.          

Despite the above Government intervention, the farmer still could neither feed the fish nor access harvesting gears.

He lacked technical guidance 

Our recommendation was that farmers, in addition to the project benefits, should be assisted with full cycle support, for example, being linked to the NAADS programme.

In Kamuli District, the committee visited Bukungu Fish Landing Site. We noted at Bukungu that the district leadership lacked sufficient project information. They complained that they had not been involved.

The place looked abandoned with big gullies seemingly carved out by persistent heavy rainfall, resulting into soil erosion. 

Work at the marine docking structure was about 75 percent complete. 

The following structures as part of the construction work were visible: A slab for ice plant housing; an administration block; the marine docking structure; the dry fish store; changing room; rubbish pit; and a toilet. 

The project which should have ended by December 2008, had delayed.

Recommendations 

    1. The district leadership should be involved in developing the needs assessment and the actual implementation of the project. 
    2. Mitigation measures like planting grass should be put in place to minimise soil erosion and silting of L. Kyoga.  

In Bugiri, we visited Namasere Integrated Fish Farm and Bugiri Fish Farm. Our observations were: 

Bugiri District had benefited from the project through a fish handling plant at Golofa, and support to two fish farmers’ groups, named: Bugiri Fish Farm, which received a grant of Shs 16.8 million and Mr Samuel Kange, an aquaculture farmer in Namasere sub-county, who was supported with a grant of Shs 4.9 million for his fisheries activities. 

In Mbale District, the Committee visited Nkoma Fish Fry Centre. This is supposed to be a regional fish fry centre. The committee noted the district leadership had supported the project with a contribution of Shs 7 million, which was an indication that they were actively engaged and interested in efforts of rehabilitating the fish fry centre.

They expressed fear over the contractor’s capacity to complete the work on time, as scheduled, and that was October last year. 

They were concerned over the delayed restructuring of the production departments in the local government system.

The Contractor, GQ Investments, attributed the delays in completion of the work on irregular construction cash flows. The contractor informed the committee that whereas the works were worth Shs 1.5 billion, only Shs 67 million had been received by the firm.

The committee’s recommendation was, in order to minimise the excuses by the contracting firms, Government should find a way of improving its cash releases for the construction works or hire competent contractors. 

In Amolatar District, we visited Namasale Landing Site. The committee noted that the project which had just started was expected to be completed in the next eight months. On completion, the project was expected to have the following structures: A marine docking structure; an ice store; an administration block; a dry fish store; a changing room; a rubbish pit; and a toilet. 
 
The contractor attributed the delays in completion of the work on irregular construction cash flows.

Whereas the district leadership was in full support of the programme, there was inadequate involvement of the local leaders at the lower level.

The district leaders lacked or did not have sufficient project information on Bills of Quantities, which would spell out the expectations and how they ought to be achieved.

There was inadequate information on the provision of pre-requisite facilities like electric power connections and clean water for the site.

In Masindi District, during the inspection of Masindi Fish Market the committee learnt that:

The Fish Market constructed at a cost of about Shs 5 million was almost ready for use.

Whereas the district leadership was satisfied with the construction work, the fish vendors complained that the market had not been connected to other essential utilities for example, electricity, and there was no cold room in working condition, and no water.

The fish vendors also complained about soaring market fees.

The fish vendors needed more sensitisation on the operationalisation and management of the market. 

The ministry undertook to facilitate the sensitisation of all stakeholders on the operationalisation and management of the facility.  

Observations

The committee noted that most of the issues raised by the fish vendors above could be solved administratively.   

Recommendation

The committee recommends that administrative solutions should be sought by the town council authorities to solve the issues highlighted by the fish vendors.  

The Auditor General’s Report on the Special Audit of the Fisheries Development Project

The committee interacted with Auditor-General on the following:

    a) The special audit report on the Fisheries Development Project; and
    b) The Financial Statements for the project for the year ended 30th June, 2008. All of them are in this file, Madam Speaker.

In the special audit report, we looked at the extension of the Fisheries Development Project to 2010 

The committee observed that whereas the Fisheries Development Project’s life had been extended to 2010, it needed to be backed by written evidence.

The accounting officer submitted to the committee, a letter of undertaking, which indicated the extension of the project. It is also in this file.

Verification

After consultation with the Auditor-General on the accounting officer’s response, the committee noted that the Project was properly extended to 31 December, 2010.
 
Unfunded Landing sites

30 landing sites were planned to be constructed along lakes: Victoria, Kyoga, Albert, Edward and George.  However, it was noted that only 10 were under construction.  Two had had tenders awarded in January 2009 and the balance of 18 markets had not been tendered out.

The committee further noted that since the project was closing in January 2010, the construction of the 18 landing sites might not be fully undertaken. It was also noted that out of the 10 under construction, four were behind schedule.  

The accounting officer stated that 12 of the 30 landing sites were being constructed.  The project had experienced a gap in financing of the civil works component.  Also, the African Development Bank had noted, through the project mid-term review mission that the fisheries infrastructures were under-cost at project level. The mid-term report is also in this file. 

In addition to the above, construction of civil works under the project was affected by the price escalation of civil engineering materials.

Over 75 percent of the project funds were meant for infrastructure development.  Hence, the above factors had grossly affected the civil works component, especially the fish landing sites, which were tendered out late.

Tendering out of lot III could not be undertaken until the Government of Uganda and African Development Bank had agreed on the revision of the project budget at mid-term review, which was completed in April 2008, hence, 18 landing sites remained unfunded.

The contractor who was awarded the four landing sites that were behind schedule had his contract recently terminated by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on advice of the supervising consultant who cited failure to perform and to provide security to back the extension of his contract –(Mr Odonga Otto rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let her first complete the presentation of the report.  

MS WONEKHA: The ministry was in the process of consulting with the African Development Bank to identify a new contractor.

The mid-term review report, on page 21, section 4.2.6 recommended a reduction in the landing sites to be constructed –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Procedure, Madam Speaker. I have just arrived – I had to break the doors to get here –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the morning we had Parliament here and part of my communication related to the registration exercise. I gave you an opportunity to speak on it. A number of Members spoke and we proceeded with business. But I also informed the House that the Electoral Commission will be coming here at 10.00 a.m. to address the issues relating to the voters’ registration –(Interjections)– 

Hon. Members, I gave you an opportunity in the morning and you did not utilise it. That was the subject of my communication this morning. House adjourned to 2 O’clock tomorrow.

(House rose at 3.32 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 12 May 2010 at 2.00 p.m.) 

