Wednesday, 19 May 2010

Parliament met at 10.28 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.
 
PRAYERS

 (The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

Lt Gen. (Rtd) Jeje Odong 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Jeje Odong, I wish to welcome you to Parliament as an ex-officio Member of Parliament because you are a minister. I congratulate you. You have come in a Parliament, which has got two sides; the Opposition and Government side. But as you may have witnessed that you are camped here by both Members on this side and the other side and, therefore, it means that when you are here serving as a Member of Parliament, as a minister, you have to serve Members of each side equally. You should work with them and there is no enmity that, “These are my friends and those are not”; both sides are your friends and please, relate with them amicably. 

You have sworn to uphold the Constitution – I want to give you a copy of the Constitution, which you have to protect, and the rules that you are going to use to operate in the House. I wish you success and you are most welcome. (Applause) Let me make a communication and then you come – no, you wait.

Hon. Members, on your behalf I want to welcome the Minister of State for Defence who has now become an ex-officio Member of Parliament. You are most welcome. I hope you will relate with him amicably. (Applause)

10.35
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament, I welcome the Minister of State for Defence to this House. (Applause) Members of Parliament made it clear that he would not be a minister until he ceased being a member of the UPDF and we have complied –(Interjection)- with the constitutional requirements of this country. I thank you.

10.36
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): I thank you Mr Speaker. I would like to join Members of this House in congratulating hon. Jeje Odong upon his being sworn in this morning. You know we sometimes say good things when people have died; so let me take this opportunity to thank hon. Jeje Odong for the faithful service he has rendered to Uganda while he was in the UPDF. 

Let me also put on record our appreciation – I come from a certain village, which shares much with hon. Jeje Odong and the people of Teso appreciate the appointment of hon. Jeje Odong to Cabinet and they have been asking the President to address more of these imbalances in Cabinet by increasing the number of people from that village –(Laughter)- so we appreciate –(Interjections)- I would like to thank – you know today I am in a very good mood. I wish  to thank you people for the good work –(Laughter)- let me thank the Prime Minister for ensuring that the concerns of this House were taken note of, and for waiting until a time when hon. Jeje Odong got his retirement from the army so that he comes to serve in this multi-party Parliament. I think we meant to appreciate you. 

It is in the same breathe that we are asking that the members of the UPDF who stay in this House – that they are staying in a multi-party Parliament and they are making multi-partisan decisions and it is not good for the country. So, if you could borrow a leaf from what you have done as of now, you would support the review that takes away the UPDF from a multi-party Parliament from making partisan decisions. I congratulate hon. Jeje Odong.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you.

10.39
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): I thank you. I am standing on a matter of national significance regarding the disasters that are hitting the country particularly the area I represent in Kawempe. Of course I sympathise with other areas in the eastern, northern and western regions which have been hit by natural disasters. Mr Speaker, as you know, the area of Kawempe, particularly Bwaise and the surrounding areas are now flooded. 

But the point of significance that I want to raise is that recently Parliament passed a loan of about US $33 million for Kampala City Council and much of that money was supposed to work on the drainage system in that area, coupled with the garbage situation. 

Mr Speaker, I have been petitioned that the specifications under which we passed the loan are being altered. This is matter of real national importance; some of these disasters are man-made. So I request the Ministry of Works and the Ministry of Local Government and the ministry in charge of disaster to follow up the specifications under which we passed that loan. 

The petitioners are saying that the specifications which were passed are being altered; particularly regarding the width of the main stream. This means the floods are going to continue and this will be blamed on the ministry in charge of disaster. Therefore, I am appealing to Government to get interested in this so that we get value for money, and have the floods mitigated.

Recently we got about a billion to work on the tributaries but when you visit the area, you notice that it did not serve the purpose; much of the money was wasted. So I appeal to the ministries of Works and Disaster Preparedness to get interested and make an inspection to see what exactly is taking place. Whoever ate the money should be brought to book. That is my request, Mr Speaker. Let the specifications be brought back to Parliament so that we can know what they are going to work on. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: You mean the specifications which were approved should be brought back to us? We do not supervise the city council and the clerk of works must supervise to see how the work is going on. I think your appeal should be that the clerk of works should be vigilant to make sure that the construction of these channels is per the specifications that were approved. So the Ministry of Local Government is aware, and the Ministry of Works. You should just alert the contractors that, “Don’t change because we are watching you”, that is enough, isn’t it?

10.42
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): The Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, hon. Members of Parliament, on 13 May 2010, hon. Kassiano Ezati Wadri, acting Leader of the Opposition made a statement on a matter of national importance. I did pledge that Government will respond to this matter today. 

This matter is not on the Order Paper. I request that it be put on the Order Paper so that hon. Ruhindi may articulate the position of Government. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You mean this was an undertaking last week?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: That is correct.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I was not aware. Is the statement available?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: It is available and there are adequate copies.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we can adjust the Order Paper to include a statement by the minister. 

MR MENHYA: Mr Speaker, last week on Thursday the Minister for Public Service tabled a Bill titled, “The Parliamentary Pension’s (Amendment) Bill, 2010", and I can see on the Order Paper that hon. Mukitale is presenting the same Bill. I am wondering whether the Bill, which hon. Mukitale is going to present cannot be incorporated into the Bill that was presented by the minister because the minister’s Bill is already before the committee for scrutiny; so I am wondering what is going to happen.

THE SPEAKER: Let him table the Bill then I will explain.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE PARLIAMENT PENSIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010,

10.45
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. You may recall that we sought leave to present a private Member’s Bill on behalf of the Board of Trustees, Parliamentary Pensions Scheme. I want to thank the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance for finally giving us the certificate of clearance yesterday. I, therefore, now request that the “The Parliament Pensions (Amendment) Bill, 2010”, be read for the first time. 

MR MIGEREKO: Seconded. 

MR MUKITALE: The certificate was laid on the Table yesterday by the Minister of Finance. 

THE SPEAKER: Bill stands committed to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee for scrutiny and subsequent report to the House. 

Now, hon. Menhya, there are two Bills for different purposes. The first one was a Bill trying to answer the queries that you had made when you were dealing with presidential emoluments, benefits and so forth; and that Bill is removing the Office of Speaker and Deputy Speaker under the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme. That is why when that Bill was read, it was referred to your committee, because it was answering your queries. 

This Bill is dealing with the Speaker and Deputy Speaker affairs; with the pension’s scheme. The two are not dealing with the same subject matter. That is why, whereas the other one was committed to your committee, because it was answering the queries that were raised here when we were having general debate, it was sent to you. But this is going to another committee.

I noted when your Bill was presented; even before it was presented, Members stated debating it; I think that was out of place. You do not debate something, which is not in the House. I think they should have waited for the Bill to be tabled and then subsequent debate would follow. There were concerns that the matters in the Bill, which you are handling, constitute a charge on the Consolidated Fund rather than on the fund under the pension’s scheme. I think that is clear. Thank you very much. 

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE HIV AND AIDS PREVENTION AND CONTROL BILL, 2010

10.48
MRS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I beg that that Bill entitled, “The HIV and AIDS Prevention and Control Bill, 2010”, be read for the first time. The Certificate of Financial Implications is ready. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, now this Bill stands committed to the Social Services Committee for scrutiny and subsequent reporting to the House.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

10.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I refer you to the statement on the matter of national importance, “The ongoing struggle for electoral reforms in Uganda”, made by the acting Leader of the Opposition in this august House on the 13 May 2010 to which I wish to respond.

I draw the attention of this House to the fact that Uganda has witnessed a wave of demands for constitutional reforms that led in 1988 to the establishment of the Uganda Constitutional Commission; the Odoki Commission by the Uganda Constitutional Statute of 1988. The Odoki Commission traversed the country collecting the views of the people of Uganda on what they consider to be necessary constitutional reforms. The commission was inter alia tasked to endeavour to develop a legal framework for a democratic, free and fair electoral system that would ensure true peoples’ representation in the legislation and at other levels.

The report of the Odoki Commission precipitated the establishment of the 1994 Constituent Assembly of directly elected delegates who on behalf of the people of Uganda debated and promulgated what is now the 1995 Constitution. The Constituent Assembly was established by the Constituent Assembly Statute of 1993 for the purpose of scrutinising, debating, enacting and promulgating a new constitution based on the draft text prepared by the Constitutional Commission.

It is not in contention that the establishment and work of the Odoki Commission, the election of representatives to and the subsequent debates that ensued in the Constituent Assembly in the early 90s constituted a soul searching exercise by the people of Uganda. I believe that the Constitution reflects the country’s national objectives and principles of state policy. Although the independent Uganda of the 1960s, 70s and 80s was punctuated by bouts of democratic, quasi-democratic as well as military and pseudo-military governments, to date we can confidently state that there are has been progressive development in the democratic process of Uganda.

In 2001, Government established the Constitutional Review Commission headed by Prof. Fredrick Sempebwa to review the Constitution and make proposals for reform. These proposals resulted in the constitutional amendments of 2005. We can assert that there has been progressive improvement in the management and conduct of elections or referenda held since 1996 and the position of observer missions have taken cognisance of this fact and pronounced their verdict as free and fair.

Expansion of the National Resistance Council (NRC)

The expansion of the NRC was not chaotic as alleged by the acting Leader of the Opposition. The expansion was based on a system of electoral colleges and lining up. There is no uniform system of balloting. There is nothing chaotic or inherently undemocratic about colleges and they are used in countries more advanced than Uganda. 

Given the economic and social conditions of Uganda in 1989, it was not practicable to base the expansion of the NRC on election by the system of one person, one vote. The allegation of bribery by the acting Leader of the Opposition is a matter that constitutes an offence under the Presidential Elections Act, the Parliamentary Elections Act, the Penal Code Act and other relevant laws. The Opposition has every duty to report matters to the law enforcement agencies for investigation and prosecution.

Operations of the Electoral Commission

As you are well aware, Article 60 of the Constitution establishes the Electoral Commission and gives it the exclusive duty to conduct regular, free and fair elections and referenda in Uganda. It also guarantees its independence from the direction or control of any person or authority in Article 62. 

The Constitutional Court recently upheld the independence of the commission in the Constitutional Petition No. 1 of 2006; Kabagambe and others v the Electoral Commission and another. The court found that there was substantial compliance with the provisions of the law and noted that there was an improvement in the conduct of elections. 

The court also observed that the principles contained in the law were substantially complied with by the Electoral Commission and further noted improvements reported in the conduct of the elections quoted in the final report of the EU election observation mission. The court held that the irregularities did not affect the results of the elections in a substantial manner.

In terms of the general update of the voters’ register to date, Section 18 of the Electoral Commission Act requires the Electoral Commission to maintain and update the voters’ register. You will recall that on 12 May 2010, the Chairman of the Electoral Commission issued a press statement on the general update exercise. Some of the issues raised by the Leader of the Opposition in this regard were exhaustively covered during the commission’s meeting with Members of Parliament organised by the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee.

At the time of making his statement on 12 May 2010, all the 4,000 registration kits had been secured on 10 May 2010 and the commission was in advanced stages of deploying all the registration kits to the various districts. The preliminary technical and logistical issues encountered in the voter registration process have been addressed and there is steady progress in the registration process. 

To date, the capture rate ranges from 20 to 135 voters per kit with 50 and above registrants as the most dominant capture rate. This can be easily measured against the figures as at commencement of voter registration on 03 May 2010. It should be noted that some of the units register higher figures per day than what is usually achieved during the monthly update report during the continuous update exercise. The Electoral Commission is continuing to interface with Parliament and other stakeholders to resolve any problems associated with the ongoing updating exercise of the voter register.

But in addition, the Electoral Commission has also initiated and implemented the following electoral reforms or measures among others:

a)	Holding of consultative meetings, seminars or workshops with stakeholders, including political parties, political organisations and candidates; 
b)	Establishment of a national information desk and district complaints desks;
c)	Integration of voter education into the school and functional adult literacy curricula;
d)	Training of a special unit in the Police Force to handle electoral matters;
e)	The introduction of a single voters’ register;
f)	Display of lists of recruited temporary election officials for verification by the public and political parties;
g)	Training of political parties or organisations and candidates agents together with electoral officials;
h)	Display of lists of voters particularly recommended for deletion from the voters’ register; 
i)	Provision of serialised declaration of results forms for each polling station; 
j)	Organised and proper packing of ballot papers indicating the quantity and serial numbers of ballot papers at each polling station; 
k)	Abolition of enclosed polling booths;
l)	Counting and announcing of voters shortly after the close of the polls and at each individual polling station; 
m)	Use of a single transparent ballot box at every polling station; 
n)	Use of tamper-evident envelopes for sealing and retrieval of election results from polling stations; 
o)	Computerised tallying of election results;
p)	Use of software that rejects any inflated votes above the number of registered voters per polling station.

I call upon this august House to ensure that the Electoral Commission is allocated adequate resources and facilities to enable it perform its constitutional functions effectively in accordance with Article 66 of the Constitution. 

What has been the position of the Supreme Court on general elections? 

Mr Speaker, the pronouncement of the courts and most especially the Supreme Court should not be quoted out of context in relation to the conduct of elections and their management by the Electoral Commission. The findings in the Supreme Court presidential election petitions since 2001 concluded that irregularities did not affect the results of the elections in a substantial manner and that the elections reflected the will of the people of Uganda and the petitions were accordingly dismissed. Neither judgment stated anything about the competence of the officers of the Electoral Commission as is commonly alleged by some stakeholders. 

In terms of the electoral reform movement in Uganda, Mr Speaker, the move for electoral reform with regard to the amendment of the electoral laws has been carried out with the participation of the relevant stakeholders. It is on record that several electoral laws have been amended while a few are due for amendment to bring them in conformity with the multi-party dispensation and to address implementation challenges. The bulk of these amendments were Government responses to, and acceptance of, the court judgements in the election petitions.

In terms of the electoral reforms proposed by the IPC/IPOD, the IPC reforms were formally submitted to the Attorney-General in May 2009. The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs studied and took into account the reforms proposed in the IPC report. Some of the reforms were adopted and were incorporated in the Bills brought to Parliament. Those that were not adopted were referred by IPC/IPOD to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, which considered them when presenting the Bills.

Additionally, the IPOD-proposed reforms were presented to Parliament in plenary when debating the Bills. Several of the proposals were accepted and incorporated into the Bills.

The existence of the IPOD and the willingness of Government to work with them in processing the amendments is a clear manifestation of the existence of democracy in Uganda, which has been developed and nurtured by this Government. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, six of the Bills proposing electoral reforms have now been passed by Parliament. These include: 
1.	The Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2009.
2.	The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2009.
3.	The Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2009.
4.	The Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2009.
5.	The National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill, 2008.
6.	The National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill, 2008

The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2009 is still pending before Parliament.

The passage of the bulk of the electoral law reform Bills by this House and the existence of other legislative and administrative electoral measures partly addressed herein cannot be described as a move towards discord in the country’s electoral process like is being suggested by the acting Leader of the Opposition.

In terms of the proposal to introduce a constitutional amendment Bill by the Opposition, on page 3 of the statement by the acting Leader of the Opposition, reference is made to a constitutional amendment Bill the Shadow Attorney-General intends to introduce seeking, among others, to:

a)	Amend article 60(1) so that the power of appointing members of the Electoral Commission are taken away from the President and given to an impartial judicial commission to increase the Electoral Commission’s independence. 
b)	Urgently restore presidential term limits in the Constitution under Article 105(2). 
c)	Remove army officers from Parliament because they have failed to remain non-partisan in our multiparty Parliament as was envisaged in Article 208(1) and (2) of the Constitution. 

Under paragraph (a) above the acting Leader of the Opposition seems to indicate that the power of appointing members of the Electoral Commission is vested solely in the President. Mr Speaker, the exercise of the said power is a shared responsibility between the Executive and Parliament and it is Government’s position that under this arrangement, appointment of an independent commission is assured and that indeed the current commission was appointed in full compliance with the law.  (Applause)

Under paragraph (b) and (c) above it is Government’s position that the reasons that led to the removal of term limits in Article 105(2) of the Constitution and the inclusion of army officers in Parliament are still valid. However, without prejudice to the above, if the Opposition wishes, they may present a Private Members’ Bill in accordance with rules 105 and 106 of the Rules of Procedure on the above or other matters and we shall handle it on its merit.

In terms of re-demarcating constituencies under Article 61(1)(c) of the Constitution, Article 61(1)(c) gives power to the Electoral Commission to demarcate constituencies in accordance with the Constitution. Article 63 provided for the manner in which constituencies are to be demarcated. Article 63(5) requires the Electoral Commission to review and re-demarcate constituencies within 12 months after the publication of results of a census of the population of Uganda.

Uganda is deemed to be demarcated into constituencies as set out in Section 11 of the Electoral Commission Act and the Schedule to the Parliamentary Elections Interim Provisions Act, Cap. 141. However, in addition to any county created by a district council with the approval of Parliament under Article 179(3) of the Constitution and Section 7(7) of the Local Government’s Act becomes a constituency. In both arrangements, however, approval is by Parliament and that gives the opportunity to Parliament to guide and harmonise the process for the creation of constituencies, among others.

In terms of the events that took place that resulted in the suspension of Members of Parliament, the Members of Parliament were suspended under part 13 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, in particular under rule 73 relating to decisions of the Speaker or Chairperson. The matter can, therefore, be adequately handled under rule 73 of the Rules of Procedure, which provides that an order of the Speaker shall not be reviewed by the House except upon a substantive motion made after notice. 

In terms of security in the Parliamentary precincts, the government is mindful of the needs of Parliament for security personnel within its precincts and may deploy any such personnel as is required by Parliament and as may be necessary and in accordance with the law. For God and my country! (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Next item! Did you debate hon. Wadri’s statement? This was just a response to it. I understand hon. Wadri made a statement and this was just the response, which was promised. Isn’t that the case?

11.10
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yes, hon. Wadri made a statement on our behalf and it was our statement, and this is the Government’s response. But if you will permit us to just mention things in regard to voter registration because we think it is important - 

THE SPEAKER: I will allow three of you to make a brief statement. You can make one.

MS ALASO: In regard to the general update of the voters’ register, I would like to raise a few concerns, particularly the fact that even after the briefing that we had with the Electoral Commission, the commission did admit that by the time of the briefing, I think it was around 12 May 2010, but I do not remember; by the time of the briefing, the exercise was not going on as scheduled; they hadn’t delivered cameras as had been agreed. So, we had lost out on time. We asked the Electoral Commission to consider a possibility of compensating on the lost time. What we are looking at from the Attorney-General’s statement is that he seems to suggest that the cameras have had the magic of compensating on their own when they were introduced in the second or third week, which is not the case, Mr Speaker.

There are still areas where cameras are inadequate, I can speak for Soroti. We now have 57 out of the 75 that we should be having and yet we lost out on time. Most parts of the country lost out on the first week because people were being trained; the cameras broke down; they were inadequate, and some sub-counties didn’t have them. So, it is my position that we ask the Attorney-General to consider the possibility of extending this exercise; Ugandans need to be assured.

Secondly, I want to raise another matter in regard to registration. The exercise is being abused in some areas. 

THE SPEAKER: You are saying because of deficiencies that have been experienced they should consider making an extension? 

MS ALASO: Yes, Mr Speaker, if we can have an extension beyond the date that had already been communicated. 

There are areas where this exercise has been abused and we wanted Government to come out very clearly on this matter. There are border areas where non-nationals and non-citizens are getting registered and getting into our voter roll. There are constituencies where people of 12 years are being registered. I can give you an example. Mr Speaker, in Igara West, in a parish called Kabire, in a sub-county called Kakanju - we have photographs and a documentary of children of 12 years being registered; and I think this does not auger well with a clean voter register.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I thought that after registering respective voters, there would be a stage of display and objections would be taken. So, I think what should be done is to collect the information so that at the time of displaying you say, “So and so should be edited out because he or she does not qualify”. It may not be easy at this stage because somebody comes and claims to be 18 or 20 years; and they don’t have a birth certificate. As you know in most of our villages, people do not have birth certificates. But if you have the information, I think there will be a stage when these objections on this current exercise will be made so that those who do not qualify are deleted. I think it cannot be done at the same time.

11.14
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you. I appreciate the point you are raising, Mr Speaker, but we have a very big problem with what hon. Alaso is talking about, the screening mechanism being used at this stage. The screening mechanism is not fair enough to address those issues and you remember when we were debating the issue of parish tribunals here, it was a very contentious issue. 

What we have in place today are tribunals, which are arbitrarily established. The parish tribunals have got no criteria or formula. Actually I was looking at the supporting law, it is non-existent because the tribunals are supposed to come into place at a time of display but what we have in place today – you find parish tribunals at all the registration centres are mainly composed of LCs and, with due respect to my colleagues on the other side, Members of the NRM and they sit on those tribunals -(Interjection)- Yes, Mr Speaker, it happens. 

Like in the case hon. Alaso was talking about, when they are screening, they do it selectively. They can deny registration of a person who is resident in that particular area and they allow people who come from other areas. This is happening. I can give an example in my constituency. I think it is the worst case scenario. Almost 100 percent of all the members of the tribunal are known NRM activists. What they do is sit at the registration centres and they block whoever wants to register; they say, “No, you shouldn’t register; we want so and so”. 

Most of these LCs cannot tell where a person comes from. It is not that easy to tell where a person comes from in a cosmopolitan constituency like Kampala Central. It is not that easy but they purport to identify eligible voters whom they screen and vet. And the registration officers entirely rely on the discretion of the members of the tribunal, which is very unfortunate. They can deny somebody a right to register on the basis of the opinion of the members of the tribunal and it is very unfortunate. 

Finally, there are two registration centres, which have been established and they are national in nature, at the Constitutional Square and Kololo Airstrip. They said with these ones, irrespective of your area of origin, you are free to go and register from there. At the end of the exercise they are going to post those voters registered at the Constitutional Square at any polling station of their choice in the country. I find this a little bit ridiculous because if there are vetting mechanisms to establish who is a resident and who is not, do we have tribunals at the Constitutional Square, say for example, to determine a resident in some remote village in Kyanamukaka and the person is registered here at the Constitutional Square? Do they have that capacity? So, I really need to get an explanation on this.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukwago, I think those two centres are meant to help me not to go to Kyanamukaka to register but register here instead. These concerns have been expressed; the minister in charge of the Electoral Commission has heard; the Clerk of Parliament will send a copy of the Hansard of today where these things have been stated so that an independent commission can take action to remedy the deficiencies. The extension is part of what you have said here that, in view of the deficiencies experienced, it is necessary maybe to extend the period, as to how long, I do not know; but there is need. The independent commission will assess and determine the period. Yes, the last one.

11.19
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will start with that extension. Three weeks ago, I had the opportunity to meet with a German team that is undertaking the biometric registration exercise. They informed me that they have a deadline which they have signed to meet. I do not know how that will be waved because they were supposed to register 3.5 million people in four weeks –

THE SPEAKER: There are normally provisions for variations in agreements, be it in construction or whatever. If necessary, the variations are made at a cost.
 
MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that clarification.  

Secondly, again on registration, I beg for a clarification from the Attorney-General regarding what he has termed as an exercise going on well. In Makindye West - I have repeatedly come here to indicate problems that have been engulfing that constituency and the division as a whole. But to be more specific, any attentive politician and citizen follows the advertisements of the Electoral Commission which are both on radio and TV and are as well carried as inserts in the print media. These advertisements indicate the starting date and the closing date of registration. They also indicate that registration will take place in the places identified everyday from 8.00 O’clock. 

Mr Speaker, this is not happening maybe in Makindye West - for other constituencies, I do not know. I have a list of the places where people are supposed to be registered. I have gone to these places with my constituents a number of times, and we have been told: “You know, we decided that we are going to register here today, and register from another place the other day.” But this is not part of the advert. This is not the direction. So, I do not know whether even the increment of the days is going to rectify this anomaly because our people are totally confused. 

Thirdly, on page 5, the hon. Minister talks of reforms that are being undertaken by the Electoral Commission. In part (e), he talks about the introduction of a single voters’ register. I do not know when this is going to be effective, because apparently, what we are doing is making two parallel registers: One is biometric - which is new and for 3.5 million people; and the other one is the old one, and for lack of a better word, you can call it analogue. Now, what does part (e) mean? Is it for the future or for now?

Lastly, it is true that the Electoral Commission does not have sufficient power in some areas. In Makindye Division, the Electoral Commission has been sufficiently sabotaged by individuals masquerading as workers on behalf of either the office of the RDC or the NRM. I do not want to believe them because I have no proof, but they have gone around parading themselves and I have these names - I went, two and a half weeks ago, to the Electoral Commission and had a meeting with the vice-chairperson of the Electoral Commission and reported all these individuals, but nothing has happened to them. They are still going ahead with the exercise and they are the people hon. Lukwago is talking about in Kampala Central who stand in front of registration centres and say, “You do not register from here; go to Kayembe. You do not register from here; go to Kasalu.” 

Mr Speaker, our people are extremely vulnerable. Those people have a lot of power; they have canes; they can smash someone. So, we beg for your indulgence rather than extending the days. These problems are embroiled within the exercise of registration. We have tried by all means to be cooperative with the Electoral Commission, but we are finding a lot of difficulty working with it when it has minimum powers.
 
THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. Hon. Members, as I said earlier, let the misgivings expressed today be communicated to the independent Electoral Commission and also the minister in charge should discuss it with the Electoral Commission. And that ends the debate on this.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL

11.25
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would wish to move a motion seeking leave of this House to introduce a Private Member’s Bill.

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, hon. Lukwago. Please, bear with me. In the gallery, are pupils from Bright Doors of Saint Francis, a youth club which trains young boys and girls in various disciplines in Church and the development of talent. They are located in Kamwokya Catholic Parish, Kampala Archdiocese. You are welcome. (Applause) 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move a motion seeking for leave of this House to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Constitutional (Amendment) Bill, 2010” under rules 105 and 106 of our Rules of Procedure: 

“WHEREAS Clause 2(i) of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy which is enshrined in our Constitution, provides that the State shall be based on democratic principles, which empower and encourage the active participation of all citizens at all levels in their own governance;

AND WHEREAS Article 1(4) of the Constitution stipulates that the people shall express their will and consent on who shall govern them, and how they should be governed through regular free and fair elections of their representatives or through referenda;

NOTING that the aforesaid key principles of democratic governance have not been fully realized in all the previous general elections inter alia on account of deficiencies or loopholes in the existing legal framework;

NOTING FURTHER that the Supreme Court and other courts of judicature have repeatedly pronounced themselves on such inadequacies in the existing electoral laws and recommended necessary   amendments;

AND CONCERNED that we are left with very limited time to make preparations for the forthcoming general elections;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:
This august House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled, “The Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2010.”

It is further prayed that Parliament doeth cause the said Bill to be published in preparation for the first reading.
 
I beg to Move.” 

MR KIBANZANGA: Seconded.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.
 
MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The justification for this motion is that we are at a very critical stage of determining the future of this country and at a critical stage where we have to cement the –(Interruption)

MR ONYANGO-KAKOBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am standing on procedural matters. The Shadow Attorney-General is reading a motion, but we do not have copies of that motion. 

THE SPEAKER: I think copies will be with you shortly. Please, produce more. 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We do concede that Government brought amendments to the existing electoral laws and we did make our position earlier on that those amendments were inadequate, and it is on record that we attempted to bring Private Members’ Bills to address those amendments. And we appreciate that at least we have registered some mileage in as far as amending electoral legislations is concerned, but the core of these electoral reforms is the amendment of the Constitution. Unless we amend the Constitution in certain aspects to bring it in conformity with the current political dispensation, it is going to be extremely difficult for us to realise free and fair elections in the near future and for generations to come. 

Mr Speaker, the Bill we are seeking to introduce has got four key elements:

1.	The amendment of Article 60 of the Constitution to restructure the composition of the Electoral Commission in a number of aspects, which I will highlight. 

2.	We are seeking to amend Article 78 of the Constitution to remove representation of the Army from this august House and there are justifications for that position.

3.	 We are also seeking to amend Article 105 of the Constitution to restore term limits. We also have serious grounds for that proposal.

4.	Finally, we are moving an amendment to Article 206 of the Constitution to entrench the provisions of Articles 102 and 103 which require a winning candidate to at least garner 50 plus percent vote before he is declared a winner. Currently, it is not an entrenched provision. Entrenched provisions under Article 260 in addition to other parliamentary processes require a referendum. 

So, those are the four key elements.

THE SPEAKER: Do you intend to put a transitional period to your provision? 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance on that.

THE SPEAKER: As we transit from the current system to the new system, don’t you think there should be a transitional provision? Anyway, go on with your motion.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think we shall handle that at an appropriate stage. For the record, in 2005, we amended the Constitution in August when the general elections were due in February of the following year. 

On the issue of the Electoral Commission, hon. Members, we all agree that we adopted a multiparty democracy and we all agree that we are supposed to have a say in the establishment of this Electoral Commission because without an independent Electoral Commission, we cannot have a free and fair election. The Attorney-General made an observation earlier on this Floor that the courts of law have not pronounced the existing Electoral Commission incompetent. Mr Speaker, I beg to respectfully disagree with that position on the following grounds:

The Attorney-General is fully alive to the judgements of various courts - the High Court, the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court – on a number of elections which have been held in the recent past, particularly in 2001 and 2006, and some of those judgements are an indictment to the existing Electoral Commission.  

The finding, which is not in dispute in most of those cases, even in the presidential election petitions, is that the Electoral Commission is failing in its primary mandate of organising free and fair elections. Under Article 61, the core function of the Electoral Commission is to conduct a regular free and fair election, and the Attorney-General will agree with me that even in the presidential election petition of Kiiza Besigye v. Museveni on two occasions, the pronouncement has been that the Electoral Commission failed to organise free and fair elections and the provisions of the Constitution that I have just read, specifically Article 1 –” For us to have the will of the people always reflected in matters of governance, there must be free and fair elections” - so, without free and fair elections, that means that the Electoral Commission has failed in its original and primary mandate and, therefore, it means it is incompetent. 

Secondly, as a country, we assented to the Durban Declaration, which I laid on this Table sometime back, but I will give another copy to this House. This is the Harare Declaration of 8 July 2002. It was adopted on the 38th Ordinary Session of the Assembly of the AU in Durban. By then it was still the OAU and we laid down benchmarks after considering a number of international instruments regarding free and fair elections. 

On page 3, are the benchmarks and among other things they include: “…for us to realise free and fair elections on the entire continent, we must establish an impartial, all inclusive, competent and accountable Electoral Commission staffed by well-trained personnel and equipped with adequate logistics”,  and when I go to page 4, this is a commitment we undertook as a country by assenting to this protocol that: “We undertake to establish an impartial, all inclusive, competent and accountable national electoral body, staffed by qualified personnel as well as competent legal entities, including effective constitutional courts to arbitrate in the event of disputes arising from the conduct of elections.” 

Mr Speaker, the key words or expression here is “all inclusive national body.” I beg to lay this on Table, once again. If I may pose and ask Members; how all inclusive is the current Electoral Commission which was established during the Movement political system? What are the benchmarks? What are the tenets of an all inclusive electoral body? This is the key issue which should preoccupy our minds, which should be considered when we are debating this motion. What amounts to an all inclusive body? We shall borrow from other practices of other democracies.

In Botswana, which is one of the beacons of democracy in Africa, they have adopted – this is their provision. The Botswana Electoral Commission is a seven-person commission. It comprises a chairperson, who is a judge of the high court; a deputy chairperson, who is a legal practitioner; and five members chosen from a list recommended by the All-Party Conference. The commissioners are appointed by the Judicial Service Commission. The secretary is appointed by the president. So, here the point is, there is an All-Inter-Party Conference, which makes recommendations to the Judicial Service Commission. That is one aspect.

The second aspect is, the chairperson is qualified to be a judge of the high court and the deputy chairperson is a legal practitioner. There are valid reasons why Botswana adopted this position. I beg to lay this on Table.

Finally, South Africa’s position is as follows: The independent Electoral Commission is composed of five members one of whom must be a judge. A member of the independent Electoral Commission must be a South African citizen and must not have a high political profile. Members of the independent Electoral Commission are appointed by the president on recommendation of the National Assembly following nominations by a National Assembly Inter-Party Committee. The inter-party committee examines a list of at least eight nominees submitted blah, blah, blah! and it continues. 

The point here is that the parties are involved in the process of appointing members of the commission, including the chairperson and the deputy. In this particular case, where are the parties in this whole process? The Attorney-General talked about involvement of –(Interjections)- Parliament exactly, but that is not enough because the key phrase or expression “inclusiveness” means all the stakeholders must be involved in the process! This is not the case here. 

That is why we are suggesting in the amendment that:

1.	The parties should make nominations to the Judicial Service Commission because we have a commission here. 

2.	There should be a supervening body between nomination and appointment because Parliament comes in to approve. 

But ask me or I would ask you, how in our case here would the President identify suitable candidates? Who recommends these people to the President, anyway? It is the President, using his discretion, to sit in his office or anywhere and say, “I need so and so to be a member of the commission,” and he appoints him and brings him or her to Parliament for approval. There should be a supervening body even if we are to retain the President as the appointing authority. But in this particular case, we are saying the Office of the President should be out. 

We should have the inter-party; we should have the parties; we should have the Judicial Service Commission; and then Parliament. That would be enough; and there are provisions we shall bring to safeguard the security of tenure because we are proposing that their terms of service should be equivalent to those of the judges of the High Court. The removal of the commissioners – Article 62 - guarantees the independence of the commission; but practically, they serve at the mercy of the President. They are no safety measures within the Constitution to secure their tenure because the President can easily dismiss them. In the case of judges, there must be a tribunal; but in this particular case, the commissioners can be removed at the will of the President.

The justification I would give for the removal of the Army from Parliament – I will leave the rest to my colleagues who are seconding the motion, particularly the issue of restoration of term limits, I will not dwell much on it.

Finally, Mr Speaker, allow me to address you briefly on the issue of the removal of the Army from Parliament. Members, we appreciate the role of the Army; we appreciate that the Army is such a central institution in the management of society, but their role is as defined in Article 208, 209 and 210. The words in Article 208 are quite instructing. The Army shall be non-partisan and shall be subordinate to the civilian authority. That is the express provision in Article 208. So, where is the civilian authority? The epitome of the civilian authority actually is this august House and probably Cabinet, but now, how subordinate are our colleagues representing the Army when they sit with us here? How are they subordinate to the civilian authority? Actually we are at par with them; they are not subordinate to the civilian authority; they can veto the decision of the civilians – 

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Lukwago, did you, on this issue of the Army, consider the provisions of Article 78(2) because, without even amending the Constitution, if you convince these people at the end of the term of this Parliament under (2), they can drop any special category representation without necessarily amending the Constitution. I remember in the Constituent Assembly, I am the one who suggested this. It provides as follows: “Upon the expiration of a period of ten years after the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter, every five years, Parliament shall review the representation under Clause (1)(b)and (c) of this Article for the purposes of retaining, increasing or abolishing any such representation and any other matter incidental to it.”  

When you are effecting this, you are not amending the Constitution, you are just operationalising the Constitution. So, the provisions –(Applause)- for dropping are there. The task of amending a constitution is not easy, but operationalising it is easy. I thought you should consider this. It may be easier like that than maybe the other. I do not know. 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I understand the option you are suggesting that we would have adopted. But I am saying that we are trying to address the contradictions we have in the Constitution. We are saying that even in the first place, inclusion of the Army at the promulgation of the Constitution was a mistake! (Interjections) Yes, because you cannot provide in Article 208 that the Army shall be subordinate to the civilian authority then you go to Article 78 and say – by the way, they can sit with the civilians in making decisions of this nature –(Interjections)- unless my understanding of the word “subordinate” is different; but, Mr Speaker, we appreciate that and one of the reasons why we are entangled in this mess is because we made a fatal mistake in 2005. We adopted a multiparty democracy without amending even a single Article on the issue of multiparty democracy in this country. We did not amend any of those provisions in the Constitution, which was very unfortunate. This is the reason we are saying, if we are to have a functioning multiparty democracy where the Army would play its traditional role - its historical role is known and we do not dispute that and we appreciate it. But they should leave us to take decisions in an atmosphere, which is free of Army fatigue and anything that resembles undue influence so that we can freely debate on national matters. What I know is that they can also be present in committees and all other aspects.

Mr Speaker, allow me wind up by saying that hon. Members, unless we get the Army out of politics, we shall continue to have turmoil in this country. The Army should be out of politics –(Interjections)– honestly, I am appealing to you to appreciate my point not for the good of the Opposition, but also for the good of this country.

As I said earlier on, I would like to leave the other issues, particularly the one on the restoration of term limits, to my colleagues. Otherwise, I would like to emphasize that if we are to have orderly succession and if we are to avoid a one-man’s rule, we must restore term limits as a matter of urgency. This will help us entrench Articles 102 and 103 as provisions that require a referendum if we are to change anything. 

Once again, I would like to appeal to you, hon. Members, to have mercy on this country and support us. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukwago, hon. Okello-Okello is the person you mentioned? Okay, let us hear from him.

11.51
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this motion. But before I do much, I beg to say that this motion is not only in the interests of the Opposition, but also in the interests of this country and its stability.

I live in an area that has been in insurgence for over 20 years. I would not like anybody in this country to experience that kind of situation. We are saying that we all belong here and so, we should all live, die and be buried here without any chaos.

I would like to start by saying that the position of the Electoral Commission is very pertinent in any democracy. We are all familiar with the game of football. If the captain of one team participates in choosing a referee, I do not think that game will go on. The referee must be independent and free and fair to both teams. The composition of the Electoral Commission, if we are to promote democracy, must be changed. We cannot say that we are now under a multiparty dispensation, when we are using the Movement system Electoral Commission. That is a contradiction.

Mr Speaker, democracy is not always about numbers – mark my word; not always about numbers. Democracy is about logic and compromise, and consensus. The use of numbers without this other element can lead to disaster.

There are many examples in the world. There was a system called apartheid, which ruled South Africa for many years. That system did everything according to its own laws. But were the laws in favour of the majority of the population? For 14 years in the apartheid, Mr Speaker, there was only one opposition member sitting on the opposition side. She kept telling the government side that one day they would go. They were laughing, but as you are all aware, apartheid is no more. We are saying that the numbers should be used reasonably and judiciously. 

We have had Army representation in this House for quite a number of years, but I have never seen any uniform sitting on this side – it is now four years! But you keep saying that the Army should be non-partisan. Why don’t we show it here? (Applause)

We all pay to maintain the Army, including the people on this side; it is not anybody’s Army. If we are now saying that the Army is now personal to the holder, then definitely that Army will go with the holder.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okello-Okello, would you mind if I advise them to sometime sit on this side and sometime on the other?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I wish you had done that four years ago. But whether they heed to your advice or not is what I do not know, but I doubt they would listen to you.

What I am saying is that we want separation of powers. The Army profession is totally different from the political profession. We cannot mix the two and have people crossing lines. I think it is in the interest of this country that we look at this matter soberly and nationalistically, and decide in the best interest of our country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Attorney-General.

11.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE & CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I rise not to support the motion. I oppose it. The Shadow Attorney-General is highlighting a few things in his motion that we have consistently debated without any clarification, even when sought from him. 

I have insisted that if you are citing a decision of court, have the courtesy – particularly given your profession - where necessary, lay it on the Table so that everybody can have the benefit of that. The Electoral Commission officials or the Electoral Commissioners were never put on trial. The consideration of matters in the Supreme Court was in respect of whether an election was free, fair and transparent. You said it very well - in fact, when you say that in one way or the other, they could have failed. Failing to comply could be precipitated by so many factors; incompetence is another. 

In the statement, which I have just presented, Mr Speaker, I was calling upon Members of Parliament to raise the challenge of the need for necessary resources. I know we are constrained nationally; we all live here; we do not live in Missouri. But in a united form, we could together - in fact, I would be happy if the challenge here was how do we mobilise resources to give the Electoral Commission to perform its functions effectively? (Applause) We should be seen to be positive not negative. I would like to get it from him either here or out. Let us get the extract from the judgment which says the Supreme Court has declared the commissioners of the Electoral Commission incompetent.

Mr Speaker, you raised an important issue, which seems not to have been followed up by the Shadow Attorney-General. You asked whether he is proposing any transitional measures in this Bill. That is critical in the sense, for instance, if you are to say that your proposals take immediate effect upon passage in this House, then you would actually be saying that the Electoral Commissioners, who have already been appointed in accordance with the law, will cease to be commissioners. In which case you have to provide for them in terms of emoluments, because we shall terminate them when they have actually been appointed. In accordance with the law, maybe you may think in terms of packages to give them and that brings in the element of financial implications to his motion under Article 93 of the Constitution. You would actually have to convince us that that is taken care of under your arrangement; but I have not yet seen that arrangement in place. 

The issue of inclusiveness - and I am happy because I thought you would bring it in another form, but you brought it very tactfully by saying whoever is appointing should consult. Even Parliament should consult. By the way, if you want a model of an all-inclusive body, it is the Parliament itself. This is why my challenge has been, why is it that Parliament wants to exclude all other players but not itself? Every other body is not impartial, it is only Parliament which is impartial; but when we take the decision, then you come out and say it is not us, it is the President who is appointing. We do appoint. We have the final approval and the committee is all-inclusive. 

Now, let us look at it from this point of view. I wanted to say that if it is the issue of consultation, we all know why the National Consultative Forum has not been operational to date. We all know that it lacked a chairperson because the post of chairperson was not provided for under the Political Parties and Organisations Act. We have had a successful amendment to that law. That Bill has passed through this Parliament and was passed. I believe we are now going to have a functional National Consultative Forum, then it will become a legitimate body that an authority can consult because it will be presenting the interests of all political parties and organisations.  

Sadly and tactfully, there was no mention of that because I thought that one would actually be speaking in terms of proportional representation of political parties in the Electoral Commission. But I think that, that would completely polarise the functioning of that body. My view - you have not said it, but I am highlighting it in case anyone has got or is entertaining that thought – I think it would be wrong because that would polarise the body; we should actually be looking more at the independence of the body; at how it functions rather than or who is on it or not.

In terms of the Army, a lot has been said. When I was seated the other side, Gen. Kahinda Otafiire whispered to me and was wondering whether by him not being in uniform and he is seated in this House, stops him from being a General. (Laughter) I think we all know the history of why the Army came to be part of us in this House, and if we are to be speaking from our hearts, we would be frank to each other and say it has worked well. (Applause) It demystified the armed person that we all know existed then. Hon. Lukwago, for you really, to be in these corridors cracking jokes with Gen. Tumwine and you think it is not a big achievement -(Laughter)- and planning together how this country should be shaped politically, socially, economically and so on and so forth. That harmony; that closeness – in fact to me, if there has been any major achievement in this country, it is the symbiosis between the civilian population and the armed forces. (Applause)

This is not the right time to begin saying – what signals are you sending to them when you say get out of this House? (Interjections) Well-

MS ALASO: Hon. Speaker, I have been following the Attorney-General very keenly, but the last statement he made kind of threw me off balance. He is wondering what signals we are sending to the Army when we say, “Get out of this place”. 

Is the Attorney-General in order to try to impute bad motive on our motion; that we are doing a thing that is irregular by trying to seek leave – we are not even at the level where we would debate the presence of the Army as an institution; we are just seeking leave. Is he in order to impute bad motive and even intimidate us that this is a no-go area? Are these not the same things that we used to worry about, which he said we had demystified; and now he is saying in the same breath that the Army cannot be talked about?

THE SPEAKER: I think this is a matter of interpreting the purpose of the motion. For him, he understands that by saying what you are saying, you want the Army to quit. But you can help him by explaining what you meant by the motion. (Laughter) 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, thank you for that wise ruling. In conclusion, I agree with your interpretation of how we should handle special interest groups under the Constitution, here and in the future. When a review is done, any decision of such a review that necessitates taking action, should not necessarily entitle amending the Constitution. 

The other items in this motion were not adequately argued and I have nothing much to say about them. I, therefore, oppose the motion. 

12.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (WATER) (Ms Jennifer Namuyangu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise to oppose the motion by the Shadow Attorney-General. We should not sit here and expect the Army to fight and sacrifice their lives, and when it comes to sitting in Parliament, we say, “The Army should not be here”. 

I have watched the Army; they are even friendlier to us the Members of Parliament; they are on record for not being violent here. If we set precedence of getting the Army out of Parliament as one of the interest groups, I imagine hon. Lukwago will next remove the women out of this Parliament; then he will ask the youth to get out of this Parliament; then the people with disability; and the workers too. So, we should stand our ground and oppose this motion. 

Hon. Okello-Okello was worried that the Army does not sit on their side. The Army belongs to Government, and I want to assure him that when it is his turn to be in Government, the Army will sit on the same side with him –(Interruption) 

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Namuyangu for giving me way. This is exactly the worry we have. The Constitution is clear that the Army should be impartial. You were here in the last Parliament and by August 2005, it was very clear that we were going for a multiparty dispensation. When we were voting for the lifting of the term limits, one member of the UPDF attempted to be impartial: Col. Bogere decided to withdraw and said, “I belong to UPDF, and I should be impartial. I should not be seen siding with one side of Parliament”. 

What were the consequences? First of all, he was never brought back to this Parliament. Secondly, I no longer hear about him; they are promoting other people who were below him and I wonder when his next promotion will be. So, we are trying to create an environment where the UPDF can act freely and not to be –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, using this word impartial, does it mean that when you are impartial then you should not make a decision? For instance, how do judges decide cases?

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Mr Speaker, to be impartial means you should not take sides in this House –(Interjections)– you should not take a partisan decision; that is my interpretation of it.

MS NAMUYANGU: Mr Speaker, I want to plead with the honourable members to reject this motion. As I said earlier – let me repeat for emphasis – it is on record that the Army has not been violent in this Parliament. They are not on record for breaking parliamentary doors –(Laughter)– so we should support them.

12.17
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to oppose the motion and I do believe that on the question of the Army, the critical point that you raised was very relevant. Article 78, clause 2, provides that after ten years – every five years thereafter, Parliament would review the inclusion of these special interest groups. Therefore, you do not need to propose an amendment of the Constitution to do so. 

In fact, the ten years elapsed in 2005. Now, this is the fifth year; so Parliament could in fact, even now, consider under 78(2) that question and you do not have to bring it by way of amendment, because that is a procedure that is contrary to the Constitution, and obviously, that will not be helpful to your cause.

We have had occasions, many times before, to talk about the involvement of the UPDF in this House, and we have said repeatedly - reminding especially people who in terms of age are not so old to have experienced the past history like the mover of this motion - that it took a real struggle to reach where we are; to be in a democratic dispensation. Thanks to those who took up arms to fight the dictatorship and bring about change. And in light of that history, what we decided at that time and the reason why the Army was included in this Parliament was - such a miniature representation of 10 was because we wanted to maintain that linkage for the Army with this democratisation process that it brought about itself, by simply having a few representatives here and occasionally on national matters, giving their views; but which would be of course subject to the decision of the whole House.

Why do they sit on the government side? Again I have said this to hon. Okello-Okello before, that the day the Army sits in opposition to Government, is the day Uganda is in a state of mutiny and as hon. Okello-Okello may know in the experience of the Government of UPC, in fact that has happened -(Interjections)- twice -(Laughter)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. UPC has never had a personal Army. It was always a national Army and that is part of the reason why a coup could take place. Is the Minister for Security in order to state that because UPC did not bring soldiers to Parliament, that was the reason the government was overthrown? But UNLF and even the Military Commission; the Army was part of the Legislature. Is he in order to mislead the House?

THE SPEAKER: I must confess, I have not clearly understood this. I have not, but I think what you need to do is to make a clarification that will help him and help us. Expressing an opinion on a fact -

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I can paraphrase in the way you advise. I am saying that even in the past, when the Army overthrew Government, the Army was part of the Legislature. From 1979, the Army has been a part of this House; but the Army still went ahead and removed Government. But all I am saying is that if the minister is taking comfort that because 10 Army officers are here, therefore, no coup can take place, I think that is not a guarantee. (Laughter)

MR MBABAZI: As I had been saying, Mr Speaker, once there is imminent dispensation like we have, which is multiparty, the Army must always be on the government side because it is part of Government; it is part of the Executive. Anyone who does not know that, please learn it now. (Laughter)

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, I am standing to be guided -(Interjections)- the Speaker just guided this House and he said he was going to advise. What about if he advised the Army officers to sit on this side? Now the honourable minister is here asserting a different position and I wanted to be guided by the Speaker so that I continue to be comfortable with his deliberation. Help me, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, when I make the decision to advise, then I will let you know.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Speaker, our Rules of Procedure -(Interjections)- I am seeking clarification from you. [Mr Mbabazi: “Okay, then ask.”]

When you sat, I presumed that you had accepted. I want a clarification from the minister. Our Rules of Procedure give two sides of the House. The other side is NRM and this side is Opposition; that is what constitutes -(Interjections)- and both sides constitute the Legislative arm of Government. Article 208(2) of the Constitution says, “The Uganda Peoples Defence Forces shall be non-partisan, national in character, patriotic, professional, disciplined, productive and subordinate to the civilian authority as established under the Constitution.”

I will want a clarification from the minister whether he constitutes or construes this part of the side of the House not to be part of Government; and two, whether the Army’s sitting on the side of NRM constitutes them either being part of NRM or being part of the Executive. I want that clarification because Government is not NRM; Government is constituted by three arms with this Legislative arm being both Opposition and that side of the House. I want that clarification.

MR MBABAZI: Now, Mr Speaker, I want to help my honourable colleague in stating that it is possible - first of all, there are two sides in this House: The government side and the Opposition side. That is all -(Interjections)- I understand perfectly well why my brother and my sister are saying there is the NRM side. It is because of course they are fully aware that NRM is continually going to win and, therefore, be on this side. (Laughter) That is okay; there is no problem. But there is the Government side and the Opposition side, and the point I was making was that the Army must always be on the government side. It does not matter who constitutes that Government. 

If you take Britain, for example, they have just concluded elections and the party that was in power this afternoon is going to sit on the opposite side because they are on the Opposition. But the public servants who served the Labour Party Government for 13 years are the same ones who are going to serve the Conservative Party from the day the Conservative Government was formed and onwards. 

It does not mean that they are non-partisan because they are serving the Government of the Labour Party or the Conservative Party. So, all we are saying is that here the Army can - like even our Speaker here. Our Speaker must be elected from among Members of Parliament, and in a multiparty political dispensation, that means most probably he or she will have come on a party ticket like our current Speaker did. But you can see what a stunning performance our Speaker has given to this country -(Applause)- very objective; very impartial. Sometimes I think he listens too much to your side. (Laughter)

Secondly, on the point concerning the Electoral Commission, I had a wonderful debate with the Leader of Opposition some time ago and I made the point which I wish to repeat here, that for the Electoral Commission to be non-partisan, it need not be constituted by multipartyists. It can be non-partisan when it has people that have a background that has been political or not. It is really the individuals and the law, and the Constitution demands of them that they be people of integrity and all those criteria that are listed. One can be a person of integrity even if he or she had been in a political party. 

Take our judges for example. We know many judges who are performing very well today like hon. Justice Remmy Kasule my good friend. Who does not know about his party affiliation previously? But he is doing a wonderful job. Hon. Justice Mulenga who has just retired from the Supreme Court was the Vice Chairman of the DP. When he was appointed to the Supreme Court, he performed professionally and I have not heard anyone say he did not meet the standards of a Judge. So, performance has nothing to do with previous affiliations to political parties. This is very critical and I hope our people will understand this. 

Previously, we actually attempted this. There was an Electoral Commission where the choice of people was based on their previous performance politically, and we had the Secretary-General of the party called the Democratic Party, Mr Robert Kitariko, who was also a very distinguished Ugandan. He was a member of the commission. Did they perform better because he was DP or not?

So, this question of performance and being partisan; or being professional and objective -(Hon. Johnson Malinga rose_) just a second. It is a matter that someone that you appoint must rise above even if you were, for instance - like hon. Lukwago eventually when he amasses enough experience -(Laughter) 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. For the record, I enrolled as an advocate on the 18th day of November 1998 -(Interjections)– and I have been in practice for a period of over 10 years. Under our Constitution, a person who has served for a period of at least 10 years qualifies to serve as a Judge, and I have a record of practice of 12 years now.

Mr Speaker, is the minister in order - and for the record, I have practicing certificates for all these years unlike some of my colleagues here in the profession -(Laughter)- who have taken refuge elsewhere; they are not in the profession. I have been a fully-fledged member of the Uganda Law Society since I enrolled and I have been practicing since then for a period of 10 years. Therefore, I qualify to serve as a Judge. 

Is the minister in order to say on record that I do not have enough experience as a lawyer? 

THE SPEAKER: I think he was not there for your enrolment; but now that you have told him, he knows how long -(Laughter) 


MR MBABAZI: Well, I really was thinking of a position higher than my colleague is talking about because 10 years qualifies him to be a Judge of the High Court and not beyond. And as you know, the hierarchy in the court -(Laughter)

I think we should learn from the experiences of well established democracies. You know, in many of these democracies, holding and managing elections is almost the routine and it is an Executive function to manage them. In fact, I think in Britain, for example, it is the ministry that organises elections -(Interjections)- you know - and my sister hon. Alice Alaso knows that very well and if she does not, outside this House I will give her details. (Laughter) My mind was nowhere near where the -(Laughter) 

Finally, on the term limitations, we have had tremendous debate on this question of term limitations. It took a lot of debate nationally and internationally when we amended this Constitution. Actually, we even put this provision in the CA and we had tremendous debate over it and in 2005, you will recollect, again we had tremendous debate over this same issue. Why the people of Uganda supported the removal of term limits was because everybody realises that in a democratic process, term limitation is inherent because we elect a president for only one term of five years. And for that president to take on another term, it must be because he has been elected again. 

Term limits means denial of the right of choice for the people of Uganda. It is in fact inherently undemocratic because you are telling the people of Uganda that you can do everything except this. It is in fact an attempt to remove presidents who are performing well because that is the only way you can remove a president who is performing well - who has a popular base; you want to remove him by a technical Constitutional provision. And in Uganda, we are determined to have full democracy and we shall not deny our people the right of choice. 

I understand the Opposition. The Opposition is afraid. When they look at President Museveni, they think that they cannot possibly defeat him in a popular vote and, therefore, they are trying the indirect way through Parliament by removing him through a technicality. Now, we are very much alive to this and the people of Uganda obviously –(Interjection)– please don’t be worried about that. We have every right, as we are doing now –(Interjection)– with that, Mr Speaker, I wish to oppose the motion. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion before us is only for seeking leave of Parliament. There will be a time, assuming leave is granted, when we shall discuss the merits of the amendment. What I am going to do now is to allow two people on this side and two people on the other side and we close. What are we going to do assuming leave is granted? The kind of debate should be whether sufficient cause has been shown to grant leave rather than going to the merits of the amendment. Let me give two Members for both sides and you take five minutes each. On this side I will give hon. Cecilia Ogwal, and the revolutionary leader; okay, hon. Sebuliba prepare yourself. On this side, Mary Mugyenyi, Alex Byarugaba and the Prime Minister. 

12.43
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I certainly stand to oppose hon. Lukwago’s motion. 

I chanced to have been one of the members of the Constituent Assembly and true, this was an issue that was brought on the Floor and it was debated thoroughly. Fortunately, if my mind recollects properly, Col. Besigye himself was a member of that Constituent Assembly; Gen. Mugisha was a member of that Constituent Assembly; and we did unanimously agree that it was very imperative that the Army had to be part of us to ensure harmony, peaceful coexistence, peace and of course for discipline within the Forces themselves. 

The mover made reference to Botswana where they had an inclusive national body. I wanted to look at it a little bit more broadly. Inclusiveness could mean religious inclusiveness; it could mean political inclusiveness; it could also mean ethnicity; even regional. All of which I see in this current body. I happen also to know members of the Electoral Commission who were actually members of political parties. I will not mention them because I was with them in those political parties at that time. 

Finally, I promised I would be very brief. Removing the Army from this august House and other august Houses in future as you propose, would, I think, be indirect contravention of Article 21. Hon. Lukwago, you are a lawyer and I do respect you and your shrewdness in those legal issues. But honestly, when you look - I learnt that when reading the Constitution, you should not read articles in isolation of others. 

When you read Article 21, if I may go through it very quickly for you, it says, Article 21(1), “All persons are equal before and under the law in all spheres of political, economic, social and cultural life, and in every other respect, and shall enjoy equal protection of the law.” Yet in your submission, you are emphasising that they should be very subordinate to us; wherever we pass they should kneel down. They should not even be near us –(Interjections)- that is how I got it. Let us not forget our history. The history of a place determines its geography. 

Today is different from what it was because of this very simple inclusion of our colleagues in the determination of issues regarding our people. I do not see any problem whatsoever. 

I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to emphatically appeal to my colleagues to object and refuse this motion. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kibanzanga. 

12.49
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I should first of all thank you for your guidance. What we are doing now is seeking for leave of this Parliament to allow us introduce to this Parliament a Private Member’s Bill. 

The only institution that is mandated to discuss, debate, dialogue, agree and disagree, is this House. At this stage, we are only asking why we don’t cause debate on presidential term limits. Why don’t we discuss the presence of our professional Army – of our National Army in a partisan Parliament?  Why don’t we discuss and debate and dialogue, agree and disagree on the Electoral Commission? Why don’t we entrench the 51 percent of whoever wants to become a president?  These are the issues. And to me, denying the country an opportunity to debate these issues is denying ourselves an opportunity to help develop and make our democracy grow; make our Constitution grow. 

I have listened very carefully to the argument of hon. Mbabazi - the Minister of Security and the friend of hon. Otafiire - the more he continued talking, the more I resolved that we need a debate to go beyond this House. What am I talking about?  

It is that if we are granted leave, we shall introduce the Bill here and then the Bill will go to the relevant committee of this House and invite all stakeholders and engage them in this debate.  

Some of my friends are saying, “Do we have that time?” Yes we have the time. Really, if you cannot have time to develop the democracy of your country; to clean the democratisation of your country; what time do you have? And what is that time for?  Because even if we give you time, you cannot drive this country to the moon. But if we have time to discuss and debate, we can perfect the democratisation of our country. And this is what we are saying. 

My friends are dwelling on issues that are meant to be at the second reading of this Bill we are talking about. 

I know the difficulties of our professional Army to be seated in this House to debate this. How come that you sermon all the 10 of them whenever there is a partisan issue like this one? I have the eyes to see; I have the brains to reason. So, I can see what is going on. 

The narrow arguments that we are moving, seeking leave of this Parliament to attend to this Bill that is about individuals in this country, must not find us in the subconscious of our brains. The Bill is not about individuals. The Bill is about the betterment of our county. It is not that if this side turns to the other side we shall amend this and then change the term limits. No, hon. Amama Mbabazi, take heart. It is not about President Museveni. It is about the stability of our democracy. It is about the stability of our politics in this country called Uganda which is part of Africa. 

What haven’t we seen? Armies of other countries have played equal roles to intervene where politics has failed and yet their soldiers are not in Parliament. What about Southern Sudan? What about Rwanda? What about Somalia? The role of the Army is professional. When we do not agree, they step in. And we must allow that professional work; we must allow our Army to be seen to be neutral by all stakeholders in this country. That is the spirit in which we are seeking leave of this Parliament.  (Mr Dombo rose_) 
 
THE SPEAKER: No, I gave him five minutes. So, when you interrupt him, it is going to be more. 

12.55
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think this is a good opportunity for us once again to debate the foundation of democracy of our country. I happen to have been privileged to be in the Constituent Assembly to represent our people and you were one of them, Mr Speaker. My brother, hon. Amama Mbabazi used to sit just behind me -(Interjections)- because alphabetically, he is “B” and I am “A” -(Interjections)- yeah, of all positions. (Laughter)

So, this is a good opportunity and it is an opportunity for us to tell the world and Ugandans that things have changed. Things have changed because everybody knows that the best way you can know Uganda is by its militaristic culture and traditions. We have to begin giving a positive image about Uganda and the culture we are trying to inculcate in the population and the generation after us. So, I feel this kind of debate is very important. 

I know the other side is too much in a hurry to throw away this motion - you are too much in a hurry –(Laughter)- but I must say that the end result either way,  you are the losers. Whether the motion is thrown away, you are the losers -(Interjections)- but when the motion is passed, you are the beneficiary because through this motion we are trying to help you to show that democracy is flourishing in Uganda.

So, there are three things that have been raised here and I am surprised that people are emphasising more on the military. But I do understand why. I am not so concerned about the military because when we entrenched that Article in the Constitution, I was lobbied by three Army Generals; I was lobbied by hon. David Tinyefunza, hon. Kizza Besigye and hon. Serwanga Lwanga. And they told me that: “It is a reassurance for us to be here. We do not want to be hostile; it is a reassurance; and they went on to say, “We will try our best to be neutral.” 

Mr Speaker, my concern now is about the neutrality of the Army. It is absolutely important that they show that they are neutral even in the way they are positioned in Parliament, and thank God they are not even active in debate. My concern is how neutral they are. Where do they cast their vote? Where do they sit? I have shown you my neutrality by staying at the corner. I am neither UPC, FDC nor anything and I sit at the corner. Where is the Army staying? How is the Army voting to demonstrate its neutrality? That is very important. 

Secondly, the issue of the presidential limits was discussed because we used to emphasise this word “tailor-made.” We do not want to tailor-make the Constitution to suit an individual or to suit a particular system. We wanted our Constitution to be neutral to suit everybody. Today we maybe fortunate to have a leader in the name of President Museveni; but tomorrow we may not be that lucky. Tomorrow we may have somebody else wearing that suit -[HON. MEMBERS: “Amama Mbabazi”]- they are saying “Amama Mbabazi” -(Laughter)- we may not be that lucky. You may give that man power and he may want to stay in power until death; God forbid. I do not know where this country will be going. 

And I want to tell you that regular elections are not a measure of good governance or good leadership. You know very well that President Ceausescu of Romania was elected in 1989 and within one month, the popular uprising overthrew the man; for, the 95 percent votes that he got was nothing but falsehood and the militaristic environment that was reigning at that time –(Member timed out.)

1.01
MS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you for this opportunity to put my views on record. In 2005, when the Constitution was amended to remove the term limits, there was a lot of uproar, not only from Members of the Opposition, but I think generally; this country was not comfortable about removing term limits and, therefore, I am surprised that the Opposition now want to tamper with the Constitution again because to me, the concern was that we should not be changing the Constitution every day. That is what I have been hearing all the time, and I think I will limit my contribution to the representation of the Army in Parliament. 

There are many interest groups in this Parliament and I wonder why we should be picking on the Army and not the other interest groups in terms of reviewing their status here; and I do not agree that, because the Army is represented in Parliament, it has caused turmoil; one of the contributors said that. That is not true; at least not from our experience as we co-exist in this Parliament, and I think at the time when the Constitution allowed the Army to be represented here, there were good reasons and I am sure some of the Members that are seated on both sides agreed to that. 

I would like to agree with hon. Mbabazi when he says that there is a provision in the Constitution which gives a term after which the interest groups’ representation can be reviewed - whether we still need them or not; and also in terms of numbers; and whether the reasons that warranted us to put them in Parliament are still valid or not. But if I understand what the movers of the motion are saying about this issue, it is about the neutrality of the Army and I think we are trying to kill a fly with a sledge hammer, because we could find a way of reconciling the two Articles in the Constitution – the Article that allows the Army to be represented and the Article that demands that the Army remains neutral - in which case then we can look at the mechanisms. 

How does the Army continue to be represented in Parliament as one of the interest groups, but does not participate on either side and also contribute to the debate in such a way that they do not support one side against another in a multiparty dispensation? I think that is workable if there is goodwill. It is possible that the bad aspects can be worked out so that the Army’s participation does not contradict the Constitution in any of the Articles. 

Lastly, I have always wondered; the Electoral Commission oversees all the elections in this country, but we never get to know what happens in terms of elections within the Army. So, why hasn’t the Army also woken up, since it is the same Parliament and the same Electoral Commission, so that we know who participates; how people compute results; who qualifies; and so on; and so that they are democratically elected? To me, that is the concern. 

1.06
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Attorney-General on this side and I support the motion. I thank the Shadow Attorney-General first of all for bringing out those contentious Articles – Articles 60, 78, 105 and subsequently 206. These are some of the issues we would have looked at when discussing the multiparty dispensation, but of course it was overshadowed by Article 105 which drew a lot of focus from the Members of Parliament then, and with the kind of money that flew around to influence the Members to change that Article, a lot of focus and energy was put on that. 

These are issues. If we allow the leave like my colleague said, we would have delved into many details, subsequently coming to all the stages, and we debate the pros and cons for the betterment of this country. Hon. Members, you remember a lot of water has passed under the bridge. A lot of things have changed. Yes, we agree, for instance, that when we were under the Movement system, the Army was one of us; and of course, if you look at it from the historical perspective. But things have changed and today, we are talking about a polarised Parliament. A polarised Parliament meaning that there is a ruling party and a party on this side called the Opposition. The question is, where will the Army be in these cases? Already, we have heard two casualties; there was a one Tumukunde and another, Col. Bogere, who has already been mentioned, because of what they did. So, I think the world over and even from where we imported this democracy that we are practising today, the Army just comes in as it did in Thailand. When we fail to agree, they can be invited and I have been bemused by my colleague the Attorney-General on the government side, when he talked about Article 60 regarding the EC. 

These are some of the questions I could pose. Imagine that we gave in the names to be included in the EC, what would happen? Or if all the names now came from the side of the Opposition because he was saying that if we included in proportional representation or representatives from the Opposition, there would be polarisation. If that be the case, why don’t we then allow the Opposition now to give you the names such that we talk about the neutrality we are talking about? By the way, will you feel safe at the end of the day? I doubt whether you will feel safe –(Interjections)-  yes, Parliament has got a role to play; but as you have heard from the Appointments Committee, there are a lot of happenings there which still leave a lot of things unanswered. 

We have got a role as legislators to add some weight on the appointments by the President, but we are still in contention. We are going into a competitive election under the multi-party democracy. We feel there is no neutrality when the Army is on that side. 

Mr Speaker, you have already heard what the Minister of Security has said, “Once you come here and you are Government, then the Army will be on your side.” He even quoted from Britain that the outgoing Prime Minister – when he went out, another came in and the civil servants now took over. I have to tell the honourable Minister of Security that those people who took over and those who are going to serve those people who took over, never sat in Parliament – they never. They were not included in Parliament. They even never voted. What we are seeking from this is, leave, so that we discuss these matters amicably for the governance of this country, because if we do not, nobody will. 

Like my sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal said, what about if we get a mad man in our midst and he takes over the reign of this country? (Interjections)- he is going to use the same –(Interjections)– somebody is saying, in form of hon. Amama Mbabazi –(Laughter)- I do not know how bad hon. Amama Mbabazi is –(Laughter)- God forbid. But I am saying - I have never seen the madness in him –(Laughter)- but I am saying, another mad man –(Interjections)– who brought out the historical things we are talking about; what will happen? Are we going to be the same people to come out here and fight that same man? He will bring out the Hansard and say, “This is what you said; why are you changing the goal posts when I am having the reigns?” And it is going to be a bad day – it will be one black day in September for the rest of this country. Therefore -(Member timed out.)

1.11
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker –(Ms Alice Alaso rose_)

THE SPEAKER: The Leader of the Opposition says she has to say something. Can you come after her?

1.12
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): I thank you for giving me the opportunity to enjoy the benefit of being the Leader of the Opposition. I want to thank my colleagues in the House for the detail of attention that they have given to this motion. I want to make a few observations.

The first observation is in regard to the argument raised with regard to aspects of the Electoral Commission. I have heard attempts here to water down the issues raised, especially in regard to inclusiveness, independence and security of tenure. I want to state for the record that what we are seeking are questions of principle. We are not seeking questions of behaviour, that at one point the Electoral Commission will behave in such a way that it is competent and at another point it will behave in such a way that it is independent. 

The reason we are looking for a constitutional amendment is so that we guarantee these principles in our Constitution. You all know that when these are embedded in the Constitution, they become key principles of inclusiveness, independence and security of tenure. I listened to the Attorney-General when he talked about a consultative forum and the Attorney-General knows only too well that you cannot even bring in a consultative forum at this stage unless you still go for a constitutional amendment. I implore Members to look at this matter in regard to the principle that we would need to entrench in the provisions of our Constitution.

I also want to comment on the issues of the Army. We are again looking at principles here. The principle we are looking at is that we are now in a multi-party dispensation and we are also looking at the fact that the issues of review as provided for in Article 78, have not come up from the Executive. If the Executive was interested in a review, as they seem now, they had an opportunity in 2005 and they have another opportunity, but they do not seem to be interested. So, to keep our Army in a very partisan Parliament is something that does not mean well for the multiparty dispensation that we are in. Moreover, I think the NRM Government should be keen to demonstrate to the world that it has outgrown its militaristic outfit – the one they came with from the bush. (Applause)You should be keen to demonstrate that you have shed it aside. I am surprised that you are not keen. 

I want to particularly respond to the argument raised by hon. Amama Mbabazi that the day the Army sits on the Opposition side of the House, it will be deemed to be a mutiny. Our Constitution in Article 69(f) says, “No person shall be compelled to join a party by virtue of belonging to an interest group.” 

According to hon. Amama Mbabazi, you are forcing the 10 Army MPs to sit on the NRM side by virtue of being an interest group. We again want to put it to you that this is unconstitutional and, therefore, should not be happening in the Parliament of Uganda. It should be in the interest of this Government to ensure that the Army is not forced – that you do not pursue issues that are not constitutional. I think that there are no contradictions as yet in regard to the presence of the youth and the women in this House and so I find the arguments that want to bring the youth and the women in this motion simply as being arguments to whip up emotion so that the youth jump in this House and say, “Now hon. Lukwago’s motion will throw us out the next day.” And then the women jump up. I think we should get beyond whipping up emotion and just look at these matters as objectively as we possibly can.

Finally, it looks like hon. Sam Kutesa wants to give me some information  –(Laughter)-  the issues of presidential term limits are very important and you know what it took you people who made the Constitution - you understand better than I do - what you put in the preamble of this Constitution. You said in the preamble that you understood the history of this country and that is why you put provisions so that you would guarantee that this country does not go back to its history. And when President Museveni was being sworn in, he said that, “The problem with African countries is leaders who over stay in power. They stay and stay and stay until they die in power” –(Laughter)– now, unfortunately, we have decided – you know you can legitimise a dictatorship by putting it in the Constitution so that you have the backing of law. Now what we are trying to do here is that we put a backing of law to legitimise a possibility of a dictatorship in this country. You are yourselves undermining what President Museveni said on the steps of this Parliament. 

I would like to ask that all of you, Members of the House, to give due consideration to this motion. Hon. Byarugaba, in his submission, said “refuse.” But I would like to point out that those are not parliamentary words. I think due consideration should be given to this motion. My prayer is that you support the progress of this motion to the second stage for the good governance and stability of this country. I beg especially my colleagues on the NRM side because you have the numbers and you can do anything with it, but I beg that you do the right thing with the numbers this afternoon. I thank you.

1.20 
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apollo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I thank you for the contributions. You enhanced frontiers of knowledge. However, I oppose the motion.

We are on the blink of being prorogued. When we come back, we shall be dealing with the State-of-the Nation Address, the budget –(Interjections)- of course, and in October, we shall be dealing with nominations for presidential and parliamentary candidates. So, the issue of time is very important. You have raised very important issues, but we do not have time to handle them adequately given the points I have mentioned.

May I also point out that if you open the Constitution to amendments, then other Members of Parliament have a right to bring other amendments, which shall all require adequate time to internalise in order to make amendments that are durable. So, the time factor does not allow us to do that.

Finally, on the issue of the term limits – as you know I am a student of practical politics – there are many polities, which include Britain. They do not have term limits, but they are democratic. I oppose the motion. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion by hon. Lukwago is to seek leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill with details you have seen from the copy that was given to you. I now put the question.

(Question put and negatived.)

Motion rejected.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW A LOAN OF KUWAIT DINNARS (S 3.0 MILLION) FROM THE KUWAIT FUND FOR ARAB ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND GUARANTEE THE BORROWING BY UGANDA DEVELOPMENT BANK LIMITED OF US$ 10 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK FOR LINES OF CREDIT TO UGANDA DEVELOPMENT BANK LIMITED

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you remember yesterday, as we adjourned I asked you to study the report on this particular loan guarantee. So, I expect the chairperson to give a very brief presentation because you already know what is in the report.

1.24
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE OF NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Kasule Sebunya): This is a report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by Government to borrow a loan of Kuwait Dinnars 3 million, which is the equivalent of US$ 10.5 million from the Kuwait Fund for the Arab Economic Development and guarantee the borrowing by Uganda Development Bank Limited of US$ 10 million from the Islamic Development Bank for lines of credit to Uganda Development Bank Limited (UDBAL).

The committee has considered this loan for UDBAL – we toured most areas in the North. We also toured Western and Eastern Uganda to have a look at development projects funded by UDBAL. In this document, there are minutes and a report of the field trip, an overview of the loan, the draft loan agreement, the draft Government guarantee documents and so on. I now lay them on Table.

As the Rt Hon. Speaker has said, this document was circulated to Members. I hope they have perused through it. So, I shall not read the background of UDBAL and the rationale for the bank’s involvement, that is the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development –

THE SPEAKER: Can you go to the observations and recommendations.

MR SEBUNYA: Okay, let me go to the observations that were made while considering this loan.

The committee observed that there are few development financial institutions that provide medium to long-term financing in the country. Consequently, this limits the private sector from borrowing for medium and long-term investments. 

The committee recommends that Government steps up its capitalisation of UDBAL in order to enable them expand their medium and long-term financing to the private sector.

The committee observes that funding to the agricultural sector, which is the backbone of our economy remains a challenge as many financial institutions are reluctant to provide credit to this sector. The committee therefore recommends that Government establishes an agricultural fund or bank to provide financing to this important sector – this recommendation is long overdue.

The committee also observes that UDBAL continues to borrow smaller amounts of loans, which increase transaction costs and time when negotiating for further financing from development partners. In addition, such small amounts have limited impacts of the huge needs of the private sector for long-term investment financing. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that UDBAL carries out a comprehensive study on their financing and capitalisation requirement, which will guide their borrowing needs and also attach it whenever they need loans to be approved by this Parliament.

The committee also observes that the appraisal process of UDBAL takes too long – sometimes six months and more, which distorts their clients’ investment plans.

The committee recommends that UDBAL adopts modern financial and banking practices where maximisation of efficiency and time management are fundamental principles and, therefore, fit into the timetables of the clientele. 

In conclusion, therefore, the members of the committee appreciate the role of UDBAL in augmenting medium and long-term financing, which is vital for the country’s sustainable development. The committee further appreciates the geographical spread of UDBAL’s operations throughout the country, and the need to deepen further into the countryside. As I said, we visited many of those projects upcountry.

The committee supports and recommends to the House to approve the government’s request to borrow  a loan of Kuwait Dinnars 3.0 million (equivalent to US$ 10.5 million) from the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development (KFAED) and guarantee the borrowing by Uganda Development Bank of US$ 10 million from the Islamic Development Bank for lines of credit to Uganda Development Bank. I beg to move 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, I think it is clear. Therefore, I put the question subject to the recommendations.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE MOTION FOR THE CREATION OF RUKUNGIRI MUNICIPALITY

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you are aware that yesterday, we dealt with the motion by the minister and committed it to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government to consider. Now, what we are waiting for is the report of the committee and then we see what to do.

1.31
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Anthony Yiga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Minister of Local Government moved a motion where among others, he was urging Parliament –

THE SPEAKER: No, yesterday we received the motion. You just tell us your recommendations. 

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, the committee received a lot of background information about Rukungiri. The Town Council Act was established in 1974 and the population right now is over 100,000. (Interjections) It has a road network of over 78 kilometres and several institutions like health centres, educational institutions, financial institutions, there are several banks there; the local revenue base is reasonable –(Interjections)- and there are water sources –(Interjections)

The request to upgrade Rukungiri Town Council to a municipality status was prompted by a number of reasons. One is the need to have effective physical planning once it becomes a municipal council. It will also help them improve the infrastructure, the road network –(Interjections)- water supply systems, street lighting and also improve their markets.

They also expect to have –(Interjections)- industrialisation. 

They also expect that once they assume that status of municipality, they would also be able to have tourism being promoted. 

Finally, the committee is satisfied that Rukungiri Town Council satisfies the provisions of Regulation 32 of the Third Schedule of the Local Government Act and, therefore, recommends that Rukungiri Municipality be created. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 


1.34
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We would like to know the specific criteria that the Ministry of Local Government uses – the standard criteria for creating municipalities because I also think that Kumi and Kitgum towns have reached a level where they could be changed into municipalities. So, I would like the minister to educate me so that –(Interjections)- I need to be educated truly, Mr Speaker. I have no idea. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Minister. But why don’t we pronounce ourselves on this current one and then he can come in? He will come in. I put the question on Rukungiri Municipality.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Minister can you tell us?

1.35
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Well, Mr Speaker, the criteria is written in the law. It is in the Local Government Act. One of the criterions, which we use, is the population. For a town board or trading centre to qualify to be a municipality, it must have a minimum of 100,000 people. It must have facilities like electricity, water and sufficient local revenue. In the case of Rukungiri, they are able to collect more than Shs 800 million per year. So, Kumi will be studied; if it meets this criterion, it will definitely be elevated to a municipality.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you very much. Now, hon. Members, I want to take this opportunity to thank you for what you have been able to do during this Fourth Session. Soon, we will be starting our last session of the Eighth Parliament. But I thank you; you have done a lot and you are increasing the harmony among yourselves although you belong to different parties. This should continue because as I appealed to you at the beginning of this Parliament; this Parliament is the first one to be run under a multiparty system in 20 years; but what we can do is to either give light to the system or kill it. We do not want to kill it.

In the past, the system would not last for three or four years; three years was the longest. I think this was because people did not understand what a multiparty system is; they saw it as a centre of enmity and this should not be so. You should continue to relate to each other; you should continue to solve problems together and I think we will be delighted at the end of the Eighth Parliament to hand over the system to another Parliament, and another. So, what we do now will determine what happens to the system. 

Now, I take this opportunity hon. Members to do my work. This is to make a proclamation. Okay.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for your indulgence. I have three issues that I would like to procedurally draw to your attention. As is the custom during the time we prologue to pray that we save the business, especially the Public Accounts Committee –

THE SPEAKER: It is here.

MS ALASO: Public Accounts report and then two, we also passed laws. I do not know how your office works with the assenting authority; but as you know, the amendments we passed have not yet been assented to and to pray that your good office works with the assenting authority so that we have them on time. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay

MS ALASO: Lastly Mr Speaker, I need your advice on this matter; really, your advice on our suspended Members. They have served their term of three days of suspension. And I have heard all sorts of things in the media that it is being extended and whatever and that for them to access their offices during the recess would require a directive from your office. There is a lot of clarification that has to be done by the Speaker’s Office. So, I do not know how we will proceed on this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Let me start with the last one. I am just reading from the record; I was not here. But I know a decision of disciplinary nature on the Members was done on Wednesday when Parliament was sitting. When we count days, we exclude the day the decision is made. Therefore, Wednesday was not part of the three days of sitting that had to cater for that. So, we started counting on Thursday, Tuesday and today. And today is the last day of the sittings in this session. Therefore, if they have to come they will come in the new session. 

But I would personally not mind if the Members affected regret the circumstances under which this happened; it does not hurt and that is the best way. But anyway, it is ending today, today being the third day of the three days that were determined. 

And as I would indicate to you, we shall soon start the next session. I regret that I have not given you sufficient time because normally, prorogation used to come at the end of April. But because we had a lot of business on us, I ate into May for about two weeks now. So, when you should have had three weeks or a month before the new session starts – the new session will start very early in June. There is a lot of business, including business which is pending; but I thank you very much, hon. Members.

PROCLAMATION

THE SPEAKER: This is the proclamation:

“Proclamation by Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, Speaker, Parliament of the Republic of Uganda: 

WHEREAS, Clause 3 of Article 95 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that the Speaker may, after consultation with the President prorogue Parliament by proclamation,

AND, WHEREAS, the necessary consultation with His Excellency the President has been carried out and has been agreed that Parliament be prorogued,

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of powers confirmed on the Speaker by Clause 3 of Article 95 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, it is proclaimed that the Parliament shall stand prorogued with effect from the 20th day of May, 2010, the pending business in the House or its committees is save. Given under my hand and seal of Parliament House Kampala, this 19th day of May, 2010. Signed by Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, Speaker of Parliament.” 

Thank you very much.

I wish you an enjoyable recess. 

(The House rose at 1.43 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 

