

Tuesday, 16 May 2017

Parliament met at 2.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

 COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. There are number of matters I wish to communicate. As you are aware, we have been having trouble in utilising the Prime Minister’s Time. Starting today, we have arranged a CCTV Channel 2, which will display the proceedings in the House of Commons until next week, so that Members can learn better how to use the Prime Minister’s Time and how to ask questions. 

The Members and the presiding officers have been complaining that a lot of time is taken on preambles and by the time the question comes, a Member has used seven minutes. Honourable members, in the House of Commons, they answer more than 100 questions in 45 minutes but here we do only 30 questions in 45 minutes. Please, use that facility; go to Channel 2 on our CCTV and see how it is done. I hope that it will improve our output.

I would like to request the chairpersons of the sectoral committees to expedite scrutiny of the ministerial policy statements so that the budget process is concluded by 31 May 2017. In that regard, the Business Committee sat and agreed that all the reports should be sent to the Budget Committee so that they have one comprehensive report, which we shall debate once. Otherwise, if we debate them differently and again send them to the Budget Committee to debate, we would have debated the same issue thrice - during the presentation of the Budget Framework Paper, the ministerial policy statements and the final reports. Therefore, the reports should be laid on the Table and they will be sent to the Budget Committee.

Honourable members, on a sad note, one of former Members of Parliament, hon. Titus Kidega –(Interjection)– You do not know him; he was in the National Resistance Council (NRC). He was the member for Aruu County. He passed away yesterday at Lacor Hospital and he will be buried on 19 May 2017 in Pajule, Pader District. We would like to offer condolences to the family and later, we shall observe a moment of silence in his regard.

Honourable members, there are some other very important issues that have come to light. I am going to amend the Order Paper to permit the first reading of the Uganda Investment Code (Amendment) Bill to be read for the first time. I will be giving the minister time to do that. 

I have also received information that hon. Eudia Kwizera, former Member of Parliament for Kisoro in the Eighth Parliament, has died. We shall stand up for a moment of silence for both of them.

Again, honourable members, during these last few weeks there has been a lot of coverage in the media about the torture of people who are in police custody. The Mayor of Kamwenge, for instance, is in great agony arising from torture. There are also other suspects, from the reports we have seen, who have also been severely tortured. I would like to remind ourselves about Article 24 of the Constitution, which provides thus: “No person shall be subjected to any form of torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.”

You are also aware that in 2012 this very House enacted the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act. It is now many years after that law was passed; how can one explain the electric shock treatment, knocking out of people’s teeth, breaking knee caps, ironing someone’s body, introduction of noxious substances into the mouth, anus and ears? 

Therefore, on behalf of the citizens, we are demanding for justice. This is not an issue of the Police Disciplinary Committee; these are crimes against humanity. (Applause) It is a breach against the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act, 2012, and the perpetrators must be arrested and charged in an open court. I do not understand how for very many days the reports have been in the press and nothing has been done. Who are these people? Why are they not in court and not even being named? I think the country wants answers.

I would like to also remind the Minister of Internal Affairs that it is a cardinal principle of law that children below the age of 12 have no legal capacity to commit any offence.  Therefore, we shall want to know how children who do not have legal capacity to commit crime can be captured. 

Further, I would like to remind the minister that under Section 244 of the Penal Code Act, it is provided thus: “Any person who kidnaps or abducts any person with intent to cause that person to be secretly and wrongfully confined commits a felony and is liable to imprisonment for 10 years.” The officers who are keeping these children even for just one day have committed a felony. That is abduction and they should be in court, not siting in their offices to talk about how they are keeping the children. I hope that matter will be addressed so that we bring sanity to what is going on this country.

The other matter is on the abuse of public spaces in this country. We have recently complained about Nabagereka Primary School land being taken and also East Kololo Primary School, among others. Yesterday, I was in Makindye Division to open a workshop in Nsambya and I was told that the small facility in Nsambya is the only place where all the children in Makindye Division play. All the grounds where they used to play have been taken; Nsambya playground, Clock Tower playground, Katwe playground and Mulungu Playground are all gone. The children of Makindye Division and all the other divisions have nowhere to play from. 

Honourable members, the people who planned this city were not mad to create spaces where children can play. I, therefore, would like to remind ourselves of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy in our Constitution; in objective No. XVII the state is enjoined to promote recreation and sports for the citizens of Uganda. What are we going to do? Soon, everything will be concrete and there will be nowhere even to sit. I do not know who is in charge of all this that is being taken away but I would like to appeal to Government to fulfil the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy to allow our people to have spaces where they can rest.

Honourable members, we have been suffering from the invasion of the armyworm. However, I have been made to understand that if we had paid up our subscription to the Desert Locust Control Organisation, where we are members, they would have come to our rescue immediately. They have done so for Tanzania; they sprayed the whole country because Tanzania is up to date. However, I was embarrassed to find out that from 1982 when we joined, we have never paid our subscription. (Laughter) Now we owe $ 4 million from 1982. We even get positions and take people there to get jobs, but we are non-compliant. 

Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, agriculture is very important to this country. I wish something could be done. I would like to direct the Budget Committee to ensure that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allocates some money or reallocates within their budget to make sure that at least we pay subscription for this year, so that if we need help they will know that we are good members. If you take free things, no one will think about you. I request that this is handled so that we can get support when we have problems.

Honourable members, there were a few people who had issues to raise but let us first stand up for a moment of silence in memory of hon. Kwizera and hon. Kidega.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

3.03
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You have raised a very touching point and I would like to thank you for your vigilance and the work you are doing. 

I just want to inform this House that Government does not condone torture. All the laws that we pass in this House, save for a few, are assented to by the head of state and this means that he has agreed with what we have put in place. 

I would like to assure this Parliament that the Minister of Internal Affairs has to make sure that whoever is found guilty of torturing the people of Uganda is brought to book. I know there are a number of them who have already been brought to book, but we have to exhaust these undisciplined people who are tarnishing the name of the Government.

Madam Speaker, you also talked about the abuse of public places and you have mentioned all these places in Kampala. Kampala is now under Kampala Capital City Authority and I think the authority owes us an explanation on how these pieces of land have been given away and what plans there are to make sure the key objectives for which they were reserved are still being achieved. Therefore, the Minister for Kampala Capital City will have to offer an explanation –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for that response. 

It is unfortunate that in this Parliament, you only see the Prime Minister during the Prime Minister’s Time. Why should the Speaker of Parliament and the press first observe all these issues and then the Government Chief Whip also comes in now to say that the Minister of Internal Affairs should make sure the torture perpetrators are brought to book? People have been complaining! When you were getting these ministries, you cried for them and you lobbied for them. Now it is the Speaker of Parliament –(Interjection)- The clarification I seek from the Government Chief Whip is why she comes in now after the Speaker has observed all these irregularities?

Lastly, you talked about recreation fields and I will give the example of Nsambya. Just as you go to Nsambya Hospital, next to the police post, there was a playground for children. It is now the police guarding it and stopping children from playing there. That is where we used to hold our competitions as schools. How do you bring in KCCA now, which has just come in, when you know it is the police that have been gazetting these places where people used to play? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Ssewungu that Government has been working. I have mentioned that we have names of people who have been brought to book for torturing - (Interjection)- I am sure about it and as I speak now, security meetings have been taking place. 

However, we are dealing with human beings. Therefore, we must continue to be vigilant and implement the law. It is not that we are just coming out because the Speaker has spoken; no, we have been working. You receive ministers when they come to defend their policy statements. You have been interacting with them and they have been informing you about what they are doing. If you have not been doing so, then we have to blame ourselves –(Interruption)

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity. I recall very well that issues of torture and security in the country were raised before we broke off to go to the committees. The minister was then tasked to come up with a comprehensive report regarding the security situation in the country and the issue of torture. I would imagine if these statements had been given by the minister, possibly we would have been able to discuss these issues in detail and find remedies.

Wouldn’t it be procedurally correct, Madam Speaker, that we set tomorrow for the minister’s statement so that we can discuss the issues of torture, security, killings, kidnap of children and arrests? Wouldn’t it be right for you to order the minister to present the statement regarding the state of security in the country and the torture we are talking about tomorrow, so that these issues can be handled at once?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have no problem with the minister reporting. The problem the country would like to address is why those who tortured the people and kidnapped children have not been taken to court. These are clear criminal offences that breach the Penal Code and the Prevention of Torture Act. There is nothing to meet about. The statement is welcome, but these offenders ought to be in the dock by now. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I agree with you. In my explanation, I told you that there are those who have been brought to book. Can the minister tell us the arrangements they have in making sure that every culprit is brought to book? I have no problem with that, Madam Speaker - (Interruption)

MS NABILAH NAGGAYI: Madam Speaker, I happened to go to Ishaka over the weekend and fortunately or unfortunately, there was a grandfather of three children who was trying to follow up on their whereabouts. Their mother had travelled from Ishaka to Nalufenya to pick them and they had asked her to perform a DNA test to see if they are her children. She spent a week doing the DNA tests and after she had completed the tests, she went to pick them. 

The results revealed that she is their mother but she was told to produce their father before the children are given to her. Therefore, those three children from Ishaka who were picked from the school are still with the police as we speak now. Honourable minister, are you aware that these children are still languishing in police cells?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, of course I am not aware. She is just giving me the information now –(Interjection)– I am not aware as the Government Chief Whip. However, since you have informed me –(Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You initially gave an order to the effect that the minister comes up with a statement and we debate it. Today you have guided very well, that Government should come up with a statement on issues to do with torture, Nalufenya and these children between two and 12 years who are in police custody.

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Internal Affairs is here present, quietly listening and comfortably seated. Is the Chief Whip in order to answer all the questions to do with the Ministry of Internal Affairs when the minister himself is here? Is she in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: The minister is exercising collective responsibility. However, let us have some answers; why are these people not yet in court?

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker and honourable members, first of all we equally would like to express our concern over these matters of the torture that has been reported in the press and elsewhere for this period of time. We apologise to the country and to you, Parliament. (Applause) This is because essentially, whatever we do, the result should not be what was seen in the media or even what was unseen. Therefore, we are equally concerned and we share your concern. 

We know laws have been broken but it is not correct to say that the ministry or the ministers and indeed the police have not been doing anything. Since these actions started, the police have arrested four people who have been processed for criminal trial in the courts of law.

Madam Speaker, it was our intention that within a short period of time when we have investigated all these other people who are involved in these criminal activities, we will come here and give a comprehensive statement, including the names of the people who are going to court and the courts to where they are going. We will also give names of those who were arrested and appeared in court with torture wounds regarding the issue of the late AIGP Kaweesi.

Therefore, we needed to give ourselves time –(Interjection)– Yes; we wanted to give ourselves time because we want to give you a statement. The truth is whether we come now or tomorrow, the act has already happened and we can only undo it by giving a detailed report to this Parliament so that you are able to give justice and good direction to us. If we give you half-baked statements, you will not be able to help us. When we come here, we are not coming to you as opponents but as friends who can help the Government and the ministry. That is why –(Interruption)

MS NAGGAYI: I would like to get clarification on the fate of those children who are still held by the police. They are not awaiting trial nor are you processing files for them. So, how about the fate of these children?

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I need clarification from the Minister of Internal Affairs. We hear about Nalufenya and Kireka but we know for sure that if somebody is a suspect or has been charged in court, there are gazetted places where they are supposed to be taken. They are still suspects; what is so special about Nalufenya and Kireka, especially Nalufenya? Can you tell us, honourable minister? Thank you.

MR OBIGA KANIA: Madam Speaker, the children are an equal concern to us, like any other person who has been tortured. Separating a child from the mother and for such a long period of time is definitely a matter of concern. It is an offence. Who separated them; how did they manage to be separated away from their parents - all these are matters which must be thoroughly investigated and reported on. That is why I am promising this –(Interruption)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In your communication, you were very clear; you said these are crimes against humanity and you said they are unlawful and criminal acts in our law. 

In addition, I am raising a point of order because he is aware that these acts are being committed within the precincts of the police cells. Madam Speaker, there is a police cell in Kisugu, here in Namuwongo; there is a police cell in Kireka; there is another torture chamber in Kololo; there is a torture chamber opposite Nalufenya. Forget about Nalufenya but there is a huge building opposite Nalufenya that is a torture chamber.

Madam Speaker, the police and the Minister of Internal Affairs have full knowledge about all these places because in the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs we informed him about all these facts. Therefore, is he in order? We even informed him and volunteered to give him the names of the children under custody and the people who were charged with murder before the Kaweesi case and they are in courts law. Is he in order to stand on this Floor of Parliament and say he is not aware? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the issue of these children has been on for more than a month. Are you really telling the country that within that whole month you could not ask where they are and who they are, and every day they continue to hold them? This is a new course of action. You do not know who is holding them? The children, under law, cannot commit crime if they are below 12 years old; they cannot. That is the law of our country.

MR OBIGA KANIA: Madam Speaker, as you know very well and as this House should have known by now, the Police Professional Standards Unit right now as I speak has taken custody of all these children with the purpose of returning them to their parents. Some of them have even been returned. For those who have not been returned, it is an issue of identification of their parents –(Interruption)

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to raise a point of procedure. The concern of Members, including you as you mentioned - I think that the only thing the minister could help us to do is to go and bring factual statements that we can debate here seriously. The moment you say that you are still identifying parents of those children, we shall ask where you picked them from and why. If you do not have the information, go and verify it with the relevant agencies and bring a comprehensive report here and we debate it. 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. The procedural guidance I am seeking concerns the minister’s promise that he will bring a comprehensive statement, which will later be debated. 

Analysing this issue gives us another option. When you consider the categories, especially the children, we cannot wait to have a comprehensive report to handle the issue of the children together with the rest of the issues that have been raised on the Floor of this House. We strongly believe that the children were picked from a specific point and their parents did make a follow-up and preliminary steps were taken. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence on whether it would not be prudent enough for us to get the report pertaining to the children tomorrow as we wait for other parts of the report concerning illegal activities that we presume happened. We can then handle the issues concerning these children and ensure that they are safe because we believe that they are innocent. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us separate the criminal act from the report to this House. Criminal offences have been committed in abducting the children who are below the age of criminality. Already that is a crime; whether you come to report or not, it is a crime. Those who abducted those children must be in court for that and then you can come to explain, but the offence is already committed. 

Let us separate the report from the criminal act because it has nothing to do with the crime; the two are different. More so, even concerning the torture, you take them to court and then you come to report to us. That is what the country would like to know. Why are they not in court? What is the criminal justice system doing? We would like to hear that the abductors and torturers are in court and then you come and we debate. The crimes have already been committed under the Penal Code Act and Prohibition of Torture Act. Let us allow the minister to tell us what he intends to do about our proposal.  

MR OBIGA KANIA: Madam Speaker, I am grateful for your guidance. However, from the start, I said as far as the report and taking people to court is concerned, the four people who have been arrested will be taken to court plus those under investigation as part of the criminal group that committed a crime against our people. Regarding the children, I also entirely agree that it does not necessarily help to wait for the report to come here, but they can be released as soon as the parents are identified – (Interjection) – Just hold on. We cannot just have the Government release these people to anybody but to the parents.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You rightly guided this House, and I think that the minister should have accepted the olive branch that has been given to him by this House. The representatives of the people in this House have presented their case very well to you and honestly speaking, you as Government know exactly where you picked these children from. Hon. Kakooza reiterated this point and asked you but now because you are trying to elude justice, which we call the common man’s justice, you are trying to impute the principle of DNA –(Interjection) No, because you are trying to talk about identification of parentage.

The issue as to why you are holding these children is not a matter of dispute of parentage. You said that these were children of people suspected to have committed crimes. Therefore, you know the people and the exact homes from where you picked them. The question is simple; it is not how, where and who: can you return these children to their homes? Whatsoever you continue to do is not only illegal under the laws of Uganda but also internationally. It is torture and a crime against humanity internationally, and you are destroying the image of this nation.

As a minister, we expect you to do something, even in consultation with many from your bench, including the Attorney-General who is present in the House - the principal advisor to this Government legally. He is a friend of mine and I can see that he is puzzled by this statement. The issue is crystal clear; you are the principal advisor to Government on such matters. Who in this country does not understand that incarceration of children or juveniles in places that are not gazetted to be so is not only torture but also a crime against humanity, condemned by all international treaties and also the Constitution of this republic?

Therefore, whosoever would like to elude their responsibility by imputing statements is in breach of our grundnorm, which is the Constitution that we swore to protect and the laws of this country. Therefore, Madam Speaker, since you guided wisely, the only answer we need from the minister is to let us know that he will step out for two minutes and instruct that these children be released immediately. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: He should also instruct that those who abducted should be charged. 

3.30
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me begin by thanking you for bringing this statement this afternoon and raising the concerns that have been dear to both our hearts and those of the people of Uganda. 

I wanted to ask the honourable minister: Is he aware that while he waits for a month or two to finish investigations, Ugandans are angered by the callousness of the officers that appear on our television screens to give annoying responses? We all saw a person that was so sick and he had torture wounds but an officer turned around and said that those were normal wounds. Honourable minister, can you rein in these officers; if they have no useful information to give to Ugandans, let them keep it to themselves. Let them not come and add insult to injury.

Madam Speaker, while we wait for the minister to bring a statement, we hope that he realises that this is an issue of security for all Ugandans and we are deeply concerned, especially when it touches our children. Therefore, let him bring the statement but he should also rein in his officers to appear to be responsible for the law and order that they are supposed to maintain in this nation. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, our position is that you bring the statement but tomorrow we want to hear that the abductors and the torturers of the people have been taken to court. They should be charged and the children should be released. (Applause)

3.33
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise guidance and I thank the House for the debate so far. This relieves us of the pain, as Ugandans, because of what has turned out to be the most horrible and unbelievable treatment of our people. Madam Speaker, I was at pains when I heard that our own children would be incarcerated by police, but thank you for the guidance that our children should be released as soon as possible. That keeps us at peace as parents. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to put into context the issue of the torture of our mayor. Honourable members, I come from Kamwenge District and the Mayor of Kamwenge Town Council was arrested. We had light information that he had been arrested. We thought he was in safe hands but we were terrified when we saw what had happened to a human being. It is our government, so it made us cry. I could not imagine that a person under police custody would face such torture. 

Madam Speaker, like hon. Jovah Mateeka has said, the worst bit is the contradictory statements coming from the police. This has annoyed us the more. Kamwenge District is on fire and soon you will see them here demonstrating because the police have issued contradictory statements regarding the situation of the mayor.

On 12 May 2017, Mr Asan Kasingye claimed that the injuries on the body of Mr Byamukama, the mayor, were as a result of a scuffle that ensued between him and the arresting officers in the car. This is glaringly absurd. Clear observations of the wounds on the body of Byamukama indicate that probably, certain equipment was used to scoop flesh from his body. This could not have happened in such a scuffle in a car. 

Madam Speaker, the doctors at Nakasero Hospital have said that Mr Byamukama will be lucky if his legs are not amputated. The alternative is that a lot of flesh has to be picked from his buttocks to fill the wounds that have been inflicted by our own police. We are saddened.

Again on 12th, the police said that Mr Byamukama had been discharged from Nakasero Hospital. Madam Speaker, in medical terms, “discharge” means the patient has been released from hospital better than they came and, therefore, they have improved. Mr Byamukama was released from Nakasero Hospital in a wheel chair. He can hardly walk and the wounds are deep and fresh; so it is absurd. Mr Byamukama was actually snatched from the hospital because he had now been exposed to the public and we do not know where he is now. 

Madam Speaker, our law and other laws regarding suspects guarantee that when a person is deprived of any liberty, the police must take care of him. They must also be kept in safe places that are known under the law; the police must take responsibility of such people; and they must be given access to their next of kin, a doctor and a lawyer. All these were denied in the case of Mr Byamukama. In today’s newspapers, I read that the police said that they will be taking Mr Byamukama to hospital every two days. I do not know from where and to do what in hospital if he has been discharged from the hospital. 

Colleagues, you need to see for yourselves to know what we are talking about because we are saddened. There is no political party here; it is about our country, our Government and our people. (Applause) The Byamukama I am talking about has been a cadre and supporter of the NRM. Therefore, he has done a lot for NRM. Do not make yourself comfortable thinking that anybody deserves this because we are all candidates of arrest any time. (Applause) We should not wait for any of this to happen to us and then we react.

Madam Speaker, the ministry wishes to take their time to give a report. Whatever report they give, those who tortured must be presented to court, just like you guided. Mr Byamukama has relatives and friends. He is a Ugandan national. He is a leader of high calibre in society. We are, therefore, all concerned. We demand that those who tortured him – because they are known and are at large – be presented and charged in court. 

Madam Speaker, the police should be sensitive about the statements they are releasing to the public. We were again annoyed when Mr Kasingye said that Mr Byamukama’s condition was aggravated by a severe sickness that he moves with. This is dangerous. Mr Byamukama’s wife said that he was arrested without a wound. The near-death situation that he faces now was because of those deep and wide wounds that have been inflicted on him by the police. 

We would also like to know when Uganda will assent to the optional protocol on the prevention of torture so that some of these detention centres can be supervised and monitored –(Interjection)– Yes; that can result from the supervision and monitoring. Uganda should sign so that they can be monitored and accessed. When everybody talks about Nalufenya forever, we need to know what it is. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, we would like to know why the civil police of Uganda have increasingly become brutal to the people. The civil police of Uganda have increasingly become brutal and lawless; I do not need to mention the different circumstances we have witnessed. The other day the police caned Ugandans in Kasangati – you saw them. Another video showed a Ugandan being knocked by a police car and kicked by another policeman. Today we are seeing this. This shows that the direction we are taking is dangerous. Madam Speaker, I thank you very much.

3.41
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you from the bottom of my heart for the issues that you have mentioned in your communication. They have left us really concerned as citizens and as Members of Parliament who represent the people out there.

One of the issues that you mentioned was the grabbing of public land, which is a thorn to many Ugandans. You rightly mentioned that many pieces of land have been taken away from their rightful owners. We need to remind ourselves that we have had issues recently of Nabagereka Primary School being challenged by land grabbers and also Nakyekoledde Primary School only last year. There was a KCCA LC grader – it had the letters “LC” on it – which brought down another building of Nakyekoledde Primary School. We have also had issues with Nakasero Primary School, Buganda Road Primary School, Nakivubo Primary School also known as Nakivubo Blue Primary School. 

This issue is not new to this House, Madam Speaker. In February 2015, according to the records and the Hansard, this issue was raised on the Floor of Parliament by hon. Ssekikubo and after the debate, a select committee was put in place to investigate the grabbing public land belonging to schools. A report was presented to this august House and resolutions were made as follows: 

    a) That KCCA takes interest in the affairs of Nakivubo Primary School with a view of a evicting all persons who illegally settled on the land. 
    b) The Uganda Land Commission grants leave to Nakivubo Blue over land that is currently occupied by the encroachers.
    c) This Parliament also ruled that KCCA should evict and demolish all structures built on the school land by a one Mr Kasaija, to free the school land for the learners.
    d) The Attorney-General should take action against Mr Kasaija to recover damages for encroachment on the school land. 
    e) That KCCA demolishes all the structures built on by another land grabber known as Ssemakula. 
    f) That the Attorney-General should explore ways of recovering land sold by the veteran’s association to Ssemakula Moses.

Madam Speaker, this was debated on the Floor of Parliament and Government was supposed to give feedback. It is unfortunate that as we speak now, KCCA has not executed these resolutions or evicted the people illegally occupying school land. They were supposed to fence it off but that has not been done.

The Uganda Land Commission is actually processing a land title for the same land as we talk now, for a Mr Kasaija who is the encroacher and whom this House clearly recommended should be taken to courts of law to be prosecuted. The Attorney-General has not taken action against Mr Kasaija to recover the damages as this Parliament recommended. 

Madam Speaker, I do not think that it is procedurally right for this august House to take action or to make a recommendation on an issue and no action is taken. My prayer is that something should be done. The Government should tell us why they have ignored the recommendations that were made by this Parliament, and the Attorney-General should tell us why this man is still walking free and he is continuing with his action of occupying the land, legalising the action which this august House clearly condemned as illegal. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Attorney-General will have to explain to us why they have not yet enforced the resolution of the House; you will get the details.

3.46
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to speak on the issue of Nalufenya because it is a challenge legally, politically, morally and administratively. Legally, a lawyer goes to Nalufenya, presents the Uganda Law Society identification, an introductory letter from the detainees and the detainee’s parents, a letter from a law firm – they literally have everything - but he will be told that he should go and seek clearance from Kampala. They do not tell you the exact place from which clearance can be sought but they simply say, “Kampala”, not even the Inspector General of Police. You end up asking yourself, “Who is “Kampala”?

Administratively, when you go to Nalufenya, they will not be able to tell you who is who in the administrative structure of the station; they cannot tell you who the Officer in Charge of the station is, not even the DPC. There is no hierarchy. 

It is notable that whoever goes to Nalufenya must confess and admit to have committed a crime. Accessibility is tricky even to lawyers, next of kin and the parents of the suspects as well as the public as a whole. Recently, one of us, hon. Dede, was arrested and taken to Nalufenya, but accessibility by the lawyers and the parents was a challenge. It is not just limited to only hard-core suspects but even to simple cases as well.

Some people are also tortured to death in Nalufenya. On 16 July 2014, one Mususuwa Saleh, a young brother to the JEEMA President, Asuman Basalirwa, was arrested and taken to Nalufenya and he was tortured to death. Three days later, Asuman was called to go and pick the body from the mortuary in Jinja. He picked the body and they buried but two days later, they complained to the IGP and they ordered that the body be exhumed so that a post-mortem is done. The post-mortem was done but since then, no report has come out and nothing has happened. (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Please try to conclude quickly.

MR MWIJUKYE: Madam Speaker, since Nalufenya cannot be accessed, we cannot get the administrators’ names and contact. Even before the report comes out, why don’t we recommend that Nalufenya be closed? A normal police station must have administration. Who is the DPC of Nalufenya Police Station? Who is running it? How are they running it? Now that we do not know and the minister does not know, why keep a facility that is known for torturing Ugandans? 

I would like to conclude by telling us, Members of Parliament, that it is not about only Nalufenya but the very many safe houses. If you want to appreciate this by being held there or having your relatives there, then you wait, but for now I really ask that we recommend that Nalufenya be immediately closed. 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have heard this afternoon a series of lamentations regarding aspects of torture, abduction and brutality by those supposed to protect us. What is even strange is the revelation by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi that in the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs they informed the minister that we still have safe houses - an act which Ugandans believed had long gone.

Madam Speaker, I want to request you and indulge this House that I move a motion without notice orally under our Rules of Procedure, particularly rule 50 (1) (b). I beg to move that this being a matter of national of national importance, - I am the one who brought the Private Members’ Bill, which was passed into an Act, against torture - matters of torture and abduction of children be subjected to a select committee of this august House which will come up with proper recommendations, which may encompass and capture all aspects that we need to address in matters to do with policing in this country.

If we leave it to the minister to come up with a statement without us going to the root of the matter, we shall not have solved the problem. Otherwise, I am seeing a reincarnation of the dreaded State Research Bureau of 1970s under this current regime of the police led by Gen. Kayihura.

Therefore, if the Members could accept and second me and with your guidance, Madam Speaker, I move my motion without notice under rule 50 (1) (b) for a select committee of Parliament be constituted to investigate those specific aspects which Members have complained about, which have occurred in the last one month. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will reflect on it and give my ruling at the end of this sitting.

3.54
MS NAMBOZO FLORENCE (NRM, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just last week, another crime against humanity was committed when the Minister of State for Gender and Culture insulted the Bamasaba culture. 

I am a Mumasaba and our institution was abused, insulted and demeaned with every hypothetical utterance by the honourable minister –(Interjections)- The institution is fully fledged with a minister of information. We, the Bamasaba, are wondering how a whole minister would go to the media without consulting us.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought she was making a statement on your behalf; do not interrupt her (Laughter)

MS NAMBOZO: Madam Speaker, the Bamasaba, wherever they are, their blood is running in disarray because we have been insulted to the bone. We implore the honourable Minister of State for Gender and Culture to have a locus standi in our cultural house for better information.

The honourable minister said that imbalu must be abolished and that kadodi is backward. For your information, Madam Speaker, in Bugisu a man does not have children unless he has been circumcised. We, the Bamasaba, are products of circumcised men. (Laughter) Why would an honourable minister not consult us, the sources of information, about our culture? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I heard something on the radio but I do not know whether the minister really said that. Maybe we should ask her to come and tell us what she said about imbalu. I direct hon. Mutuuzo to come and explain to the House and the Bamasaba what she said about their culture. Thank you.

3.57
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kasanda County North, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You are aware that the deadline for SIM card registration is this Friday, according to communication from the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC). Madam Speaker, this SIM card registration has created tension amongst poor people. This is because in order for you to register your SIM card, you need a national identification number, which you can only get with a national identity card.

Madam Speaker, the authority charged with the responsibility of registering our people transferred the issuing of Identity Documents (IDs) to the district level after the mass registration that was carried out, and anybody who lost their ID must come to Kololo. Over the weekend, the people who sent me here summoned me and asked how I expect them to spend over Shs 50,000 to travel to Mubende District. There are people who even asked, “How can you ask me to go Kololo when I have never even gone to Kampala?” Our people do not have the resources to travel to the district headquarters some people cannot even access some of those places.

Madam Speaker, National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) has made life very comfortable for themselves by choosing to call people from wherever they are to ask them to come to Kololo or go to the district headquarters. My humble prayer is that we should work under the decentralized system where we have subcounties. The issuance of IDs can be done at the subcounty, and that is what our people desire, not at the district and not in Kololo. 

Madam Speaker, there are so many people that do not have IDs as yet. If you say that by Friday their SIM cards will be switched off, that will be very absurd for this nation. I know we have been laughed at for always extending deadlines in this country, but I will not be ashamed to ask that this deadline of Friday be extended until the right processes are followed. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: In addition to that, I would like to remind the Minister of Internal Affairs - I have written several letters - about the Maragoli who were born in Uganda and they have never been registered. I wrote to your predecessor but unfortunately he died. They keep writing to me asking to know where they belong. They are in Masindi and they have been there for centuries; they are neither Ugandans nor Kenyans. They can easily benefit from this process.

I can send you other copies; they have been writing almost every month because they have no status in this country. They were born here and about four generations are in this country. 

4.02
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of public concern. Last Saturday in Ngora, we had a serious storm that destroyed not only houses but crops as well in a subcounty called Kobwin. As we speak now over 500 gardens were all destroyed. We have been lacking food but now the hailstorm has destroyed crops. 

I appeal to the Office of the Prime Minister to investigate this matter and see what should be done. I also appeal that these people be given planting materials. Thank you so much. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE INVESTMENT CODE BILL, 2017

4.03
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION AND INVESTMENT) (Ms Evelyn Anite): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion and lay on the Table the Investment Code Bill, 2017 for the first reading. Attached here is a certificate of financial implications. 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, I have a point of procedure. The minister has said that she is laying it on the Table. Is it a motion to lay the Bill on the Table or the motion is to read the Bill for the first time?

THE SPEAKER: You moved that the Bill be read for the first time.

MS ANITE: Yes, I said that; I think he was absent minded. I would like to say it again; I want to move that the Investment Code Bill, 2017 be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: It has been seconded by several ministers and Members. It is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for expeditious consideration and report back. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON STATUS REPORT ON THE MASS REGISTRATION OF LEARNERS

4.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Cabinet, in a meeting on 28 September 2016, directed the ministers of internal affairs and education and sports to fast-track the process of registration of learners in order to weed out ghosts in schools.

Madam Speaker, a follow-up meeting was held between the ministers of finance, planning and economic development; the Minister of Internal Affairs; the Minister of Education and Sports; the Minister of Public Service; the Minister of State for Higher Education; the Minister of State for Primary Education; permanent secretaries of the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Internal Affairs; the Executive Director National Identification and Registration Authority; and technical officers from the respective ministries, departments and agencies. The meeting was to propose a governance structure to manage the exercise and strategy of registration of pupils and students between 5 years  and 15 years old, which was approved by Cabinet under minute 60(CT 2017).

Madam Speaker, the multi-sectoral governance structure is composed of personnel from the ministries of finance, planning and economic development; internal affairs; education and sports; local government; Ministry of Security; Ministry of ICT; NIRA and other technical officers from the respective ministries, departments and agencies.

Madam Speaker, the purpose of this official statement is: 

1. 	To inform the honourable members that- 
(a) 	There will be a national exercise of registering learners aged between 5 to 15 years across the country between May and August 2017. About 2.91 million learners for higher education and 8.06 million from lower education will be registered. 

(b) 	During this registration exercise, learners will be issued with national identification numbers. However, non-Ugandans including refugees will be registered and issued with an identification number that can be used by respective agencies for further management.

(c) 	Honourable colleagues, the registered learners will, upon attainment of 16 years, be issued with the national identification cards in accordance to Section 69 of the Registration of Persons Act, 2015 and regulation 21 of the Registration of Person Regulations, 2015. 

2. 	To request honourable Members of Parliament to sensitise their constituents on this important Government undertaking and mobilise especially parents to ensure that all learners are registered.

As far as resources are concerned, Government under NIRA has budgeted to spend Shs 53,606,139,000 for this exercise and those resources are spread into the 2016/17 and 2017/18 financial years. However, registration of all persons will continue at the district NIRA offices even after this mass registration of learners. 

This Government exercise is expected yield the following outcomes: 

1. 	The Ministry of Education and Sports will be in a position to ascertain the exact number of learners in schools for effective planning and management

2. 	There will be many efficiency gains, for instance there will be accurate execution of capitation grants and assessment and management of dropouts.

3. 	This exercise will help the ministry of Education and Sports manage and iron out cases of impersonation and forgery of academic documents.

Our prayer is to request for support from all Members of Parliament to sensitise and mobilise their constituents to fully support this important Government exercise. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and dear colleagues. I beg to inform the House. 

4.11
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for her submission. However, we noted a challenge in Busia during the first phase of that exercise. Most of our children were left out; because we are at the border, most of our children who were born in Busia-Uganda speak the same language as those in Kenya and the system being used required one to have a national ID. However, as it was said on the Floor of Parliament, most of our parents do not have these national identification cards. 

Also, because we are at the border, we have many tribes and some of these tribes keep migrating and settling. This has brought about a very big challenge. I, therefore, need the minister and her team to put procedures in place to see how all the learners can be registered without having a lot of disturbances. Thank you.

4.12
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Under expected outcomes, the minister has stated that one of the gains from this exercise is to ensure accurate assessment and management of drop-outs. I would like to find out what happens to learners who change schools and do not inform the former schools that they are changing to a new school. How will they be traced?

4.13
MR PATRICK OPOLOT (NRM, Kachumbala County, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. From the way I see it, I think the registration of learners is intended to swindle our money. (Applause) There is no way you can spend Shs 53 billion to register. Every day we are doing registration – registering SIM cards and other things. These are children who do not even have lunch; why do you spend Shs 53 billion to register them? (Applause)

I am a professional teacher and I expect the Minister of State for Primary Education to supervise. There is a head teacher in every school as well as District Education Officers (DEOs) and inspectors. We expect every class where learners sit to have a register everyday where learners are registered either present or absent. Therefore, the Ministry of Education and Sports should shop for that information and save our funds. I submit.

4.14
MR MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I must also thank the minister, only that I got puzzled; the way the minister gave us the information is as if we are going to undertake setting up the whole education system in Uganda again. Unfortunately, in some cases, in order for you to fit well in Uganda, you must be a dramatist; otherwise, you will find yourself the odd man out. 

Just like my colleague has said, we have systems in place. I visit these schools and the headmasters have displayed all this information in their schools, offices and boardrooms. Now, are you going to count people who are in Uganda here or people who have not yet reported – people the headmasters and DEOs do not know about? 

Sometimes let us learn to be honest and serious. If they are doing this for the purpose of planning, we should call upon the DEOs, head teachers, inspectors as well as the Resident District Commissioners, political leaders and Gombolala Internal Security Officers. All these are people we are paying. This budget of Shs 53 billion is uncalled for and the money should be planned for another exercise, not this one here. Thank you very much.

4.16
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think this proposal is divisionary –(Applause)- and it should not be accepted. 

We agreed that every Ugandan should possess a national ID. Because we did not have enough money, we said let us start from 16 years onwards and in the subsequent years register Ugandans from zero years plus. (Applause) That is what we agreed to. Once we have captured everybody, then what is the need of undertaking this exercise? (Applause) 

This is wasteful expenditure and should be avoided. (Applause) We should rather take the money to the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) to undertake the registration of the zero years plus. It should not be accepted by this Parliament. I would like to move, Madam Speaker.

4.17
MS CONNIE GALIWANGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale):  Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I would like to observe that in her statement, she indicated that the reason for the counting of these pupils is to avoid ghost pupils in schools. However, at one point, she again gave the number. If we want to avoid the ghosts, then you should first establish the number by going to the ground and progressively establish the number of pupils who exist. However, I would like to note that the budget is very high and yet we have very many underfunded priorities in our budget. 

In addition, it may not be very urgent at this time. With time, given the fact that we have NIRA, they can go to the schools with the help of head teachers. It has been indicated by one Member that the head teachers can do it but many times the stakeholders in the schools are the ones who inflate the number of pupils. Therefore, I do not want to agree with the idea of head teachers taking charge. However, NIRA can guide the whole process. They can station in schools and move from one school to another. 

This budget is very big. In addition, how much was spent on the general registration in 2014 if this one for children alone is taking Shs 53 billion? This is very big –(Interruption)

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, we have been trying to check how Government spends money, but when you read this budget of Shs 53 billion you get worried. We have Universal Primary Education (UPE) and Universal Secondary Education programmes where Government has been sending money to these schools. Are the numbers not known? They are known. 

When we pass a single treasury account for the money going to schools and education, the numbers must be known. National Identification and Registration Authority itself, where you are sending this money, is a mess. Go to Rubaga Division where they have failed to register people who are born. They used to register 1,000 people in a week but now they hardly do it. They do not have the capacity and you want to send this money back to the same mess! 

I think there is something wrong within the systems and Government must be active and internalise when they are passing these proposals. Universal Secondary Education (USE) has taken about seven to 10 years in operation and the number of students is known; what are you trying to cure? Isn’t that wasteful expenditure?

MS NAKAYENZE: Madam Speaker, I was asking, if the national registration, which included the procurement of those computers and all the other things, coat about Shs 58 billion, why should this one cost Shs 53 billion?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we were dealing with registration under NIRA, we said they should stop at a certain stage for the purposes of the elections. We also agreed that after elections, they would start automatically from zero. We provided this money already and it is part of their work. That is what we agreed to here. 

MS SENINDE: I would like to make it clear; like the Speaker has pointed out, we know very well that Ugandans from zero years plus have to be registered. The money we are talking about is not a new budget; it is the budget of NIRA, which they were supposed to use to register Ugandans from zero years onwards –(Interjections)– The reason we have requested as Government -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the minister to explain. 

MS SENINDE: Like I was explaining, the reason we wanted to start with five years onwards is because these children are in schools. I would like to inform you that when I was the Chairperson of the Committee on Social Services, most of the challenges that we were grappling with were based on issues of ghost learners. I would like to inform you that in the Ministry of Education and Sports, we have had a headcount of children in schools but we have realised that most of these numbers have been inflated -

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the Ministry of Education and Sports for being concerned about ghost students, like they have got concerned about ghost teachers. Yesterday in my district, 14 teachers were arrested as ghost teachers. I am very sure they had already carried out the census by that time. Therefore, there must already be a framework in place for screening ghost teachers. I am wondering why we cannot use the same method to screen ghost students. 

I would like to appreciate that there is a lot of money that is being wasted in paying ghost students and ghost teachers. However, honourable minister, we would like you to use the existing systems that you have been using to identify ghost teachers to also identify ghost students. Thank you, Madam Speaker. That is the information that I wanted to give.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Head counting and registration are two different things. Registration is the mandate of NIRA, which is under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. What the Ministry of Education and Sports can do is head counting. 

When the minister was explaining, she said that this process is going to lead to the award of national identity cards. It cannot be the Minister of Education and Sports to come and defend a budget of another ministry. Therefore, are we proceeding rightly when the Minister of Education and Sports comes and defends a budget for an item under NIRA, which is under the Ministry of Internal Affairs? The Minister of Internal Affairs is quietly seated and comfortably listening – are we proceeding rightly? 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I arise on a matter of procedure. I would like to add onto what has already been said. You are aware that we are now scrutinising the budgets of various sectors and ministries. I feel very sympathetic with the minister who has presented this report because she is ordinarily known to be a very clear minded person when it comes to analysing these kinds of matters.

Madam Speaker, the ministry is aware that before you come to Parliament for approval, the sector must be able to come up with strategic plans and meet the conditionalities as spelt out. If the transfer of the budget of Ministry Internal Affairs has already been effected to the Minister of Education and Sports, we would like the Minister of Education and Sports to bring to us evidence as proof that the Shs 53 billion has been transferred from the Ministry of Internal Affairs to the Ministry of Education and Sports for this specific purpose, and that it has been approved as per the law and you know the law.

Secondly, I am aware that the headcount process was heavily funded by this country; it took a lot of money. From 2014 to 2015, this Parliament was very concerned about the amount of money spent on the census exercise in the country. The details of all this information are available in our database. The census report that captured the details of all the people in this country should be there, and normally it gives the details of the age of schooling children. 

Honourable members, I would like you to look at pages 1 to 3 of the report. The minister is telling us what they are supposed to do. We expect them to receive the census report and analyse the data; for instance, which students belong to a particular age - it is all captured.

Madam Speaker, you remember that this report was deliberately submitted to us for release in May 2016, not earlier, because we did not want it to mess up with the election data. This data was released last year in May and I do not know why we are taking the time that we should have used to scrutinise the budget. You have just guided that by 31 May 2017, we must have concluded the exercise of the budget. For us to be doing something as if we do not know the law, as if we do not know the procedure, as if we are absolutely ignorant is really unfair to Members of Parliament - (Interruption)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I sit on the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and we interfaced with NIRA on this subject. 

First of all, NIRA had Shs 19 billion to undertake registration of Ugandans of zero years plus across the country as a national rollout. This data will effectively capture every aspect that this exercise is intended to achieve. In addition, when we interfaced with NIRA, they did not have the money. They are doing something dangerous - shifting the additional money for the software they are supposed to buy to protect the data that they already have and putting it into this exercise. The rest of the money is in next year’s budget. This exercise would mean that we shall spend Shs 7,000 to headcount one child. 

Madam Speaker, some of the objectives identified here are very confusing. They say they are going to register people between 5 and 15 years old. As one of the outcomes, they are saying that the exercise will help the Ministry of Education and Sports to manage and iron out cases of impersonation and forgery of academic documents. (Laughter) You are counting pupils of the age 5 to 15 years to sort out forgery of academic documents! 

Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give this committee is that even the requirement they want is a bone of contention in the committee and even in the Budget Committee. This is a contentious exercise that should await the formal process of a ministerial statement, which we can debate thoroughly and see whether it is fit or not.

MS OGWAL: You have given me too much information. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, I wanted to end by saying that I have looked at the statistics of the census. The figure the ministry should be looking at - I am surprised if the technocrats have not told you this - is roughly 5 million. If you divide Shs 53 billion by 5 million, we are actually spending Shs 10,000 to headcount a child. That is too much money when people are dying of hunger.

Madam Speaker, this is a hopeless exercise and we should not waste our time on it. We should decide and rule on it. I know you are very clear-headed and you know that we are time barred in as far as the budget is concerned. I plead with the House to ask the minister to go and reconcile with the technocrats and come up with a smarter programme.

4.34
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Ministry of Education and Sports, in the last two weeks, has been reporting to the committee of this Parliament concerning budget issues. One of the main concerns of that committee, to which I am a member, was the feeding in schools. The Minister of Education and Sports suggested that the parents should pack food for their kids. One of the justifications given for that reason was lack of money. Today, the minister is saying they have Shs 53 billion for registering school-going children. 

Madam Speaker, I think Parliament should reallocate these funds to provide lunch in these schools in the next financial year, because registration has already been catered for through NIRA and other agencies - (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, let us correct the record here. When a minister comes on the Floor of Parliament and gives one of the objectives as avoidance of forgery of documents in primary schools, it is unbecoming. The authority on all the documents of primary leavers is the Uganda National Examinations Board, unless they are going to forge their reports at the end of the term.

Secondly, in the Committee on Education and Sports, we are fighting for money for the higher education loan financing scheme. This loan scheme was given only Shs 5 billion and we have been arguing that all funds should be got out of the State House funded students’ scheme so that this money goes to the higher education loan scheme. 

There is something being hidden from these people that they are not revealing clearly. If you have Shs 53 billion, why don’t we take this money to the higher education loan scheme and students start borrowing?

Finally, let me - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think there is a problem. The money belongs to the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Therefore, I do not know how we can reallocate it.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, if the money belongs to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the minister has no right to come here and defend this. 

However, as an educationist, let me give you a solution to our registration. In schools, we register by admission, by termly mark sheets, baptism cards, monthly results or immunisation cards. All those are options that can save the Shs 53 billion. I know hon. Bahati was registered by baptism card also.

MR SSEWANYANA: Thank you. That is enough. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude. Minister, does this cover the children who are chasing birds? There are those who are not in school but are between the ages of 5 to 15 years.

4.38
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the statement of the minister, on page 3, she talks about resources and she says Government has allocated Shs 53 billion for this exercise under NIRA. It is very clear that the Ministry of Education and Sports does not have anything to do with this exercise, unless the minister is telling us that there is an arrangement between them and the Ministry of Internal Affairs, which need not have come on the Floor of Parliament. 

We know very well that this Parliament allocated money to complete the exercise of registration under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The statement here says that this money will be spread in two financial years - 2016/2017, which ends next month and 2017/2018. Therefore, I really do not know what the minister wants this Parliament to do for her ministry. 

Lastly, the minister knows very well that the policy of education does not allow children less than six years in primary schools. Therefore, why are you planning to count non-existent children in primary school?

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Magyezi comes up, I would like to know, if we finish with the learners, are we going to look for separate funds to register the other children who are fishing?

4.40
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We were with you in Abu Dhabi a few days ago and we were told that in that country, the minute a child is born, while still on the hospital bed with its mother, he or she will be registered by the local authority and given a registration certificate. They are even given a number for their passport in case the mother would like to travel with the child. 

We live in a country where, all of sudden, there is a craze about registration -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, there are three things - the birth certificate, national ID and passport – that are given immediately. That is what they do.

MR MAGYEZI: You can see a country where all of a sudden, all SIM cards, motor vehicles, child offenders, pensioners and investors have to be registered. Very soon, we shall have somebody here with a project to register all women in Uganda –(Laughter)– and a week after that, somebody to register all men.

Madam Speaker, the honourable minister has requested us to do something very important for the country. She said, “I am bringing this for two reasons: to inform you, as Members of Parliament and secondly, to request you to go out and publicise this and sensitise your constituencies.” Honourable minister, in that budget of Shs 53.6 billion, do you want to tell this country that there is no budget for publicity and mass sensitisation? Why do you want Members of Parliament to shoulder a budget, which should already be within this project?

Within the policy of decentralisation, especially in terms of the policy framework, there is registration of children in schools, particularly at primary level, and this is the responsibility of the local authorities from the District Education Officer (DEO) to the centre coordinators, the head teachers backed up by the auditors of those local governments. Therefore, honourable minister, aren’t you tampering with the policy of decentralisation in this regard?

Finally, Madam Speaker, recently we agreed on Shs 16 billion for the elections of all local councils and we were told, “No, you cannot have this because of hunger.” Can we give this money to the hungry? How do we now tell Ugandans that there is no more hunger and famine and thus Shs 53 billion is to be wasted on such an exercise? I thank you.

4.43
MR JAMES NIRINGIYIMANA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has tried to present what is happening in other areas and this is the order of the day. Today, we were in the Budget Committee and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was pledging that he will not allow any other sector, which has no strategic plan, to get money. However, I can see that we are giving sectors money and the problem they have is lack of what to spend it on. That is why they have to plan and make sure they identify quack activities to satisfy the expenditure. 

If the programme is to register people of 0-15 years, why is it that they are targeting 5-15 year olds? In addition, is it your mandate as Ministry of Education to do that exercise? They are suffering with lack of what to spend on.

Madam Speaker, I would propose that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should withdraw this money and reallocate it to areas, which are of concern to Ugandans, and that is hunger and election of local councils, which lack financing.

Madam Speaker, we need to prevail upon these people who are suffering with money. Today, we were analysing Shs 212 billion, which is redundant in the Ministry of Works and Transport. They are just asking for money and they do not know what to use it for. I humbly submit that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should take responsibility because he knows the problems that the country is facing. Thank you.

4.45
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement she has made. 

In her statement, the minister said that the exercise will help to get the exact number of learners in schools. In our areas, there are hard-to-reach areas and in such communities, there are community schools, which even the Government has not taken over. They are so many and they have always been asking to be taken over by the Government and the Government says that there is no money. Why does it want to waste Shs 53 billion on an activity, which cannot be effective? If a learner gets a National Identification Number (NIN), does it mean that he will never drop out? That is my contribution.

4.47
MR VINCENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As earlier discussed by most of the comrades here, it is now agreed that this matter should be under the National Identification and Registration Authority within the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Therefore, it has nothing to do with the Ministry of Education and Sports.

However, I would like to use this opportunity to supplement the contribution by hon. Ssewanyana who talked about feeding in schools. It is a very challenging situation, particularly in villages, which are hard to reach. A pupil moving a distance of about 5kms to access schools, minus lunch, cannot perform. Therefore, as we discuss, let Government come up with a programme of feeding children in schools.

I heard the honourable minister talk about registration beginning from the age of five years. Most children of this age in the villages are at home. I think you have seen children in the category of five years in the urban centres accessing pre-primary education. These ones are able to afford. However, we do not have pre-primary in most of our villages in Uganda. What is the Ministry of Education doing to bring on board pre-primary education in Uganda? Thank you.

4.48
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have sat here attentively, listening to today’s session, which is very pertinent. We started with issues of torture and now we have received a statement from the minister where money is going to irrelevant issues when we have burning issues. As you see, I am dressed in yellow because I am yellow. However, when I see Members of the yellow family putting forward issues, which can tarnish the name of the senior yellow cadre, the President, I feel ashamed. 

Madam Speaker, this money belongs to Government and Parliament. Some Members were saying internal affairs or education. It is good the minister has brought this money here for approval. Some of us did not know, and other ministries are crying. When we see the way police officers sleep in grass thatched Mama ingiya pole houses, why can’t we use this money to construct houses for them? We do not have police stations as well. 

When you come to education, the President of the Republic of Uganda, the chairman of the mighty party and the Commander–in-Chief of the Armed Forces, pledged schools during the campaigns. I have stood here on the Floor of Parliament to raise issues about Buganda Road Primary School and you are saying there is no money! I would like to request honourable members, if it is within your –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Waluswaka, I indicated to you that this money is not for this ministry but for the Ministry of Internal Affairs and we already passed it in the budget.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, in my culture they say that two stupid people are better than one wise person. I would like to request that if this money is meant for the Ministry of Internal Affairs, it should be used for construction of police houses. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR GAFABUSA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. From the statement of the minister and the way I read and understood it, the minister is not asking Parliament to approve or provide money for this activity. The minister indicated, in the statement, that NIRA budgeted for this money in the 2016/2017 and 2017/2018 budget. Therefore, it is money already approved by this Parliament.

The minister is asking Parliament to support this activity and to sensitise our community members to support the programme, which is already approved. Therefore, I would like to know if we are moving procedurally well to debate whether we should approve this money or not when actually, the money is already approved. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House approved this money in the budget of 2016/2017. We already approved it and not by mistake. It was meant to follow on after the first registration, which ended just before the elections, and we said they should start again from zero years and continue. 

Therefore, the minister did not want you to hear that there are people running around your constituencies. She wanted you to know that NIRA is on the ground to do this exercise. That is what she came to inform us about. She is not asking for money because we already passed it in the budget.

4.54
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, if that is what the minister meant by saying that this money was already passed by NIRA, then it should have been the Minister of Internal Affairs to inform us that there is an exercise that will take place in the whole country. After all, we had approved that NIRA should carry out registration of persons zero to 15 years. There would be no need for the Ministry of Education to come to the House and inform us of this exercise.

Colleagues, I would like to request you to read page 2 of the statement of the minister. She is talking about another sector/governance structure, which will be composed of personnel from the ministries in charge of finance, planning and economic development; internal affairs; education and sports; local government; security; ICT; and NIRA and other technical officers from the respective ministries, departments and agencies. What I am sure we passed under NIRA was money for programme based management, not this money for the multi-sectoral governance structure that the minister wants to bring before this House.

I would therefore request, Madam Speaker, that the minister’s statement only be taken with a pinch of salt because it is misplaced. If it is NIRA handling the issue, then it is acting within the mandate that was given to it by this House. The only thing that we would be requested to do would be - (Interruption)

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development brought a law before this House in 2015 and section 13 says that there is no money, which will be released without a work plan and a strategic plan. If this money was given to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, how can it be a multi-sectoral activity including other ministries? This cannot happen; it becomes irregular, it is against the law and is inefficient. 

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, the minister will eventually inform the House as we take a decision. However, I would like to state that when we gave NIRA the opportunity to register all our children and we even went ahead to make NIRA an independent authority, we gave them authority to go to those in schools and reach out to those grazing our animals. We gave them authority to go to the hospitals to find out the number of children who have been born and those not born. 

I would imagine that some of the outcomes that the minister was looking for - she talked about better planning and knowing the numbers of the learners - would instead include strengthening the registration of deaths and births. In this way, we would know that every child who goes to school should go with his or her birth certificate for purposes of record keeping and this birth certificate cannot be given to another person. At the end of it all, when a learner is finishing primary seven, the school is already aware that they have the birth certificate of learners a and b. I would imagine that this is the same information we are using when they become of age; NIRA would therefore have captured their data. 

Madam Speaker, we feel that we will lose money in the multi-sectoral committee and yet we do not know who will be the accounting officer in this matter - the one we shall hold responsible for our money. We know that there is an organ we have put in place that is supposed to deal entirely with the registration of persons. It is not that we will not work with anybody; we are working with NIRA, we have cooperated with NIRA and we have popularised the registration. 

This is why we are asking that the registration of SIM cards should be extended so that more of our people can have their SIM cards registered. It is a request we are making as the people’s representatives because we know that our people need to be registered. Therefore, concerning this one, I do not see the reason why the Minister of Education should come to be seen as if she is the one taking the lead in the registration of young people.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when the ministers do not come to inform us about what is happening in the country, we complain. Now the minister has come to inform us about the exercise and purpose for which it will be carried out in our respective areas. 

The money was already approved by this House with an accounting officer in the 2016/2017 budget; so if anybody is to be asked, we shall ask the same accounting officer. Therefore, it is not the ministry taking this money; they are just informing us that they will be in our areas for the exercise.

5.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I would like to just confirm two facts. The first is that the accounting officer for this money is the same accounting officer for the National Identification Registration Authority and so they will be responsible for this. 

The structure that we have is purposely for coordinating. The people who will be registered will not be registered in the ongoing registration. Remember when we approved the money for the registration of people for national identity cards, we agreed that it would be continuous. Therefore, in this phase, we are focussing on schools and that is where the Ministry of Education and Sports comes in.

However, there are also other interests in this because we have been losing money through ghost learners. People have argued that there has been a similar exercise. Yes, people have been validating this, but the truth is that some schools overstate the numbers of learners because they get more money as the numbers increase. We are, therefore, saying that this time, we need to know the people that are there, register them and these will not be repeated in the exercise. 

We agreed to this because it is a multi-sectoral programme of Government. The Ministry of Education and Sports is leading this exercise because it is in schools and NIRA will take over the technical bit of it, which is registration. The computers that are going to be used are from NIRA and at the end of the day, it would be wrong to hear that the Ministry of Education and Sports is doing some work in various parts of Uganda without Members of Parliament knowing. That is the purpose of this. I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the information is for noting. The Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs is expected to follow up this money in the normal course of their work. Thank you for the information. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we indicated earlier, the report will be laid on the Table and sent to the Committee on Budget. We shall then develop a comprehensive report when the Budget Committee comes back. Chairperson of the committee, you can come and lay your report on the Table.  

5.03
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Ms Rose Mutonyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I present the report, I beg to lay on the Table a signed copy of the report and the minutes of the meetings that we held. 

THE SPEAKER: No, chairperson of the committee, we are sending that report to the Committee on Budget. We shall have a comprehensive debate on all the sectors when they report back. Thank you. Just lay it on the Table. 

MS MUTONYI: Okay, I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson, for the good work. The report is sent to the Committee on Budget to handle expeditiously and come back with a comprehensive report. 

MOTION FOR RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO URGE GOVERNMENT TO DEVELOP A COMPREHENSIVE POLICY ON HAEMOPHILIA AND SOLUTIONS FOR UGANDANS LIVING WITH HAEMOPHILIA

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Joseph Ssewungu, please use just ten minutes together with hon. Rwabushaija. 

5.05
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to urge Government to develop a comprehensive policy on haemophilia and solutions for Ugandans living with haemophilia under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by a few members. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, the motion reads: 

“WHEREAS Objective 22 of the National Objectives and the Directive Principles of State Policy enshrined in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 obliges the state to take all practical measures to ensure the provision of basic medical services to the population;

AND WHEREAS haemophilia is an inherited genetic bleeding disorder, which is characterised by recurrent spontaneous bleeding into joints and muscles without the ability to clot when a blood vessel is broken; 

NOTING THAT treatment of haemophilia is very rare and expensive and if available, it is very effective in controlling bleeding, prevention of chronic arthropathy and premature death, yet without treatment most people with haemophilia die at childhood or early adult life;

FURTHER NOTING that the World Health Organisation recognised the seriousness of haemophilia and recommended that national guidelines should be developed for the diagnosis and treatment of haemophilia; 

COGNISANT THAT even with the directive of the World Health Organisation to which Uganda subscribes, the policy makers in Uganda have not yet included haemophilia as one of the diseases that need urgent policy directive and attention, thereby putting the affected citizens at risk of lacking diagnosis and appropriate treatment;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:

    1. That Government develops a comprehensive policy on haemophilia; 
    2. That Government sets aside funds through the Ministry of Health to ensure consistent supply of consumables used in the diagnosis and treatment of haemophilia;
    3. That the Ministry of Health establishes a care unit for haemophilia patients at the national and regional hospitals; 
    4. That the Ministry of Health prioritises outreach programmes to increase awareness about haemophilia.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. You can justify the motion. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, when I was reading the motion, one Member asked why I had not mobilised them, but the fact is that this is a bi-partisan motion, which concerns everybody. 

I could give a brief history of haemophilia in Uganda. I am not moving this motion just in the interest of Ugandans but I also have experience with haemophilia. I happened to produce a child and at around six months, he developed black spots on his body; these were blood clots. At that time, we did not know what was happening. Later on, we suffered a lot trying to find out what the actual problem was. It took my wife, Stella, and I two years with Prof. Tumwine to discover that this child had a rare disease called haemophilia.  

Madam Speaker, a mere hitting of a body part of someone suffering from haemophilia causes the veins to break and the blood may come out of the skin. If the person cut themselves, that blood flows non-stop because the person’s blood does not have those clotting factors. During that time, we did not know anything to do with haemophilia. We were only using what they call cryoprecipitate and this was a factor got from someone with the same blood group as that of my son. You would go to Nakasero Blood Bank and if the child is blood group AB, they look for blood group AB, pull out that plasma and thereafter they transfuse it to help the child’s blood clot. 

Incidentally, there came an Indian called Satish Pilla who was working with the Madhvani Group of Companies. This man was employed in Uganda and he came with a child that was suffering from haemophilia. He first went to Mulago Referral Hospital to look for a department of haemophilia but nobody in Mulago was able to talk to him about haemophilia. The doctors knew about it but they said that it was a rare disease in Uganda and they said that they did not know much about it. From that time, the Indian began mobilising people. They told him that there was one person they knew in Uganda who was a Member of Parliament and he had a child suffering from haemophilia. They advised him to look for me.

He came to me – I think by that time I was still teaching and I had not become a Member of Parliament by then - I am refreshing my mind on some of these issues. (Laughter) Anyway, later on, we started moving on but it was discovered that there are many children who have this bleeding disorder and many parents did not know much about this problem. 

The test to find out whether someone is suffering from haemophilia is one of the most expensive tests in Uganda. Testing alone requires at least not less than US$ 200, maybe at LMK - this is one of the service areas. Mulago National Referral Hospital has the machine that can test for haemophilia but they do not have the reagents for these tests.  The reagents are quite expensive. 

With the Indian, we moved around sensitising people and there were a number of children who were affected in the country. One time we had – and the honourable Dr Chris Baryomunsi can bear witness – over 60 children coming from across the whole of Uganda, suffering from haemophilia. This is a rare disease but as dangerous as maybe cancer or sickle cell disease. When a child gets this bleeding, say in the joints, then they cannot walk and the joints will swell, and some have died under those circumstances. That is why we are seeking for a comprehensive policy on haemophilia.

As I speak now, there is an NGO that is trying to help by getting this factor. There are different categories of ailments - factor 9 deficient and factor 8 deficient - but doctors are better in that field and can explain it well. Anyhow, we are getting some of this treatment that is recognised internationally, to cater for these children by transfusion.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR SSEWUNGU: I am concluding, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I think you have understood the issue at hand. The motion speaks for itself. So, I request that you support this. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.14
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to second the motion moved by hon. Joseph Ssewungu, for the resolution of Parliament to urge Government to develop a comprehensive policy on haemophilia. 

Madam Speaker, haemophilia, as he has told us, is a disorder that is life-threatening. A woman with this condition, for example, can die due to excessive bleeding during labour. It also causes neurological disorders that can lead to bleeding in the brain. One can have an increased risk of developing infections such hepatitis, particularly when one receives donor blood from a person with that condition.

As a result of the problems that haemophilia can cause, I strongly support and urge Members to support the motion that has been moved. The Government of Uganda and this House have a responsibility to make sure that we represent the people of this nation, and the Government is there to protect the interests and the concerns of the people of Uganda. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Sector minister, do you have any objection to this request?

5.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will say something and then my colleague will also add something. I would like first of all to thank my colleague, hon. Joseph Ssewungu, and all the Members for raising this very important issue on health. I also would like to thank my colleagues for their vigilance in advocating for the rare medical conditions in the country, including you, Madam Speaker. You have spearheaded campaigns for quite a number of rare medical conditions and that is very helpful. We thank you very much.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that we have quite a number of inherited genetic conditions. These conditions are there and real. Allow me to just mention a few; of course, haemophilia is one of them and we also have sickle cell disease, Down syndrome, albinism, cystic fibrosis, Crohn’s syndrome, neural fibromatosis, muscular dystrophy, Von Willebrand disease - (Laughter) When it comes to genetic blood disorders like the one my colleague has presented, we have quite a number including sickle cell disease and others that I may not readily mention here. Therefore, I would like to thank him and the others for the vigilance.

As a ministry, we do have the National Health Policy and all these inherited diseases are incorporated in the National Health Policy. We even have the Uganda National Clinical Guidelines, 2016, that capture these rare genetic disorders. These guidelines have the provision for the care and treatment of such rare disorders. 

I must agree with my colleague that being genetic disorders, they do not have a cure. A disease like sickle cell disease does not have a cure. The ultimate cure for sickle cell disease is the bone marrow transplants. The same thing applies to haemophilia; the cure is not possible and it is quite expensive.

As he mentioned, the test for haemophilia is by removing blood samples and testing for bleeding and clotting time. This can be done in referral and even district hospitals. Having said this, I really agree with him that we need a comprehensive policy that covers all these disorders, including the sickle cell disease that you advocate for, albinism and many other rare genetic disorders. Otherwise, I thank you and I still appeal that let us continue to advocate for our people with rare disorders. I beg to submit.

6.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Joseph Ssewungu for bringing this subject here, because I believe that this was unknown to many of our colleagues.

My colleague has spoken, and you are aware that we have very many diseases in the country. The number of the people estimated to be living with haemophilia is believed to be 0.01 per cent of the population. As he mentioned, Mulago is where we have the equipment and of course, the other regional referral hospitals and district general hospitals can actually submit samples that can be tested and the results are sent back to the respective district general hospitals.

Yes, my colleague has mentioned that we need a comprehensive policy, but she has added that we also have other broader policies to deal with the diseases in the country. So, I have to state that as a ministry, although she has spoken, we cannot have a policy for every disease, Madam Speaker. That is what I wanted to communicate. It becomes complex, considering the population that actually has this challenge and considering that we are actually managing the situation. We just need to create awareness so that people know. It might not be the right way to go to have a policy for every disease in the country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, even if they are 0.01 per cent, I think that they need to know and to be managed. They need information, advocacy –(Interjections)– Yes, but who knows about them? I do not know about them.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, why such motions, like the one I have brought, come on the Floor of Parliament is because due diligence has not been done by the ministry. I would like to state here that we managed to get a machine and we gave it to Mulago Hospital to test haemophilia - the clotting and bleeding time. However, you cannot procure reagents for the machine. 

I totally agree with what the ministers are saying, that we cannot have a specific policy for haemophilia but we should have a general one, but we do not have it! Who should bring it? Whether the patients are just 0.01 per cent of the population of Uganda, as long as they are human beings, they must be given attention for treatment. 

Madam Speaker, as you have asked, why we are seeing this problem - Dr Chris Baryomunsi is here and he can give evidence of what he saw; it overwhelmed him. What happens is that in a country where Government minds about people’s health, the moment they see any new disease, they must take interest in it as fast as possible so that it is given immediate attention. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do approve a motion urging Government to develop a comprehensive policy on haemophilia and other diseases to help Ugandans.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE HUMAN RIGHTS COMMITTEE ON THE 17TH ANNUAL REPORT OF THE UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION, 2014

5.23
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Ms Jovah Kamateeka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I present the report, I would like to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee meetings in considering this report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, could you just give an executive summary? I hope you have sent it out.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, in accordance with Article 52 (2) of the Constitution, the Uganda Human Rights Commission (UHRC) is required to publish periodic reports on its findings and submit annual reports on the state of human rights and freedoms in the country and to lay it before Parliament. The 17th report of UHRC, covering the year 2014 and dated 24 March 2015, was laid before this House on 12 March 2015. 

In comparison to the previous annual reports, UHRC reported positive developments, which include an increase in the number of human rights committees in the Uganda Prisons Services; elimination of the use of the bucket system in some detention centres; the construction and renovation of infrastructure; improved access to water; maintenance of updated registers; and the respect for freedom of worship.

However, on the downside, there were still recurring challenges of prolonged detentions beyond the prescribed period; arbitrary detentions; inadequate food; incarceration of children with adults; some prisoners awaiting ministerial orders; increased cases of crime preventers and local council leaders assuming the role of law enforcement officers; violations during evictions; and dire working conditions of prisons and police officers.

Government Compliance with UHRC Recommendations and Treaty Bodies Reporting 

The committee recommends as follows:

(i) 	That Government adequately funds UHRC to enable it undertake the civic education mandate to raise the level of human rights awareness. 

(ii) 	That Government should build the resource capacity of UHRC, both in terms of personnel and infrastructure, in a sustainable manner. 

(iii)	Government, through the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, should handle matters proposed for amicable settlement in a timely manner and ensure that the victims of human rights violations are promptly compensated. 

Assessment of Conditions in Places of Detention 

The committee recommends that:

(i) 	Government should, as a matter of urgency, provide sufficient resources in the next financial year to the Uganda Police Force to establish reception centres for juveniles in all districts. 

(ii) 	That the available budget notwithstanding, Uganda Police Force should ensure that officers always separate juvenile offenders from adults. Officers found holding juveniles and adults together should be held personally liable. 

(iii) 	That Government should carry out sensitisation campaigns aimed at addressing societal and family upbringing of children. 

Regarding the enforcement of the Prohibition and Prevention of Torture Act, the committee recommends that in addition to sensitisation of the officers, Uganda Police Force enforces disciplinary mechanisms against errant officers for violations of the Police Code of Conduct and the Anti-Torture Act. 

On the elimination of the bucket system as an essential element for the dignity and humane conditions in prisons to ensure that Ugandans have dignity even in places of detention, the committee recommends that – 
(i) 	Appropriate and alternative measures should be taken to provide adequate water and water-borne sanitation systems to detention centres and that the bucket system should be completely eliminated in all detention centres. 

(ii) 	The Uganda Prisons Services should employ deliberate measures and efforts to eradicate the use of the bucket system. 

(iii) 	The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Internal Affairs should provide to Parliament a complete report with statistics of detention centres where the bucket system has been completely eliminated and those that are still pending. 

On the working environment of human right defenders, the committee observed that the new legal regime – and this is in regard to the NGO Act - on the operations of NGOs was promulgated by Parliament and so there is need for all stakeholders to adhere to the provisions of the law in order to harmonise and foster the work of human rights defenders. At a later date, it can then be reviewed and amendments made if need is found.

The Recurrent Human Rights Concerns Arising Out of Floods and Traffic Accidents 

The committee recommends that- 

(i) 	The Uganda Police Force pays more attention to the roads that have received continuous accident reports and devise means of curbing down on the accidents that are on the rise. 

(ii) 	We further recommend that the Uganda Police Force should be serious in checking indiscipline on the roads and also carry out comprehensive education of the driving public about their rights on the road and the rights of other users. 

(iii) 	The programme on inspection of all motor vehicles should be expedited and the public sensitised to ensure compliance. 

Human Rights Education and Awareness Programmes 

The committee recommends that- 

(i) 	Uganda Police Force carries out public education and sensitisation on their role in order to change the attitude of the public towards the police. 

(ii) 	The Uganda Police Force should exercise a higher degree of tolerance and try to woo the public to greater cooperation. 

(iii) 	The committee recommends that the police force clearly ascertains the exact number of crime preventers, gives them identity cards, clear terms of reference with a clear policy, and guidelines to enable them operate effectively.

(iv) 	The committee further recommends that the Uganda Police Force facilitates the crime preventers with a uniform and the necessary equipment. In the alternative, the Uganda Police Force should recruit crime preventers into the regular force. 

Human Rights Concerns under Ministry of Internal Affairs

The committee recommends that – 

(i) 	Government ensures that security is adequately maintained without violation of rights both during preparations and holding of elections. This was regarding the elections. I hope members will be mindful that this was in the year 2014.

(ii) 	The committee further recommends that disciplinary measures should be taken against officers that commit violations against communities such as land grabbing and violence.

The Human Rights of Fishing Communities in Uganda

The committee recommends that- 

(i) 	Security presence among fishing communities should be enhanced and properly coordinated. The activities of the various agencies should also be well coordinated. 

(ii) 	Officials that commit acts of torture and other violations should be personally held liable for their acts and be subjected to disciplinary action.

Human Rights of Fishing Communities under URA 

The committee recommends that: 

(i) 	In addition to Lake Victoria, emphasis should be put on other lakes in order to mitigate the challenge of smuggling and illegal fishing nets

(ii) 	Serious action should be taken against security officials who collude with illegal fishing communities. 

Incarceration of Children with Adults in Places of Detention

The committee recommends that- 

(i) 	The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development ensures that more remand homes where children can be rehabilitated are constructed and that at every police station, a separate room be provided for holding children in conflict with the law. 

(ii) 	The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should provide the necessary facilities as well as skills building and formal education for children in existing remand homes. Madam Speaker, this is important because children in the remand homes do not have such facilities at all and so they are idle.

(iii) 	The committee further recommends that the ministry should consider subjecting children incarcerated for petty offences to community service. 

(iv) 	The ministry should conduct regular visits to detention centres to ensure these children are well catered for. 

Under violence against children in selected schools, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development expedites the formulation of the guidelines for the operationalisation of the Children’s Authority.

Respect and the Observance of Human Rights during Evictions under KCCA 

The committee recommends that – 

(i) 	In carrying out its enforcement role, KCCA should abide by the Constitution and the UN Guidelines on Forced Evictions hence ensure that human rights are not violated even when an eviction is legal. Therefore, conducting an eviction should be preceded by involvement of all persons, by giving them appropriate notice and time to plan their departure. There should be effective dissemination of information on the ownership and proposed development projects, provision of opportunities for dialogue and legal representation as required by the UN guidelines.

(ii) 	Strict disciplinary measures should be taken against officers that violate the rights of individuals when carrying out enforcement. The actions taken against the officers should be clearly documented. 

(iii) 	KCCA should provide enabling regulations and policies to enable laws to work in the interest of the people and specifically ensure protection of the rights of the poor and vulnerable persons. 

Compensation of Lawful Claimants Arising from Forced Evictions 

The committee recommends that – 

(i) 	KCCA ascertains the number of people that need to be compensated and those that have so far been compensated. The information should be clearly documented and availed to Parliament on a regular basis. 

(ii) 	The committee further recommends that KCCA should ensure that individuals listed for compensation are adequately and expeditiously compensated. In so doing, KCCA should ensure that poor and vulnerable claimants are able to access the available justice mechanisms.

Community Sensitisation on Compliance 

The committee recommends that: 

(i) 	KCCA comes up with a formal mechanism for dialogue with vendors, market associations and developers because these are individuals or groups majorly affected by the evictions. 

(ii) 	The committee further recommends that KCCA should also strengthen its collaboration and engagement with political leaders and other Government institutions in order to get political support and buy-in for its initiatives. 

(iii) 	KCCA should sensitise the community on the laws and guidelines in place in order to enhance compliance. 

As recommended by the Uganda Human Rights Commission, KCCA should provide specific policies and a law on street vending.  

    a) KCCA should commit to undertake specialised training for all enforcement officers on human rights compliance in the implementation of their activities. This training should be included in its work plan for enforcement activities, so that it is not ad hoc. 
    b) The training should also include sensitisation of the public to ensure behavioural change. 

On the management of traffic and boda bodas in the city, the committee recommends that the process for passing regulations to control the use of boda bodas as well as regulation of traffic should be expedited. The regulations on boda bodas should specifically provide for registration of all boda bodas operating in the city, prescribe operating areas, specify no-go areas and make it mandatory for every cyclist and passenger to wear a helmet.

Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
 
Conditions in Places of Detention

The committee recommends that-
 
(i) 	Government should invest more in diversion programmes that are tailored to the individual child’s needs and supports them to address the underlying causes of their offences. 

(ii) 	Government should undertake sensitisation and training of children for behavioural change. 

(iii)	The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should ensure that all staff within the justice system are aware of and apply all available alternative dispute resolution mechanisms appropriately and consistently.

Cases Pending Ministerial Orders

The committee recommends that the Uganda Prisons Service and the Judiciary should establish the cases pending ministerial orders and ensure that they are reviewed and handled expeditiously. Madam Speaker, we have people who have had cases pending ministerial orders for 10, 15 and even 20 years. This is of grave concern.

Emerging Human Rights Concerns

Early Warning in Preparation for the 2016 General Elections

The committee recommends that prior to any electoral process, reforms and consultations should be timely in order to improve the quality of electoral democracy. Government should strictly observe the two-year timeframe for electoral reforms. As you are aware, Madam Speaker, it was a problem.

Campaign Financing

The committee recommends that electoral laws should be amended to prescribe a ceiling on expenditure both by political parties and candidates, as well as prohibit candidates from giving any type of handouts, including refreshments, to voters.

Human Rights Concerns Arising Out Of Forced Evictions

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should work with the Uganda Law Reform Commission to review the relevant laws and come up with the necessary reforms.

Compliance with the Uganda Human Rights Commission’s 16th Report Recommendations

The committee recommends that: 

(i) 	The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should prioritise the passing of a national legal policy. 

(ii) 	The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should introduce the proposed Legal Aid Bill before Parliament. 

(iii) 	The committee recommends that Government should commit more funds to the justice centres in order to enhance provision of legal aid to the poor and vulnerable persons.

Physical Access for Vulnerable Persons

The committee recommends that the Justice, Law and Order Sector should comply with the standards stipulated in the Building Control Act, 2013 such as ensuring accessible routes, curb ramps, parking and passenger loading zones, elevators, signage, entrances and restroom accommodations for people with disabilities.

Madam Speaker, the committee considered the report and now recommends that the report be adopted. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the Committee on Human Rights, for the work on this 17th annual report. I also want to thank the Uganda Human Rights Commission for fulfilling their obligation and reporting regularly and on time.

Honourable members, I do not know whether you want us to discuss this now or we wait for the issue of torture, which we have been talking about. What do you think?

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think you have guided well that we defer it so that we discuss it when the Minister of Internal Affairs has presented his report and is here in the House. I do not want to stand in for him again.

THE SPEAKER: Is it okay, honourable members, that we bring the old and the new and have one debate? Okay, let us defer it. Of course, Minister, we are “on your behind” in respect to that report - (Laughter) - It has to come this week. Let us defer it to later this week when we get the report from the minister and discuss them together. 

Honourable members, we have again heard some bad news. I understand hon. Boniface Byanyima, an MP in the First Parliament, has died. Again, we have lost one of the old people. Let us stand up for a minute of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was a motion moved by hon. Niwagaba proposing that we set up a select committee in respect to torture. However, right now, we are busy with the budget; I think a select committee would interrupt our work. Therefore, maybe we should allow him to move a substantive motion with notice so that it can come together with this debate. 

I do not want to interfere with the work of the sessional committees. If you can move a formal motion, then we can debate it but at this stage, I do not think we can set up a select committee. It is going to take away Members from completing the budget. Okay? Thank you.

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO $210 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB) TO FINANCE THE UPGRADING OF THE RWENKUNYE-APAC-LIRA-ACHOLIBUR ROAD PROJECT (252.5KM)

5.47
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Madam Speaker, before I present the report, I beg to lay on the Table the following documents: 

    1. Signed report by the members of the committee;
    2. Signed minutes;
    3. Minister’s brief on the proposal; and 
    4. The project appraisal document.

I beg to lay.

This is the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow $210 million from the Islamic Development Bank to finance the upgrading of the Rwenkunye-Apac-Lira-Acholibur Road project (252.5km).

Madam Speaker, the Committee on the National Economy considered the request by Government to borrow $210 million from the Islamic Development Bank for financing the Rwenkunye-Apac-Lira-Acholibur Road upgrading project (252.5km), in accordance with rule 166(2) (b) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. 

The request was presented to this House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 30 January 2017, and accordingly, referred to the committee for consideration. The committee considered and scrutinised the request and now begs to report:  

The committee held meetings with the following:

    i) The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development;
    ii) The Ministry of Works and Transport;
    iii) The Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA). 

The committee studied and made reference to the following documents:

i) 	The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development’s brief on the loan request;
ii) 	The Rwenkunye-Apac-Lira-Acholibur Road upgrading project appraisal report;
iii) 	The draft loan agreement between the Republic of Uganda and the Islamic Development Bank (IDB);
    iv) The National Transport Master Plan and National Development Plan; and 
    v) The Project Implementation Plan, detailing project management arrangements and modes of procurement. 

Background 

The Rwenkunye-Apac-Lira-Acholibur Road is part of the national road network. The existing road is 252.5 kilometres long and connects the western part of Uganda with the northern parts. It traverses through five districts and connects several local trading centres and villages to the district headquarters of Masindi, Apac, Lira, Pader and Kitgum. The road is part of the Lira-Kitgum–Musingo Road, which is a link to South Sudan.

Development of this corridor is aimed at supporting trade movement and thus economic growth in the Great Lakes region. It primarily connects the landlocked hinterlands of South Sudan on one hand and central and northern Uganda to Nairobi–Mombasa on the other by linking the major cities of each. The infrastructure bottlenecks on the route are the major constraint to sustainable economic growth, Uganda’s competitiveness and regional integration –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, you do not have to read it all. 

MR BATEGEKA: I am not reading it all, Madam Speaker.  

Alignment of The Project To The National Strategy

The project’s interventions on this road are in line with the following:

    i) The National Vision 2040;
    ii) The National Transport Master Plan, 2009;
    iii) The Strategic Implementation Plan for the National Transport Master Plan, 2016. 

The project objectives are to:
 
1. Upgrade the existing 252.5 kilometre long gravel road to paved asphaltic road standard to- 
    a) reduce the travel time, optional costs and economic losses;
    b) increase comfort and reliability during travel;
    c) meet current and future transport demands; and
    d) help accelerate economic activities by improving access of people to social amenities, market places, business and employment opportunities resulting from improved internal and regional connectivity.

2. 	Upgrade the current gravel road to bitumen surfacing standard, thereby providing an efficient and sustainable transport system that links centres of economic activity.

3. 	Improve access to rural economically productive areas and thereby contribute to socioeconomic development, poverty reduction, regional and national integration; and 

4. 	Stimulate and support local economic activities by reducing transport costs and travel time along the existing gravel road. 

Project Description 

The project is located in the western-northern region of the country in the districts of Masindi, Apac, Lira, Pader and Kitgum. The existing approximately 252.5 kilometre long road is five to six metres wide. It starts at Rwenkunye in Masindi along the Kampala-Gulu Highway and runs through Masindi Port, where there is a ferry crossing the Nile River, to Apac Town through Lira Town and terminates at Acholibur junction.

The project entails upgrading of the existing road to class II bituminous road in accordance with the Uganda national roads standards.

Project Cost and Financing 

The project will be financed by the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) and Government of Uganda. The Islamic Development Bank will contribute Shs $210 million, representing 67.09 per cent of the project cost and Government of Uganda will finance 32.91 per cent of the project costs, amounting to Shs 103 billion. Specifically, the IDB loan will finance two sections: Section 1, Rwenkunye-Apac, 9.9 kilometres; and Section 2, Apac-Lira-Puranga, 100.1 kilometres; Section 3, Puranga-Acholibur, 61.5 kilometres, will be financed entirely by the Government of Uganda 

The loan terms and conditions are as follows:

    i) Loan amount - $200.82 million;
    ii) Loan period – 19 years;
    iii) Grace period – four years; 
    iv) Interest rate – LIBOR plus 155 basis points (bps)

The Loan and the Current Debt Situation of the Country

The loan will no doubt increase our total nominal public debt that is currently reported, as at the end of June 2016, to be $ 8.6 billion. However, the estimated nominal debt as a percentage of GDP, as at the end of June 2016, was 34.9 per cent, while the net present value of public debt to GDP ratio was 27 per cent as at the end of June 2016. This is relatively below the public debt management framework threshold of 50 per cent.

Implementation Arrangements 

The Uganda National Roads Authority will be responsible for the implementation of the project. Uganda National Roads Authority shall establish a Project Management Unit (PMU) specifically for the project, consisting of: project director, two senior civil engineers, one sociologist, one procurement/legal specialist, one accountant, one secretary/translator and two drivers. The PMU will manage the day-to-day coordination of the entire activities under this project.

Observations and Recommendations 

(i) 	The committee observed that a long construction period of five years was proposed and it was not clear why such a long period was proposed yet Government is obliged to pay commitment fees on undisbursed amounts. The committee recommends that the construction period be reduced to minimise costs that have to be incurred by Government on undisbursed loan amounts. 

(ii) 	The committee observed that road projects were being delayed by frequent administrative reviews during the procurement process, which were also contributing to the poor performance of some loans. The committee recommends that the Government amends the procurement law to avoid projects being stopped or delayed by administrative reviews.

(iii)	The committee observed that the loans have been presented to Parliament for approval without completing the necessary preparatory activities such as land acquisition and procurement, which lead to poor performance on approved loans. 

	The committee recommends that Government should improve the performance of loans by carrying out all the preparatory activities such as land acquisition and procurement of the contractors in advance of the loans becoming effective.

(iv) 	The committee noted that there is a problem of lack of capacity at the Chief Government Valuer’s office with only a few staff required to review and approve valuation reports for a multitude of projects in UNRA and other ministries and agencies. This has led to the inefficiency in land acquisition and delayed project implementation. 

	The committee recommends that the Government enhances the capacity of the Chief Government Valuer’s office with adequate human resource to ably handle the workload assigned to the office. 

(v) 	The committee also noted that road construction often entails clearing and grading during which trees by the side of the road are often cut down, which may exacerbate the current climate change being experienced. 

	The committee recommends that all road construction projects should include tree planting along the edges of the road reserves as a mandatory requirement. 

(vi) 	The committee also noted that the project road includes social amenities such as boreholes. 

	The committee recommends that the boreholes provided for under the project should not be substandard and consideration be made for powered boreholes instead of manual ones. 

(vii) The committee noted the very low provision for training and capacity building under the loan for this project. 

	The committee commends UNRA on this and recommends all Government institutions to minimise the component for training and capacity building under loans and formulate measures of holding onto staff that have already been trained by Government. 

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, the committee has noted Government’s continued development of Uganda’s infrastructure with more focus on the roads infrastructure. The status of Uganda’s road infrastructure still needs improvement to meet the aspirations of a middle-income status by 2020.

Government has undertaken reforms in the road subsector, which are expected to lead to improvement in the state of national roads and better utilisation of resources allocated to the sector. The construction of the Rwenkunye-Apac-Lira-Acholibur Road is one of the strategic foci of the national transport development strategy meant to enhance socioeconomic development and poverty alleviation. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the request by Government to borrow US$ 210 million from the Islamic Development Bank to finance the upgrading of the Rwenkunye-Apac-Lira-Acholibur project be approved. Madam Speaker, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of your committee. I just have two areas I would like information on. I would like to know whether UNRA would again surrender their obligation to pay the project affected persons to the contractor as they have done in other projects. I would like to know if that is still the position. 

Secondly, one of the reasons for the delays in doing this road is that the Government does not have its own funds. Puranga-Acholibur is fully funded by the Government; isn’t it? Have you budgeted for it? When will it be available? We were told that Rwenkunye-Apac and Apac-Puranga are funded under the loan and the final part of 60 kilometres of Puranga-Acholibur will be funded by the Central Government. Therefore, I would like to know whether you have provided for that money so that it does not hamper our work.

The last issue is on public facilities. I am glad you have talked about lay-bys at the bus stops. However, our instructions, as the House, have been that you create sanitation facilities on the roads. You know they can put chairs at the bus stops and they do not put the other facilities. I would like clarification on that one.

Certificate of compliance on gender and equity was left out and nothing has been said about it. It is now a requirement that when you report here, you give us an evaluation of the level of compliance to gender and equity and also human rights. I am reminding all the committees to address those evaluations in their reports because it is a requirement of the House.

Honourable members, the report has been signed by more than the necessary one-third of committee members. We can debate. 

6.07
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to extend my appreciation to the chairperson and members of the committee for processing this request before us.  I support the motion for adoption of this report because this road has been demanded by the people, especially the people from Lango sub-region, for a long time. A number of times the President visited and it was high on the agenda of the request that was put before him.

However, I want to inquire whether it would be possible that when we request for loans, we also try to look at the periods which we are going to pay back the loans and try to make the roads as strong as the periods. If we borrow a loan and pay it back for 20 years and yet the road is going to last for only five years and we will need another loan to maintain the same road, then that becomes a disservice. Therefore, the design of the roads should be as strong as the period we are going to borrow and service the loan.

Secondly, I want to support what the Speaker has raised. We have looked through the proposals for the budget and the contribution by Government is only the Shs 17 billion that is meant for land acquisition. It leaves us with that gap on how we are going to find the money to complete the road from Puranga to Acholibur as it has been mentioned.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I have seen from this report that there is a contradiction between five and three years, if you read through. Also, the reason they are beginning the project in 2018 yet we are only in May this year leaves me with a lot to question. I would kindly request that as soon as this money is available, the construction begins, to avoid incurring unnecessary costs on this loan. Thank you.

6.09
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for coming up with this report. 

This road has been one of the presidential pledges the people of Lango, Acholi and Masindi have waited for, for a very long time, especially during the campaign period. Therefore, it is really with happiness today that I see it come before Parliament. 

I support the committee and the report 100 per cent. I would like to say this report is one of the very gender sensitive reports. I do not know whether they have got the certificate of gender implication but I would like to say that from reading the report, I can see that this project will construct boreholes, which is gender sensitive, and also schools and health centres. However, Madam Speaker, the issue of public toilets is one which is very gender sensitive and I would like the chairperson to let us know whether this is also inclusive. 

In addition to that, there is the issue of the construction period. I happen to be born along this road; I was born in Lira District. The feasibility study has been going on for a very long time. Many times, people are told “very soon we are beginning”. I am wondering why the construction period is five years. Therefore, I would like to support the proposal that we reduce the construction period because a number of works have been going on for a very long time.

Finally, this will enable us to address the issue of inequality or fairness, because the time people have been using to leave Masindi Port and go up to Lira has been very long. The construction of this road will address the issue of equal access to social and economic development amongst the business communities and locals. The issue of roads is key to development and particularly to education, health and business.

Madam Speaker, as I sit down, I would like to thank the Government for finally remembering this road and I believe our people are very –(Member timed out.)

6.13
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I joined this Parliament in the Eighth Parliament in 2006 in his State of the Nation Address, the President mentioned this road in his communication. I, therefore, thought that before the end of the Eighth Parliament, this road would be one of my shortest routes.

Today, I am the happiest Member of Parliament to hear that we have allocated some money to build this road. Therefore, thank you very much for finding money, hon. Bahati. It is not fair but I am thanking you. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the concern you raised is very important and that is the only reason I was trying to get up to speak about the road. Usually, Government finds it difficult to find money for its part. Now we are borrowing only for the part ending in Puranga. We now have to start fighting with Ministry of Finance to make sure money is availed; although I have not yet heard from the minister whether the part of Government that will finance the Puranga-Acholibur Road will be there.

Madam Speaker, somewhere in the report, under point No.7, the chairperson indicated that they intend to make the road five to six metres wide. I do not know what that means. Are you going to do some parts five metres and some six metres? For engineering purposes, you need to do a standard tarmac road as required, not in between a certain distance. That is the clarification I wanted.

Finally, Madam Speaker, you made it very clear on issues of-(Member timed out.)

6.15
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a project that all have welcomed not only because it will link the west and central with the north, but also because it is long overdue. Therefore, it is a project that I would expect to receive no opposition from both sides of the House.

However, Madam Speaker, I would like to reinforce your concern. When you look at the reports of the committee and the report from the Ministry of Finance, you realise that our debt ratio has gone very high. This is the main contributor to our debts. This is because loan requests are brought to the House without proper analysis and no proper feasibility study is done to enable Parliament take a decision from an informed position.

Therefore, I fear, Madam Speaker, just as you have expressed, knowing that some parts will be funded by this open window and actually, the two open windows are very expensive. You know that it is paid according to the London offered rate ratio and I do not know whether we will be able to afford it. The two windows are commercial rates and are very expensive. Therefore, can we know how much the country is going to pay? There is no indication anywhere on how much we are going to pay. 

Secondly, we would like to know whether there is approved commitment from Parliament or the Executive concerning compensation, because compensation is one of the factors that normally delays road construction. 

For those who were not here in the Ninth Parliament, I would like to draw your attention to two projects that were discussed here but eventually, we felt it was better for us to delay their approval and ask for additional facts. That helped us to unearth some of the issues, which were not brought to light by the committee. One of them was the borrowing from the PTA Bank to support the local currency depreciation pressure. Now, that was from the commercial market as a commercial loan and it has turned out to be so expensive –(Member timed out.) 

Madam Speaker, as a commissioner I am entitled to give information. (Laughter) Sometimes that loan has proved to be the main driver in pushing our debt ratio to 60 per cent. That is too high –(Interjection )- Yes! Of course, you know that our external debt now is over US$ 5 billion; you cannot deny that.

You also recall the loan for the Bukasa Project; we still had to delay the loan because there was no feasibility study. If you look at page 10, you will see that the figures or the statistics which are given are based on aide memoire. Aide memoire means that there is no strategic plan. Therefore, what we are saying is that this is a very good loan, but can we have all the facts and figures behind the loan so that we know the implications of this loan to the economy and the people of Uganda. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.20
MR PETER OCEN (Independent, Kole South County, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by supporting the motion and thanking the Government for giving this opportunity for the road running from Rwenkunye, Apac, Lira and Acholibur. 

Madam Speaker, my concern is about the ferry. Recently, when we celebrated Tarehe Sita in Apac, on our way back people used a ferry, which delayed many of the honourable members up to beyond midnight. Therefore, I would like to know whether this project will construct a bridge or the very ferry will remain as a means of transport.

Concerning the delays of the projects which have taken place in Uganda many times, my humble request is that let us mobilise, especially the Members of Parliament who come from there, so that the compensation can be done as quickly as possible so that the project can start. Thank you.

6.21
MR TWINAMASIKO ONESIMUS (Independent, Bugangaizi East County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion. However, some few months back you recall that Uganda was at the top among African countries with low absorption of loans. 

Some time back, Madam Speaker, you ruled that Government should submit the accountability on all the loans this House has passed. I do not know whether the Government has responded to that. It has been the norm of our country to fail to absorb the money they request for. I do not understand how the Government can assure this House that this time round, they are ready to absorb this amount of money in case the loan is granted. We are borrowing much money, but the output is little. Therefore, Madam Speaker, at the end I would –(Member timed out.)

6.23
MR JACK ODUR (NRM, Kibanda South County, Kiryandongo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the voices of others in supporting the motion for a loan request to do the Rwenkunye-Apac-Lira-Acholibur Road that had taken a long time without being passed. 

The information I would like to get from the chair and the Minister of Finance is what design we have for the River Nile that crosses through Masindi Port. Are we having the bridge or we will still have the ferry, which is problematic.

Masindi Port is the inland port we used to have in the 1960s and 1970s. I would like to know whether it will be upgraded or remain with this status as an inland port because that is the only inland port that we have in Uganda. I wonder whether the designs cater for that port to remain with its original status.

Secondly, I would like to also talk about the compensation. I sit on the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) and most of the challenges that we have had are about the issue of money for compensating our Ugandans being given to the contractors. I hope this House is told how the modalities will be with this project. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.25
LT COL FLAVIA BYEKWASO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the work done. 

My comment is on the first observation concerning the time for completion, which they said will be five years. If you recall the first presentations to us on these roads, the periods quoted was three years and most of the kilometres were around 52, 60 and 70, but all rotating around three years. However, here comes a road stretch of 252 kilometres being given only five years. When you calculate, you realise that for every one year, they will be doing 50 kilometres. So, I am wondering what magic will be used this time to ensure this work is accomplished in five years. I wonder whether they are not lying to us or whether they did enough studies to assure us that this is the correct period of time that will be used in the construction of this road.

My other observation is in regard to recommendation No.3, which urges Government to improve loans performance by carrying out all preparatory activities. This is because they realise that we have been underperforming because of failure to carryout preliminary activities. We have always urged Government to do the preliminaries. However, I request that we practically say that for us to approve, – we have no objection to approval - we should tag some evidence of having done the preliminary activities so that we are sure that the moment this loan is approved and passed, it will be immediately used. I beg to submit.

6.27
MS EVERLYN CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the report that he has presented to the House concerning the request for the loan. 

My enquiry is: when is he reading a similar report for the Suam-Kapchorwa Road, as it was promised that there is already a loan coming from African Development Bank? Thank you.

6.28
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari North County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Government has been procuring loans with parliamentary approval. However, from the budget process we are in, we have realised many projects have stalled because the money Government borrows has not all been released due to failure by the same Government to secure counter funding. 

I would like to know whether the US$ 17 million billion for these loans –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I chose hon. Oketayot to speak; I do not understand how you came in. (Laughter)

6.29
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report presented. 

Madam Speaker, we have been passing loan requests in this House. Therefore, if Government must really acquire a loan for any project, then it must be for this very project we are referring to. As my colleagues have said, we have been raising concerns about the state of this road over the last many years. It is high time Government started doing something about this road. This is one of the very few colonial roads that have not yet been upgraded for a long time. We have roads that were constructed some few years ago but have been upgraded. So, we need to see this process kick off. 

However, there may be concerns, like what my colleagues have already raised, about the aspect of the social amenities. I do not know where we can get the specifications for some of these social amenities like the boreholes, schools and health centres. I have seen some of the roads that are now under construction and we do not really see this coming out clearly. Therefore, we need to be guided on where we can get the specifications for these social amenities and where they are located, so that it is easy for us to monitor that what is being done is according to the specifications. 

Madam Speaker, even if we have to put down everything that is required, it is my prayer that the House - (Member timed out.)

6.31
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to express my pleasure at the presentation of this loan request. As you may realise, it is long overdue and it shows the seriousness of Government, for which I am pleased. 

However, my issue is on the Chief Government Valuer’s office. Time and again, we have talked about beefing up the Chief Government Valuer’s office because there are a number of complaints centred on compensation, which is preliminary because the locals cannot give up their land before they are compensated. That means a lot to them. Why has the beefing up of staff in the Chief Government Valuer’s office delayed? I would like, as a matter of priority, that it is handled because it is also responsible for stalling a number of court cases regarding valuation and for causing a loss to Government. 

Secondly, there is the issue of inspection of the work to achieve standardisation. I have seen contracts being split and given to two contractors on a road and you find that the standards are very different. I would like that the inspection that is done is up to standard, so that we have standardisation of the roads and have them in a worthy condition. 

In Gomba, on one of the roads that is under construction, the gradient is very steep as you slope down and if you do not know about it, you will almost dive into a mound of soil. I would also like that they put notices there for the people, probably in vernacular. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.33
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari North County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When you consider the total, which is about Shs 1.1 trillion, the cost per kilometre is about Shs 5.2 billion. Uganda is notorious for our projects being costly in the East African region. When you scrutinise the loan, you will realise that contingency alone is Shs 145 billion. We have been accruing loans and yet Government has never come back to Parliament to tell us the balance of whatever loan we have accrued for particular projects. Contingency is something unforeseen that we are just estimating; does it mean that nothing remains from all these loans that we have approved? 

Secondly, UNRA is one of the best paid organisations. They have engineers but in this loan request, there is a provision of Shs 2.7 billion for project management units; there is also another Shs 35.4 billion for consultancy and for supervision. What is UNRA going to do? Therefore, before I support this loan request, I think it will be fair for the Government to explain to this Parliament and the nation why the cost per kilometre is Shs 5.2 billion. Why should we have a consultancy when we have UNRA? Why should we also have project management units when we have UNRA? 

Madam Speaker, there is an item on workshops; when they put it in dollars, it looks so small but I have calculated it in Ugandan shillings. Before they begin construction of that road, there is going to be a workshop of Shs 543 million. They should explain this because I wonder who is going to attend this workshop. Is it the consultants? We are going to get the contractor; the people at UNRA are paid; so, who is going to utilise the Shs 543 million at a workshop? I think it is fair to have this explanation.

6.36
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and I would also like to thank the minister for bringing this loan request. This part of the world also deserves a tarmac road. They have really been in need of that all these years, so we feel happy when money is found to tarmac these roads.

Madam Speaker, the committee chair talked about the procurement process, which is very long, complicated and wastes a lot of time. I would like to know when they will bring the PPDA Act so that we can shorten the process of procuring contractors. It is very important because it will delay us. 

Madam Speaker, you talked about the gender and equity certificate; according to the report, this road is only six or five metres wide. What miracles will you perform to ensure that persons with disability have access to that road? In developed countries, they have pathways for cyclists and even a road for pedestrians. However, here along our highways, we really suffer and many accidents happen because of these narrow roads. Why don’t we adjust the road to at least eight metres to provide for safety of pedestrians, cyclists and the rest? We need this because we, persons with disabilities, are suffering.  

We have a very good road in Koboko but accidents are rampant because of lack of access roads for pedestrians. Therefore, I urge that we widen them. We –(Member timed out.)

6.38
MR DANIEL MUHEIRWE (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): I thank the committee for coming up with this report on the loan request and I fully support the motion. 

Madam Speaker, I have some concerns, basing on other loans and roads that have been constructed. We have changes in design that affect compensation. Sometimes a contractor changes designs and they tell you that it is not them to compensate. At the end of the day, our Ugandans suffer when it comes to claiming their compensation. I do not know whether they have considered that. 

The contractor is supposed to mobilise materials. However, at times we are left anticipating who should compensate, especially where there is a quarry that is grinding stones, and UNRA says that it will compensate only for the roadway and the contractor will tell you that compensation is purely UNRA’s work. So, such concerns should be addressed so that we know who should compensate the people. 

I am happy that they have talked of boreholes where the roads are going to pass. In some parts of this country, we rely on wetlands and swamps and sometimes there are ongoing road works in these places. You will find that the people living around the project areas have nowhere to get water because they are working on those swamps. We should have that consideration for people on whatever road works we shall have. 

We also talked of contingencies but I have never heard of any money that is unspent in terms of contingencies and has come back to the –(Member timed out.) 

6.41
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Madam Speaker, I rise to join my colleagues to support the work of the committee. This road should be supported because it is strategic and politically and economically viable. We, therefore, need to support it.

However, on page 10, I see some money earmarked for contingencies - it is about Shs 40 million or 12 per cent. This, to me, is a lot of money. 

I also recall, Madam Speaker, that you guided in this House that for any road to be constructed there should be rest houses to cater for the health of the people and trees should be planted along the roads, especially in the road reserves. As you are aware, climate change is really disorganising our production and our weather. I am very sure that if we had trees planted on such a road, the 250 kilometres would definitely be a big intervention in the mitigation of the climate change. I pray that for all roads being constructed or even those that have been constructed, we should adopt the policy of planting trees in the road reserves and chase away the encroachers on the road reserves. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, for every fund and construction, there is a provision for sensitisation on HIV/AIDS and sometimes it is a lot of money, which is sometimes not well utilised. This morning, we had the Uganda AIDS Commission and they were talking of lack of funds to sensitise the population, to advocate and to make policies. If this fund could be managed by the Uganda AIDS Commission – (Member timed out.)  

6.48
MR PAUL AMORU (NRM, Dokolo County North, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and Government for finally including this stretch of the road that connects several districts in the plan.

I have three issues I would like to raise quickly. The first one is the issue of delays. We have loans that we keep and yet interest is accumulating. We want assurance that on this project and the other projects going forward, Government does due diligence, feasibility studies, compensation and puts the plan in place, so that when the loan is signed for, the implementation can immediately start. This is what we want, other than getting the money and doing these things which sometimes drag the project.

Secondly, on the issue of social amenities, on top of what probably has been planned, I think we could adopt a policy that as part of the contract, the contractor is also given responsibility under their corporate social responsibility - not left at their will – to include such things like building a school along that road or boreholes. It becomes part of that contract in a way that could tie the contractor to what may be useful along that road.

Thirdly, on the issue of the port, one honourable member actually gave the experience of the day we were in Apac for Tarehe Sita. We stayed at the port from 4.00 p.m. up to 2.00 a.m. and at some stage, the workers disappeared because they were tired and were asking –(Member timed out.)

6.45
MR TERRENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report. I do support the motion to borrow for this very good road.  

The committee recommended that Government should be able to improve on the performance of loans. This is an issue that has recurred several times. This is not the first time our Government has been advised about it. My proposal is that this responsible committee should take interest and find out the factors that have caused these loans to perform poorly. They should be brought out so that we advise them accordingly.

It is very important that we know the areas where these loans perform poorly. This is a very key point for the committee to take note of. When we have identified these critical causes, we can then be able to make a change. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.47
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I fully support the motion. 

Madam Speaker, every Government comes in place with its historical track of performance. The Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) came in place and whenever I cross Bugiri, I see a UPC hospital. Whenever I go to Busolwe, I also see a UPC hospital. The NRM has also come in place with roads. However, since I came here, borrowing has gone beyond my understanding. I think in addition to the roads, we have come in place with a history of borrowing, as the NRM. 

I believe that in Africa, as one of the colleagues said, we must be ranked among the highest borrowers. This perturbs us but being a cadre of the party, whenever I am asked what we have done, I tell them that we are borrowing left and right. We keep on saying that we are doing well but it is not true. 

Madam Speaker, I suggest that as we approve this loan request, let Government make sure that implementation of these loans is done on time. Look at the Namayingo-Busia-Musita Road; since the loan was approved, there is nothing to show. It is a mess and characterised by poor supervision. Imagine poor supervision in a Government which has four ministers in the area of works. Kenya has one secretary and the Standard Gauge Railway is already in place. They have one secretary for roads and the roads are being constructed in a better way than Uganda’s - four ways but here we still have one way. 

I believe there is a problem and I request Government to pull up its socks so that we do things right. We are talking about these things because we need our Government to perform better. When our Government performs well, it is the NRM that gets credit –(Member timed out.)

6.49
MR GORDON ARINDA (NRM, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also thank the committee for the good report. I support the motion to borrow because I feel that it is very important.

I last used this road in 1997 when I was transacting business in Masindi Port via Akokoro, Apac and Lira. I actually did not know that this road was still in the same condition. I am happy that it is going to be worked on. I remember one time I had a tyre puncture on that road and I almost slept on the way. I was helped by the wife of hon. Sam Engola; that was around 1997. She really helped me a lot because I had a lot of luggage in my vehicle.  

I really do support the proposal that it is constructed. One of the reasons is that there is a lot of business going on in that area. The road will support agricultural production as there are many farmers in that area. That means that there will be a lot of trade. This road connects to Sudan as well. Therefore, it will boost regional trade, which will facilitate business in this area. Therefore, I do support this. 

This road also passes near the home of our elder statesman and I think it would also be important that we remember him. Those of you who are near that road, you know him. I support the motion that we approve this loan request.

6.51
MR RAPHEAL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and I call on all colleagues to support it. I think this loan is good for that part of the country.

I only have one problem, which I hope the chairperson of the committee and the Minister of Finance can help answer. What figures are you giving us with respect to the debt stock of this country? Honourable chairperson, in your report, you said that the total debt stock is US$ 8.66 billion and a nominal ratio of 34.9 per cent of our GDP and net present value of 27 per cent of our GDP. In addition, for you this is below the 50 per cent threshold for the public debt management ratio.

Colleagues, we have iPads and you could google the Bank of Uganda report on the state of the economy, June 2016. The report says that the total public debt stock at that time as at 1 April stood at Shs 46.1 trillion, which is about US$ 12 billion, approximately 52 per cent of our GDP. This is way beyond the 50 per cent threshold allowed in our public debt management framework and the Bank of Uganda cautions that we could recede into a debt trap –(Interjection)– It is uploaded on the iPads; one can just look at it. It is the Bank of Uganda report of June 2016. It is entitled, “The State of the Economy Report.”

Madam Speaker, my worry is not just about this loan but as Parliament, are we convinced that we are driving this nation in the right direction in terms of debt procurement –(Member timed out.)

6.53
MR VINCENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I commend the committee for this work and I support the loan request towards constructing this road. 

Madam Speaker, I am a little concerned about some roads, which have been begging and asking Government to work on for so many financial years, some of which are very small. As I speak, during this rainy season, these roads are impassable, particularly Nalugugu-Namagumba Road in Sironko, which we have spoken about so many times, and which is barely 41 kilometres. I think we would only need about US$ 10 million to have that road done. However, since 1996, there have been several pledges but this road has not been done. 

Therefore, my proposal, Madam Speaker, is that the Ministry of Works does us good and presents some of the pending projects that they have been talking about, which are in different stages, for example, those that have been planned and designed. I would then know when mine of Sironko is coming. Shall I sit here to support my friends all the time and never have mine? 

Madam Speaker, as I support this project, I would like to know when we shall have a programme of action for some of these roads. Thank you.

6.56
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I totally support this loan request and I would like to congratulate Members of Parliament who come from that side where this road is going to pass.

Madam Speaker, in simple terms, they normally say that all animals are equal but there are those that are more equal than others. What I would like to know from the honourable Minister of Finance and the chairperson of the committee is the criterion, factors and measurements they use in order to consider the acquisition of a loan for a road and even to secure a financial year in which it is considered. 

We have a road that stretches from Isingiro, Ntantamukyi to Rakai, which is 109 kilometres. The President has talked about it for some good decades. This road is very productive because it connects Tanzania, Rwanda and Uganda. We have trailers that come from Tanzania to Isingiro and those from South Sudan that come to pick matooke and they get stuck there. Do you know the consequences? Not all our farmers can get even Shs 5,000 from their matooke and yet they invest a lot for it to grow. Really, why shouldn’t we have that road done? 

Those are our prayers as people who come from there. The road has a lot of traffic jam; we do not know what we can do. Even if you maintain it so many times in a year, that road will never be in good condition. Honourable minister, with due respect, we want you to help us so that we are also considered. Thank you.

6.58
MR GEORGE NSAMBA KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I thank the committee for this report and I would like to support this motion seeking the approval of Parliament. It is very necessary.

This road comes right after Apac District, which is my neighbour in the north, neighbouring Mbale on the other side. Therefore, I support this loan request. I also request the Minister of Finance, who is in front of me here, to look around for funds like he has done for this road so that we connect Bbaale-Galilaya Road. That road would definitely connect to this new road, which we are approving money for.

That road has been promised for a long time. It has been a presidential pledge since 1993 and each time elections come, this road is on board. I would, therefore, like to request the Minister of Finance to look for the money. It is only US$ 70 million, I am told.

I would like to thank the committee for recommending powered boreholes when they are constructing these roads. One Member proposed that trees should be planted along these roads and boreholes to help - (Member timed out.) 

7.00
MS JENIPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work they have done and the time they put in to come up with this report. 

We are lucky to see that the international community still has confidence in us, especially since we can still borrow. We are very lucky and for this matter, I would like to inform the honourable minister that whenever we borrow, we should be ready to start the projects. Many times we receive the money and do not start the projects on time and yet the money is earning interest. My prayer is that we put this into consideration so that we do not lose this money.

Madam Speaker, on the question of compensation, in this report we are going to pay out Shs 17 trillion and most of these projects are delayed or even fail because of compensations. It is very unfortunate that we are budgeting to borrow money for compensation. This might delay the project and we might lose more money in the long run. 

There are some projects that started, for example Kyenjojo-Kagadi-Kabwoya under the World Bank, but at some point the World Bank withdrew temporarily. Some people had given in their land and they have not been compensated. This land was valued about one year ago; now there is inflation and I wonder whether they are going to add that to the value of the land when they pay them. It is a big question in our constituencies –(Member timed out.)

7.03
MR MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani County East, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee members. 

Members have been talking about the five-year period; either the Members of the committee erred or there could have been a typing error. If you look at point No.10 under implementation, the project will be implemented over a period of three years beginning 2018. The committee went ahead to make observations and recommendations and one of them was that the committee observed the long construction period of five years. These numbers are not corresponding. They have to go back and check whether this is a typing error or a mistake on the part of the committee. 

Madam Speaker, my major concern here is the quality, management and control of our work. I am very sorry to say this but one time, when we were interacting with some of the project engineers, they boldly told me, “Honourable, if you want us to do the roads the way you are telling us to, where do you want us to go to thereafter?” I got disturbed.

We should put in place some tough measures including withdrawal of certificates. I will give the example of the road between Kamdini and Karuma; even before the road was finished, you could see it with patches. The money being used is borrowed and it is supposed to be paid back –(Member timed out.)

7.05
MR NOAH ASHRAF OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. I also thank the committee for coming up with very good recommendations on this particular loan request. My concern is: who is going to follow-up the implementation of the resolutions of the committee? 

Madam Speaker, on several occasions, Members are concerned when Government is borrowing money. However, when money is borrowed for developing infrastructure, I think that is the way to go. Once we have good roads, our economy will improve.

Looking at this particular road, the poverty level along this road is very appalling. If this road is constructed, the flow of traffic will improve, more people will use the road and communities there will open up small businesses.

Madam Speaker, the report says that UNRA is going to be responsible for this road but look at our road designs; the workmanship on these roads is very poor. Our roads cannot last for 20 years; they only last below 10 years. In my view, let us have a mechanism in place where we can monitor UNRA because they are also involved in funny things. Once people are involved in bribes, they are forced to construct poor roads for this nation. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or the committee of Parliament should closely follow up the work on those roads. Madam Speaker, right now, there is a road from Koboko, Yumbe going to –(Member timed out.)

7.07
MS ROSETTE KAJUNGU (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My comment is on the width of the road, which the chairperson has said is between five to six metres. I am horrified because in this country, when we are designing roads, we never take into consideration the rights of pedestrians. Given the recklessness on our roads, it is no surprise that we have high mortality rates.

I would like to request and submit that starting with this road - I have been to this area and it really deserves it - can we plan for pedestrian walkways and also include them in the plans for the other roads in the country. They should be a must have. It is very painful when you go to Mulago and find a big number of causalities in the wards.

Secondly, you said that the grace period is four years and the period for construction is five years, meaning we are going to start paying the loan before the completion of the road. Can the people who negotiated this reconsider, so that we have an extra two years’ grace period so that by the time we start repaying the loan, we would have started earning and benefitting from this road. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I would like to amend what hon. Rosette Kajungu has proposed to include the cyclists because they are also endangered. 

7.10
MS BETTY AWOR (NRM, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for their report and also the Government of Uganda. We have been waiting for this project. The tarmacking of this road in the sub region had turned political. I have no doubt in my mind that when this road is tarmacked, traffic will increase and trade, both locally and regionally, will also increase. Accessibility to the other districts, including South Sudan, will also be very possible.

Madam Speaker, I have one prayer because this is a long-awaited project, and I am glad that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here: Can this project start sooner rather than later? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: As the Member for Ruhaama comes up, I want to say that when I first went to that road, I had gone to visit hon. Oketayot. As soon as I got out of the car, she said this road was supposed to be done in Obote’s time. Therefore, I am also relieved. (Laughter)

7.13
MR WILLIAM BEIJUKYE (NRM, Ruhaama County, Ntungamo): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion 100 per cent. However, my concern is that in most cases, when they are constructing a road, they tend to use murram and quarry sites deep in the villages. By doing so, because they have heavy trucks they end up damaging roads that side. They also end up creating dust whenever they are carrying murram. At the end of the construction, they leave such roads in a worse state than before. 

I would, therefore, want those who negotiate with the contractors to include a clause saying that in case of damage of another road, it should be made good. Where they get stones from, they create some mosquito breeding sites and at the end of the day, you find that people who are not near the roads they have constructed are suffering because of the construction of the road. Thank you.

7.13
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is about the stopovers, because the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is very concerned about them. During this period when we are trying to develop our tourism sector so that we gain more foreign exchange, the tourism ministry is concerned about having modern road stopovers. However, these stopovers will need a lot of land. 

Therefore, at this stage, I propose that we get pieces of land on those roads so that we can construct stopovers with modern structures. We should also do them like we do for industries. In industrial parks, we reserve land for industries and in this case, I propose that we get some land for the parks.

Secondly, we have the problem of valuation offices. The Chief Government Valuer has no capacity; in that case, they contract other companies. In the case of Ntungamo-Mirama Hill Road, they contracted a certain company and at the end of the day, that company did not produce good work. They came again and had to do the assessment themselves. People were not happy with the situation. At a certain point, they would cross out the reflected money and put there their own figures. This means they spent the money but did not get the service from the company.

Lastly, the issue of –(Member timed out.)

7.15
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I have two or three points to make. First, there is no reason we should oppose this project because it is a very important project. 

Secondly, I am concerned about the contingency of about US$ 40 million. I do not know what it entails. This US$ 40 million is quite a reasonable amount of money and in my view, if you used it to work on various bridges elsewhere such as Agule-Aleles-Ngora Bridge, you would have solved that problem permanently. Remember this Parliament was one time deceived that this bridge had been worked on, yet there was nothing on the bridge.

The other thing is: I am wondering whether this time the Uganda National Roads Authority has the capacity to handle this major road. I normally follow some of these issues. When you attend COSASE, you can understand that there is a lot of inadequacy in UNRA. I do not know whether this time UNRA has the ability to manage this project.

The last issue is that I hope there will be no corruption – tampering with this money, which is meant to create a change in that sub region, moreover from the west up to the north. Schools and health centres are going to be put there. I am told springs are also going to be put there, but the only thing which is not there is where to go for a short call. (Laughter)

7.17
MR NATHAN TWESIGYE (NRM, Kashari County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to my colleagues to support the project because it is economically viable. However, I have two issues to raise. The first issue is that the chairperson knows that the Bill about local content is coming; I wanted to hear something to do with local content.

Secondly, using the experience of COSASE, I have an issue with the design. If you look at the Kampala-Entebbe Express Highway, that road was overdesigned because they assumed that from Kampala up to Entebbe is a swamp. Therefore, in the design they considered what they call a capping layer, where they have to first dig the swamp, put some hard core and compact. That makes the whole project very expensive. 

Therefore, in terms of design, I do not know whether this road is overdesigned with those capping layers that make the whole project very expensive. Otherwise, the project is wonderful and I support it.

7.19
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I thank the committee. It is as if we were reading from the same page with hon. Abala. I wish to add that much as I support the acquisition of this loan, I also support the proper use of the loan. 

Secondly, if this loan was to construct another road in another region, which is not northern Uganda, I would have also lobbied that it goes to Kasese. However, the fact that the location is northern Uganda where the region has suffered a lot with the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) while the other regions were developing and getting some of these projects, I have no option but to support it.

However, I would also wish to remember that when northern Uganda was experiencing war, some roads in western Uganda were being constructed. One of them is the road between Fort Portal and Kasese. Just 10 years after it was handed over, if you passed through that road now, you would actually regret the expenditure on the road. I hope this is not going to happen to this road.

Madam Speaker, I would like to ask Members of Parliament who come from the area, and especially those who are engineers and those who will be concerned most - We should stop lamenting in Parliament here. We should follow up as the project is being implemented; we should play our role and supervise this road so that this money is not misappropriated. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.22
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am going to be very brief as usual. 

First of all, I would like to thank the committee for the report. Secondly, I would like to support the motion and thirdly, I would like to request that next time the committee is considering other regions, they should consider the hard-to-reach areas like Buhweju, which are not just hard to reach but have become very hard to stay in, so that they are connected to the other parts.

Madam Speaker, the other time, I told you that when you go to Bihanga, they will tell you “the road stops here; you cannot move ahead”. It is the only area in western Uganda where you cannot pass through. When you pass through Sheema District and reach Bihanga, they will tell you “go back to Bushenyi so that you can proceed to Bunyaruguru in Rubizi District”. Otherwise, I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I support the motion 

7.23
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the committee for this important work and secondly, I totally support the motion.

Madam Speaker, about one and half months ago, this country drowned in shock; about Shs 577 billion was lost to fake compensation and specific reference is given to the Entebbe Express Highway. Given what our constituents go through on daily basis, I think this House cannot afford to pass this loan request only for these people to wait again to hijack it in fake compensations. Therefore, I would like to propose that this time round, we get a clear assurance from the minister that no coin of this particular fund will go to fake compensations.

When I got concerned, I talked to the Minister of Ethics and Integrity, Fr Lokodo. He said, “Atkins, wait a minute, actually it is not Shs 577 billion to fake compensations; the figure is Shs 700 billion”. Madam Speaker, there is a catastrophic situation; we are getting used to –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 35 Members have contributed on this report. I think it is an appropriate time to end. Can I invite the minister to respond to some of the key areas. 

7.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to respond to three issues. 

The first one is on the issue of debt sustainability of our public debt. Madam Speaker, we committed ourselves to come in two weeks to make a statement on the situation of our loan portfolio. We will do that next week when we are allowed to do that. However, I would like to say that our current debt stock is $8.7 billion from the external sources and $3.2 billion from domestic sources. Therefore, we now stand at 38.6 per cent, which is far below the figure that hon. Magyezi was giving of 52 per cent. So, the figure he was quoting is not the figure that we have. 

We have the right figure and I do not think that we will ever reach 52 per cent. Even with our projections of the standard gauge railway and the rest, we hope to go by 2021, before we come down, to 40 per cent. I do not think we shall ever reach 52 per cent. We are very conscious. 

Madam Speaker, the only challenge we have on sustainability of debt is the increasing interest rate payment vis-à-vis the collection of domestic revenue because the interest on debt must be paid by our domestic revenue. Good enough, we are projecting an increase on domestic revenue, which will be used to cater for the interest payment. Therefore, the figures that hon. Magyezi raised were not accurate.

Madam Speaker, we have swamp roads. We will be discussing this loan in Cabinet next week. Hon. Evelyn Anite raised this and we hope to come to the House before the end of May. Hopefully, it will be approved in June by this House.

The other issue is on the contingency of 41 per cent. This is basically to –(Mr Nzoghu rose _) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nzoghu, please sit down; you have just come to the House. (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much. The other issue is on the contingency of 41 per cent. This is purposely for price and physical contingency. I can tell you that it is within the limit because anything can happen in the design or in the prices of cement or other things. However, if there is any balance on any loan that we borrow, we do not use it but it stays with the lender.

Madam Speaker, we will be strengthening the Office of Government Chief Valuer next financial year as the Committee on Physical Infrastructure will tell us. We have provided Shs 5 billion to strengthen the Office of the Chief Government Valuer. It is from the estimates of the Chief Government Valuer that we compensate. We would like to assure you that to the best of our ability, we will try as much as possible to compensate the people that are supposed to be compensated. Any fake person claiming for compensation, if got, will be handled by the law.

Madam Speaker, we do have counterpart funding to contract this road. You asked who will compensate. We have learnt the lesson and we shall never repeat the mistake that we made for one of the loans, when we allowed the Chinese company to compensate. We all know what happened. Therefore, we are not going to compensate using a contractor; we will do compensation ourselves.

Finally, I would like to thank Members for the overwhelming support they have given us in this debate. We would like to also assure you that we will continue to do our best to ensure that infrastructure development in this country remains a priority. Thank you very much. 

Madam Speaker, I think this is the time to do the needful.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House do approve the request by Government to borrow up to US$ 210 million from the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) to finance the upgrading of the Rwenkunye-Apac-Lira-Acholibur Road project (252.5km)

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for this afternoon’s work. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.30 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 17 May 2017 at 2.00.pm)
