Wednesday, 14 May 2014

Parliament met at 2.53 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. Yesterday I had indicated that I would appoint a select committee to handle the matter of the delayed salaries of civil servants. This is something we agreed upon on 30th April when you received the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the delayed salaries of civil servants. In accordance with rule 179 of the Rules of Procedure and after consulting with the whips, I wish to name the following Members:

1. 	Hon. Raphael Magyezi, Igara County West
2. 	Hon. Jack Sabiiti, Rukiga County
3. 	Hon. Santa Alum Ogwang, Oyam District
4. 	Hon. Cadet Benjamin, representing the Independents

I now need one member from the Democratic Party. The terms of reference of the select committee are: to review the recommendations contained in the report of the Committee of Public Service and Local Government with the view of proposing realistic and tangible recommendations. The committee should report back on Tuesday, 10 June 2014. That means you may have to forego your recess so that you can sort out the issues of salaries of Ugandan workers.

Secondly, honourable members, today I visited Roofings International Ltd in Namanve Industrial Park. I want to encourage the Ministry of Trade to give them the necessary support in the implementation of the common external tariff with which they have been struggling for the last four years. I also wish to encourage the Committee on East African Community Affairs to visit them, including that of finance, planning and economic development so that you can appreciate what they are doing. They are a major employer and also a key taxpayer in this country. 

They also want support from all of us and our friends in the region. They want us to inform our friends in the region that Uganda has a good facility for steel products and that they are capable of supplying the whole of the East African region and the Great Lakes region. So we want to ask Government to give them more support and visibility so that they can employ more people and, of course, pay more taxes.

Honourable members, between the 7th and 25th April, we sent hon. Sekitoleko Kafeero to attend a training course on science, technology and innovation for African researchers and policymakers in Chennai, India. He made history during that meeting; he was elected the first African chairperson of the Indo-Africa Science and Innovation Forum after contesting with and defeating a member from Mauritius. (Applause) A South African also defeated somebody from Botswana for the post of general secretary. So, Africa is making progress and we wish him well.

Having said that, in one of the reports of the Committee on Science and Technology, they did recommend that we should have a ministry of science. There are so many things happening but they have no home. Sometimes reports have been brought here and we do not know who should follow them up. I know that in the first session, the President had received that recommendation and said that he was considering the proposal. I want to invite the Government Chief Whip to follow this up and ensure that we get a ministry of science. These people are just wondering around because they do not know where they belong; they are not under education, finance or anywhere. I appeal for that support so that we can promote science and develop our country. Thank you very much.

2.58
MR MOHAMMED MUWANGA-KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the break-ins at offices belonging to several civil society organisations in this country, especially those that are democracy-seeking. 

A number of civil society organisations have had their offices broken into; the latest one is HURINET but we also have Foundation for Human Rights Initiative, an NGO in Gulu – they are eight in number but I will not mention all of them in order to save time. When they break into the offices, they do not steal money or any other equipment –(Interjection)– Should I name them? Okay, I will do that. The following offices have all been broken into:
a) 	Action Aid, Uganda.
b) 	Anti-corruption Coalition, Uganda.
c) 	Foundation for Human Rights Initiative.
d) 	East and Horn of Africa Human Rights Defenders on HIV/AIDS.
e) 	Lira NGO Forum.
f) 	Uganda Human Rights Network.

The robbers aim specifically for gadgets that carry information; they take away servers, cameras and laptops. Therefore, in the interest of defending human rights, – and these NGOs have a right to participate freely in affairs concerning the governance of this country - they want to know the following:

i) 	Why are these attacks targeting civil society organisations dealing with human rights and governance issues?
ii) 	Why do the break-ins target information-holding gadgets?
iii) 	Why is there delayed and untimely investigation from the Police on the organisation of the attacks so far?
iv) 	Why are there pre-emptive utterances by the Police before conclusion of investigations? This is because the Police spokesperson said that the staff members of these NGOs are the ones who break into their own offices. 

In light of that, the civil society organisations are becoming scared because this has been happening since they started the Black Monday campaign to stand against human rights abuses and bad governance. So they want critical answers from this Government as follows:

1. 	The Minister of Internal Affairs presents a detailed status report on the progress of investigation into the various break-ins into the civil society organisations’ offices.

2. 	Uganda Police investigates all cases of past civil society organisations’ office break-ins and ensures that those responsible are brought to justice.

3. 	Uganda Police must fulfil their mandate under Article 212 of the 1995 Constitution, which makes it mandatory for them to ensure public safety, security and protection of life and property, keeping law and order, and preventing crime.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I hope that the Government has noted.

3.02
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance. 

We have been battling with the issue of nodding syndrome and I was very happy to learn from the media that the government has taken another step in trying to get to the root cause of the problem. As you are aware, the nodding syndrome has spread to most parts of Northern Uganda though it started from Kitgum District in Tumango Sub-county. The children who were taken abroad for further investigation were drawn from Palabek-Gem Sub-county in Kibo Parish in Abam village, Lamwo District from the family of Mr Okeng Damasiko. Ten people were drawn from his family and they included his children and grandchildren, as was reported in the media.

Madam Speaker, we welcome this move by Government in trying to get to the root cause of this problem. However, as Parliament we have been at the forefront of getting to know more information concerning this syndrome, which has left us with an unsolved puzzle because we do not know the cause of this syndrome. We would have loved to get a statement from the Minister of Health updating us on how these family members have been taken and the details of their condition - where they are going to be staying in the US, how long they will be there and who will be in charge of their welfare. We would love to know the conditions of both those who were taken and those left behind. We would not want a situation where our fellow Ugandans are taken abroad and yet we do not have information about their whereabouts. We need to be furnished with details. 

Also, we would like this statement from the Minister to highlight the fate of the children – the ones I term “grandchildren”. Madam Speaker, you may not be aware, but some of these girls suffering from nodding syndrome have been raped. In my district, we have 14 babies born out of rape. We do not know their status as far as the nodding syndrome is concerned. We would also want this to come out clearly in the statement from the Minister of Health so that we can properly follow what is going on as far as Government’s efforts to find out the cause of the nodding syndrome are concerned. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I had asked you not to send the Minister on a fishing expedition; I wanted to know the names of the people and their villages. How can the Minister go to Entebbe Airport and ask, “You people, did some Acholi go through this airport”? I do not think you are being fair.

3.05
MRS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Madam Speaker, I wish to raise an issue of national importance. 

Two weeks ago in my district, we had an inter-clan conflict and we lost two people, 151 houses were torched and 480 people fled because their houses were burnt. Now we are hosting those people at the sub-county headquarters. We also lost property worth millions of shillings. The people are now completely hopeless.

I wish to bring this issue to the attention of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development because the Minister must take interest in the issues to deal with tribe or clan. The Minister must take interest to see that we perhaps form a reconciliation committee to handle that issue; otherwise it has caused a very big problem in my district. Most of my people have migrated to Sudan because of the conflict and the fear.

Secondly, I want to request the Ministry of Internal Affairs to provide security for the people. This is because currently, the youth of the two rival clans do not even sleep in their homes; at night each of them carries a bow and an arrow, saying they are guarding their own people. So it is such a big problem and we need the ministry to perhaps provide a police station and security for the two clans. Otherwise, they will continue to kill themselves and even destroy more property.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I request the Ministry for Disaster Preparedness to provide emergency assistance to the people who are now homeless and do not have anything. They could provide them with hoes, food, and even tents which they can put on top of the walls that were burnt to enable them begin a new life. The situation is so bad that as a district, whatever we have tried has failed. That is the reason I decided to raise it here so that it becomes an issue of national importance. Thank you.

3.09
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a point of national importance. 

I would like to remind Members that a board is very important and yet to-date the National Forestry Authority has no board. A board is supposed to direct an organisation and it is supposed to be accountable for its operations. I would like to know why there has been no board in place since October last year. In the absence of the board as it is, who is taking decisions and who is providing directions for the operations of the National Forestry Authority?

THE SPEAKER: I hope the Minister of Environment will be required to come here and explain to us why there is no board in place.

Honourable members, in the public gallery we have the LCIII chairperson of Kihihi Sub-county together with some tobacco growers. All those are tobacco growers from Kanungu, represented by hon. Amama Mbabazi and hon. Elizabeth Karungi. You are welcome. (Applause) I believe they have come to follow up on the Tobacco Control Bill.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We raised the issue of the nodding syndrome and we are kindly requesting that the minister brings the statement to update us. Even the victims at the grassroots will understand that we are concerned about their plight if we do this.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether it is the Minister of Foreign Affairs or the Minister of Internal Affairs, but hon. Anywar says that some members of Damasiko Okeng’s family – 10 of them - have been taken away by officials from the US Embassy. She wants to know where they were taken. So, maybe the Minister will find out. I hope you will be able to bring a statement.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE EXCISE DUTY BILL, 2013

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “the Excise Duty Bill, 2013” be read for the first time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, may I know why it is 2013; didn’t we deal with the Excise Duty Bill last year? Why is still 2013 and yet we are currently in 2014?

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, this Bill is supposed to revise and repeal the East African Excise Management Act and to provide for related matters. In preparation for this Bill, account has been taken – There was a judgement in the case between the Commissioner-General of Uganda Revenue Authority and Meera Investments. In the judgement, it was decided that following Article 139 of the Constitution, it is unconstitutional to oust jurisdiction of the High Court. Therefore, this Bill intends to make those rectifications so that the law is followed.

THE SPEAKER: My question is: Why is it 2013 and not 2014?

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, this Bill was gazetted on 13 December 2013. That is when it arose.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE STAMPS BILL, 2013

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled “the Stamps Bill 2013, Bill No. 14” be read for the first time. I beg to move.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE LOTTERIES AND GAMING BILL, 2013

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled “the Lotteries and Gaming Bill, 2013” be read for the first time. I beg to move.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE BILL, 2014

3.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled “the Tax Procedures Code Bill, 2014” be read for the first time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Are they accompanied by certificates of financial implications?

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, these Bills did pass through Cabinet and before any Bill goes through Cabinet, it must be accompanied by a certificate of financial implications. I will confirm that even here, they are duly accompanied by certificates of financial implication – all of them.

THE SPEAKER: Please, lay them formally on the Table one by one.

MR KAJARA: I beg to lay a certificate of financial implications for the Tax Procedures Code Bill, 2014. I beg to lay a certificate of financial implications for the Stamps Bill, 2013. I beg to lay a certificate of financial implications for the Lotteries and Gaming Bill, 2013. I beg to lay a certificate of financial implications for the Excise Duty Bill, 2013.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all those Bills are sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for expeditious perusal and report back.

STATEMENT ON THE UPDF DEPLOYMENT IN SOUTH SUDAN AND THE STATUS OF FORCES AGREEMENT

3.15
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Oguttu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I make this statement under Rule 45 of the Rules of Procedure on the deployment of the UPDF in South Sudan and the Status of Forces Agreement. We feel this is an important matter for our country and Ugandans should know what is going on.

Madam Speaker, on 14 January 2014, Parliament was recalled from recess for an emergency session to debate one motion moved under rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure for a resolution of Parliament. The motion was moved in accordance with Article 210 (d) of the Constitution and Section 40 of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces Act, 2005 for support of the deployment of troops to the Republic of South Sudan. 

It is important to note that under Article 210 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Parliament shall make laws regulating the conduct of Uganda People’s Defence Forces and in particular, providing for the deployment of troops outside Uganda. The law, in this case, is the UPDF Act of 2005, in particular Section 39, which mandates Parliament to ratify all deployments of our national army outside Uganda. 

Section 39 of the UPDF Act reads as follows: “Deployment of troops outside
(1) 	The President may deploy troops outside Uganda for purposes of- 
(a)	 peace keeping; or 
(b) 	peace enforcement.
(2) 	Deployment of troops for purposes of peace keeping shall be done with the approval of Parliament.
(3) 	Where the President deploys troops under this section when Parliament is on recess, the Speaker shall immediately summon Parliament to an emergency session to sit within 21 days after the deployment, for purposes of ratifying that deployment.”

Section 2 of the same Act – the interpretation - says, “Peace keeping means the deployment of troops under Chapter 6 of the United Nations Charter. Peace enforcement means the deployment of troops under Chapter 7 of the United Nations Charter.”

The Prime Minister, while defending the motion which was moved under section 40, told this august House that, “Deployment of our soldiers into South Sudan under Section 39 of the UPDF Act was not applicable because neither peace keeping nor peace enforcement exists in the situation that has arisen in South Sudan.” So Parliament, which had been recalled from recess for a motion to be moved under section 39(3) of the UPDF Act of 2005, now saw Government abandon that route because of a lacuna in that section and choose to move under Section 40 of the UPDF Act 2005.

Madam Speaker, section 40 is on agreement relating to deployment of troops outside Uganda and it reads as follows: “Where troops are to be deployed outside Uganda under a multilateral or bilateral arrangement with other countries, the Minister shall enter into an agreement, in this section referred to as a Status of Forces Agreement, with the host country or organisation.” However, Government did not present to Parliament any documentary evidence supporting their earlier claim that President Salva Kiir of South Sudan had actually written to President Yoweri Museveni seeking Uganda’s assistance.

Article 79 (1) of the Constitution says, “Subject to the provisions of our Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda.” 

Madam Speaker, this matter of our soldiers in South Sudan is a matter of national importance and of concern to us for which we need clarification from Government. We wish to know what UPDF is still doing in South Sudan, if it is not for peace keeping and peace enforcement according to what the Prime Minister told us. 

We wish to ask what international law instrument the government is basing on to keep our forces in combat operations in a civil war in a foreign sovereign state. Who is funding UPDF operations in South Sudan? At one time, Government said that the Ugandan taxpayers were footing the bills but this was quickly contradicted by the defence minister of South Sudan who said that their government was footing the bills. Who then was telling us the truth and who was lying?

During the debate, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister said, “Uganda was invited by the Government of the Republic of South Sudan to deploy UPDF in South Sudan. Uganda responded positively and an agreement has been signed between the Minister of Defence, as the law commands, and the Government of South Sudan. A copy of the agreement is here.” Those are words of the Prime Minister. “The content of that agreement is as in all status of forces agreements all over the world; they cover basic things.”

This is what we on this side of the House said in response to the Prime Minister: “It will be very difficult for us to decide on this matter unless we know the full contents of those agreements. We request that the agreement be read to the whole House so that we know what is in it in order to take an informed and correct decision.” The Rt Hon. Speaker then said, “The agreement has been laid on the Table; it is property of this House. I will be assigning the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to study it and report to this House.” 

As the Speaker had guided earlier, at the end of the debate, the Rt Hon. Speaker said, “I direct the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to remain abreast of this matter and to report to us any further developments when the House resumes on 18 February 2014.”

Honourable members, the Rt Hon. Speaker’s directive made at that emergency session on the 14 January 2014, three months ago, has not yet been observed and respected. Up to now, the Committee on Defence is yet to produce a report as was required from them by this august House. 

The Minister was tasked to provide the letter from President Salva Kiir proving that Uganda was invited to deploy in South Sudan by the Government of South Sudan. He did not provide the purported letter and has never returned to the committee. The letter did not exist, unless Government can lay it on the Table here. We are also concerned that the Committee on Defence has not scrutinised the Status of Forces Agreement that was signed between the two countries, Uganda and South Sudan, as requested by this august House. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, the situation in South Sudan has meanwhile gone from bad to worse. Peace negotiations seem to yield nothing tangible, as our sons and daughters continue to die. Meanwhile, in a recent UN Report, Uganda has been accused of wrongdoing in South Sudan, of taking sides in the conflict and even bombarding civilian areas near Bor Town with internationally discouraged cluster bombs.

We, therefore, call upon the Government to brief the country on the following:

1. 	The status of Uganda’s deployment of UPDF’s Zulu Task Force in South Sudan in relation to the Status of Forces Agreement and the timeframe agreed upon. How long are soldiers going to continue staying in South Sudan and when shall we start pulling out?

2. 	What is the actual source of funding of the mission’s operations?

3. 	What is Uganda Government’s position on the on-going international efforts to find a solution to the crisis through dialogue other than war? We believe that Uganda’s continued deployment is a stumbling block to the peace process in South Sudan. Indeed, one side in the conflict has said many times that they want our soldiers out of their country.

4. 	What is the status of the rescue mission - how many Ugandans were rescued alive, dead, and how many soldiers have lost their lives there so far? Is it true that hundreds of Ugandans have been killed in South Sudan? There has been some wild talk like that.

5. 	What is the legal basis, both national and international, for UPDF’s continued fighting in South Sudan against IGAD’s advice that Uganda withdraws her forces in the interest of peace negotiations between the two warring sides?

6. 	What could be the cost implications of Uganda’s involvement in the South Sudan internal conflict if the other side got an upper hand in the next Government? The story of Uganda’s illegal and disastrous adventure in Congo, where we now have to pay over US$ 10 billion by order of the International Court of Justice, is still alive to us.

7. 	How does UPDF deployment in South Sudan relate to the UN Charter, the AU Charter and the IGAD framework, and are we are adhering to the international law standards?

Madam Speaker and dear colleagues, we are convinced that Parliament of Uganda never ratified the present deployment of Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces to engage in combat operations in South Sudan in line with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the related laws on deployment of troops outside Uganda. The motion moved during the emergency session on 14 January 2014, under Section 40 and not Section 39 because of a legal lacuna, was just informing and seeking support for the purported agreement signed between the two countries. Therefore, in case of any consequences in future, the citizens of Uganda shall not be held responsible but the individuals who took the arbitrary decision. 

Our prayer is that this House guides Government to engage in actions in South Sudan which will assist in restoration of peace in that country through dialogue, not war and senseless loss of human life. Rt Hon. Speaker, I thank you very much.

3.30
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Rt Hon. Speaker, I want to thank the Leader of the Opposition for raising this. However, I also want to be educated; under what rule of our Rules of Procedure has he moved this?

Two, I remember very well that as the Speaker presiding that day, Madam Speaker, you gave a directive to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. You said that they should be following up this issue closely and should be updating this House. As Speaker, you gave a directive to the committee and we are waiting for the committee to come and brief us. 

As far as I know, the Minister for Defence has been appearing before that committee and has even discussed these issues with the committee. I think that it is the right time that the committee did what you requested them to do.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a number of queries have been raised by the Leader of the Opposition. Some of the queries are related to the Government and some to the committee of the House. Obviously, the committee has not told us why they have not yet reported. So, I direct you to report in the Fourth Session. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.32
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Bakka Mugabi): Rt Hon. Speaker, I rise to lay on the Table a report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the petition by the former workers of the Coffee Marketing Board (in liquidation), which was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on 12 July 2012. The committee has duly handled it and I beg to lay the report on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. A day will be appointed for the report to be considered in the House. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP BILL, 2012

3.33
THE CHAIRPERSON: The guests in the gallery are represented by hon. Taaka and hon. Oundo. You are welcome.

Clause 19

3.33
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Anthony Okello): Madam Chairperson, clause 19 is on monitoring of PPPs. We propose to insert a new paragraph to read as follows: “(f) prepare periodic reports and submit them to the minister and the minister of the contracting authority.” Justification: periodic reports would help to provide accountability and status updates on PPP projects. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposal. I put the question that the Bill be amended as proposed by the chair. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20

MR OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, before clause 20, we propose to insert a new clause immediately after clause 19 to read as follows: 
“Accounting and reporting 
(1) 	A private party shall keep proper books of accounts and records in relation to the project which shall be open for scrutiny by the contracting authority. 

(2) 	The contracting authority shall prepare financial statements and an annual report within two months after the end of the financial year. 

(3) 	The Accountant-General shall prescribe accounting and financial reporting rules to be adopted for public private partnerships.

(4) 	The annual report including the audited financial statements in subsection (2) shall be submitted to the minister within six months after the end of the financial year.” 

Justification

Inadequate provision has been made for accounting and reporting. 

We propose a new clause to read as follows: “Establishment of a Project Development Facilitation Fund
(1) 	There is established a fund to be known as the Project Development Facilitation Fund.
(2) 	There shall be paid into the fund-
(a) 	annual budget allocations;
(b) 	grants and donations;
(c) 	such levies or tariffs as may be imposed on a project; and
(d) 	any other source as may be authorised by the Minister.

(3) The moneys received into the fund shall only be applied to-
(a) 	support contracting authorities in the preparation phase of a project, the procurement processes and project appraisal under this Act; 
(b) 	support the activities of the unit under this Act; 
(c) 	provide a source of liquidity to meet any contingent liabilities arising from a project.” 

Justification

There is need to deliberately create a PPP fund from which some of the contracting authorities with limited resources may draw upon, especially for conducting reliable feasibility studies which shall act as the basis for guiding processes on competitive bidding, evaluation and negotiations between the public and private sector entities. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Chairperson, we have an issue with the contracting authority preparing a financial statement and the annual report within two months after the end of each financial year. Also, there is a proposal that the Accountant-General shall prescribe the accounting and the financial reporting.

Under PPPs, special purpose vehicles are companies that are set up. A Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) is a company; it is not an MDA. Therefore, the normal practice is that books of accounts and records are going to be kept in accordance with international financial reporting standards. These are standards governing all financial reporting, including PPPs, which are issued by the Financial Reporting Standards Board in conjunction with the International Reporting Interpretations Committee. 

The normal practice is that the SPV will be required, at the end of every financial year, to prepare a statement, which will then be submitted to the contracting authority for their review and subsequent audit by the Auditor-General. That is the standard practice as far as PPPs are concerned. So our proposal is that we need to allow the special purpose vehicle that has been created to do the preparation of the books of accounts, which will then be audited by the contracting authority. 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Without differing so much from the ministers’ submission, I want to say that it is true that a special purpose vehicle shall prepare its own accounts and these accounts can be audited by a private audit. However, this is a PPP arrangement. There is a government component in this arrangement, which component must be reported and audited accordingly. When we were doing this, this was the spirit in which we put this clause. 

MR OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, to add on what my colleague, hon. Musasizi, has stated, the project is implemented under the supervision of the contracting authority hence they should report using the procedures stipulated by the Accountant-General as proposed by the committee. This is because it is the contracting authority that will be supervising the project implementation. 

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, I think we need to appreciate the fact that in a PPP arrangement, it is actually mandatory, not just a requirement, that a special purpose vehicle or a company is to be established under the laws of Uganda, in this case the recipient country. It is a company. In some instances, the government may have a stake in that company but not always. So, what we are doing is to give a blanket consideration.

The PPPs come in different forms. There are so many models of PPPs. A typical example I will give you is the management of street parking in Kampala, which has been given to a private company to manage on behalf of KCCA. At the end of every financial year, the company has to lay receipts, expenditures and so on for consideration by KCCA, but there is no government involvement in it. Government has just contracted that private party to manage that asset or provide that service on behalf of itself. In such instances, I do not think it is KCCA to go and prepare the financial statements; it cannot be. It can only be the private party to prepare them and submit them for review to KCCA. We should not make a law that will jeopardise those who will come here to bring their own capital. 

MR KYAMADIDI: Madam Chairperson, I seek clarification from the honourable minister. The issue here is that the contracting authority shall prepare financial statements and an annual report within two months after the end of the financial year. Where is your problem? 

MR AJEDRA: My problem is that it is not the contracting authority that is actually doing the work. The work is being done by a third party that has been contracted by the contracting authority. You cannot expect a department or an agency to prepare accounts of a private company that has been established under the laws of the country. It is rather the company to prepare the statements and lay those records to the MDA or the contracting authority for review. 

Of course, they are at liberty to go and audit the books if they are not happy with the submission of the company. There is nothing which stops the contracting authority from asking for the company’s books for review to see if the numbers put in the report are adequate. But it cannot be the contracting authority to prepare the financial statements of a private company. They are there to do the monitoring and they can only come in to review what has been submitted to them. It sets a very bad precedent, which is not anywhere in the world. 

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I support the insertion of the new sub clause, but my concern is about the report of the Auditor-General to Parliament. This has always been done annually. To make it uniform and give him time to do this work, I would propose that the Auditor-General does not report every nine months. This is to make it uniform. Instead of nine months, it should be annually. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, the contracting authority is either a ministry or a government department. What problem do you have with them filing their accounts?

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, if you look at clause 2, it is mandatory: “The contracting authority shall prepare financial statements and annual reports within two months after every financial year”. 

Now, if the proposal was that the contracting authority shall cause the special purpose vehicle to prepare financial statements and annual reports, which are going to be reviewed by the contracting authority, I would not have a problem. However, when you say that the contracting authority shall prepare financial statements – no, they cannot. It is a private company; you cannot ask, for example, for argument’s sake, Civil Aviation Authority after it has contracted a party to perform functions on its behalf to prepare the financial statements. Rather, in the contract, it is going to be stipulated that the SPV shall prepare financial statements, which shall then be audited by the MDA and the Auditor-General. 

The problem is not that we do not want them to be audited; the question is: who audits them? The auditing must be done by somebody who contracted them to do the work in the first place. You cannot prepare the audit yourself; somebody must prepare and then another person audits. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I ask the chair what the rational of your proposal was. 

MR OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, just like I had stated, we had wanted to have a hybrid of reports coming both from the contracting authority that actually does the supervision of the projects being undertaken and the private party as well. 

We thought if we formulated it this way, the contracting authority would then be in control of the reporting mechanism and also pick from the accounting procedures that will be prescribed by the Accountant-General. So, we thought we would have a hybrid of both. 

However, Madam Chairperson, if it is in the wisdom of this House that we take the proposal made by the minister, I have no objections. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, are you saying that we can delete sub clause (2) and remain with sub clauses (1), (3) and (4)?

MR OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, we may not necessarily delete. We can say, “The accounting authority shall cause the private party to prepare financial statements”, just like it was proposed by the minister. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed by the chairman and the minister. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is also a new clause on the establishment of a projects development facilitation fund. 

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, I propose that we insert a new sub clause after (3)(c). We do not have a problem with the committee proposal but we are suggesting that after (3) (c) – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t we finish with the committee proposal if you have no problem with it? The one we need to deal with is the one on establishment of projects, development facilitation fund. Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed by the chair. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, we are proposing that after (3)(c), we introduce a new sub clause (3)(d) to read as follows: “To fund strategic projects or projects of national interest which may not be commercially viable”. The justification is that there are instances where when you do the feasibility study and do a cost-benefit analysis and from the feasibility study, it may not be commercially viable such that a private party will not be interested in funding that project. 

When a project is of strategic nature to a country or it is in national interest that that infrastructure must be done at all costs, then it will be captured under this. A typical example is the Kalangala infrastructure. We had a debate here; government provided a ferry and it was not commercially viable, but government needed to provide that service to Kalangala, just like construction of any other road that might not be commercially viable. So, we need to accommodate that in our amendments. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the new amendment – 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The spirit behind establishing this fund was not to provide a source of financing projects. The spirit was that in the inception stage, we need monies to facilitate the feasibility study. 

Madam Chairperson, even when you read the justification for this clause, it says that there is need to deliberately create a PPP fund from which some of the contracting authorities with limited resources may draw upon, especially for conducting reliable feasibility studies, which shall act as a basis for guiding processes on competitive bidding, evaluation and negotiations between the public and private sector entities. My problem is that the minister seems to be introducing a sub clause that shall compel this fund to be used to finance projects, which is not the spirit upon which this fund is being established. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What does the chair of the committee say about that proposal?

MR OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, hon. Musasizi has rightly stated the spirit that we had as a committee when making this proposal. The minister is bringing in a new sub clause to provide for funding of strategic projects or projects of national interest, which may not be financially feasible. 

Madam Chairperson, as long as we have adequate funds and they are available, I would have no problem with this. As long as we have the funds to fund strategic projects or projects of national interest, which may not be finically viable, I have no problem with that. 

MR SEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, I have a problem on another issue. Clause (3)(b) says, “The moneys received into the fund shall only be applied to - (b) support the activities of the unit under this Act”. I wonder why they are mentioning only the unit when we have other bodies that we talked about. Why do you single out only the unit? 

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, if you look at the committee report on page 5, the committee has alluded to the fact that PPP legislation should, “(f) introduce funding for economically viable projects which may not be financially viable without government support”. So we are just lifting that and putting it here so that we make it complete in this particular clause. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, yesterday I think we had agreed that we are not going to allow people to use our agreements to shop. I think they will get in through here. They will come and we enter into agreement and then they will say, “support us from that fund”. So the government will support them under the capital and again support them from the other direction.

MR AJEDRA: Yes, we did, Madam Chairperson. As I said before, there are many types of PPPs. There are those which will certainly require government support, and this is where - I think my proposal is going to come later on in one of the clauses we have stood over. That is where government, for example, needs to borrow or needs to provide a guarantee; certainly, we shall have to come to Parliament. 

There is need to have that distinction for those projects which are commercially viable, where the private party does not require a guarantee or does not need any government support apart from land. However, there are instances where government would need to borrow that money to set up a special purpose vehicle to provide that particular service. In such instances, we shall come back to Parliament. That is the proposal I was going to make later on when we come back to that clause. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: My problem is different. If the government is coming in as the public and the private party can now borrow money from this fund, it is no longer a PPP; it is fully government. 

MR OTADA: Thank you. I agree with you, Madam Chairperson, and I thought the minister would support us. I think there is a proposal still on the table, where some Members were arguing that local governments were not able to develop projects on their own. That is where the idea of the establishment of the fund came from. 

Before we go to the local governments argument, we should look at the purpose of the fund - establishment of a project development facilitation fund – and we stop there. If we go in the direction which the honourable minister is proposing, you will find that there will be a big excuse to exhaust the fund by funding projects that are not commercially viable. So, I oppose the proposal by the minister. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the new clause as proposed by the chairperson do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20

MR OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, clause 20 is about audit. I propose to insert a new sub clause to read as follows: “(3) The Auditor-General shall, within nine months of the end of the audit, report to Parliament.” Justification: The reporting period needs to be specified as well as the authority to be reported to. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 20 be amended as proposed by the chair. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, Clause 21 is about open bidding. In sub clause (1), we propose to replace the words, “one newspaper” with the words, “two newspapers”. The justification is, to ensure wider circulation. 

In sub clause (4), we propose to substitute for “law” the words, “regulations made under this Act” for clarity. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 21 – 

MR OTADA: Madam Chairperson, we should not restrict the number of newspapers to two. I propose that we say, “more than one”. Some of these bids have to be sent to international media. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What about the cost?

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Chairperson, the provision says at least one and the proposal of the chair was for at least two. My understanding is that two is the minimum but it can be more than two. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So it is okay; there is no bar. 

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, I think “at least two” will be very good. Having more than two will be a function of the cost, which I think becomes an administrative issue. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I have a problem with that phrasing of “at least two”. In normal ordinary English, where there is more than one you cannot say, “at least two”. That is my understanding. So, the proposal by hon. Otada fits in – “more than one” - when you actually want to say two or three. If we legislate and say, “at least two”, next time it will be “at least ten”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you saying we should not touch the clause? Should we leave it as it is?

MR OBOTH: We should amend it to read, “more than one newspaper” –(Interjections)– They mean the same thing but it sounds a little bit better. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When you say “at least two”, then that is the bare minimum and it can be three, four or any number. However, if you say “more than one”, when I do two I will know that I have met the standard. So it is better for us to say “at least two”.

MR KASAIJA: Madam Chairperson, the number of newspapers that we will advertise in will depend on the circumstances - it could be cost, it could be a regional issue, in which case we do not need to go for very many. So, “more than one” to me is most appropriate because at times we might need to do two, at times three or even four, depending on the circumstances. We cannot legislate for each and every circumstance.  

MR SEMPIJJA: I agree with the honourable minister, but are we talking about local newspapers? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: In the Bill it says, “wide national circulation”. 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to comment on the amendment proposed by the chairperson in sub clause (4), where he said – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, let us finish with sub-clause (1). What should we say, at least one or at least two?

MR KYAMADIDI: Madam Chairperson, under the procurement regulations and the procurement Act, open bidding is known. As the honourable minister has said, sometimes it depends on the cost, the magnitude or even the service; sometimes it can be international. So I think more than one is best. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, we would then only change “at least” and replace it with, “In more than one newspaper of wide national circulation”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 21 (1) be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, there is a proposal by the chairperson that the law referred to under sub clause (4) is the current law. I do not know where this places the law on procurement. I would like to propose that instead of making reference to the current law, we actually make reference to the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Act. I beg to move. 

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, the reason why this Bill was introduced was because of the limitations in the PPDA Act. So I do not think reference to that Act will do us any service. I think it should be under the current law. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that sub clause (4) be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, I would like to make a fundamental amendment to clause 21(2) and (3). I would like to propose complete deletion of sub clauses (2) and (3). These are the reasons for my proposal: The import of sub clause (2) is to make a provision for refining of bids. Let me read it for you, in case you do not have the text: “(2) Where necessary, a contracting authority may in writing request any or all of the bidders who submit bids in response to an invitation to tender or a call for expression of interest to submit refined bids which shall be considered as the best and final offers of the bidders”. 

I do not know why the minister chooses to give a bidder a second opportunity to submit a bid, refining a bid. Why don’t these bids come having been refined already? I would like to protest these two provisions, which are related, because they are bound to cause loopholes. You are going to be bombarded with administrative reviews if you give a bidder a second or third chance. In this era where corruption is rampant, my fears are real. 

I would like to appeal to the inner reasoning of this House that we find these two provisions unnecessary and that they become candidates for deletion. It does not remove anything, Madam Chairperson. Instead, it will demonstrate that this House is careful in the way they trade when procurement comes into play. We do not want a situation where somebody works with someone inside the entity to alter something. It may not be significant, but it might cumulatively have an impact on the final bid. That may cause us problems in procurement. 

Unless the minister has got good reasons to defend this position of refined bids, I find these two provisions, which are related, unnecessary. I would like to propose that they be deleted. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can the minister give us the rationale behind these two provisions, 21(2) and (3). 

MR AJEDRA: I will start with sub clause (3), which reads as follows: “A refined bid submitted as a best and final offer in response to a request made under subsection (2) shall not change or improve the substance of the original bid expect in accordance with the request by the contracting authority”. 

There may be instances where, after requests from bidders for clarification on certain issues, there is need for them to refine that bid based on that additional information that will have been provided by the contracting authority. So this was really why clauses (2) and (3) were put in place so that there is no material deviation from the original submission that would have been made by the bidders.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But the hon. Member is saying that by the time you issue the bid, you have set the parameters and the bidders must answer to them. So under what circumstances can you ask them to resign? Why do you want them to resign? That is what he is saying.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, just to add to what you have just stated, which is quite clear, this can be handled administratively and the minister, being the seasoned engineer that he is, knows that in normal bidding, you can even ask for additional information by just a letter. You do not need, in my view, to legislate this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But how will I know that I can apply for additional information if it is not in the law?

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, that is the real basis upon which I am rising to clarify further on that. I do not claim unique expertise in this area but it is known, even what Eng. Amuriat is talking about. It is also embedded in the same law and this is not being called out to one bidder. This copy would be given to all the bidders so there is no room for administrative review. In fact, sub clause (3) says it will not change anything in the original bid. It is only some form of clarification or refining and this is the only basis upon which the contracting authority would be able to write to a particular bidder or include all the bidders in a particular project and say, “Please, can you clarify on this?”

Probably the word “refined” could have changed the meaning but this is purely for additional information and it is a general applicable procedural issue on procurement.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, can you give us a live example of where we would require refining?

MR AJEDRA: One example that I could think of is let us assume the bids have been received, and the contracting authority realises that there is need for bidders to provide additional information. An example would be, let us say “bid security”. Unless it was specified in the original contract documents to say “bid security is going to be provided by a bank”, there are other bidders who will normally use insurance companies to provide the bid security. Therefore, you will request all the bidders and say, either because of change of government policy or whatever it is, that now all the bidders will be required to provide the bid security from a financial institution especially banks.

So that would be an example. It will not materially change the submission but it is just to make everybody compliant with the additional requirements.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But maybe you need to find a better word. You know “refined” means improving. Can you find a better word?

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Chairperson, I need to be clarified because as Parliament, we passed the PPDA Act, which stipulates clearly the procedure and conditions of bidding. I do not know why we are now bringing in those conditions in another law and yet as a country, we have provided for that process within the law, which controls every bidding process in the country. They might even conflict with the existing law that we have. Why should we put it there and yet we already have one? If you want, we can lift the other one and put it here because the law is already there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does it make provision for refining a bid in the PPDA Act?

MS LUMUMBA: Madam Chairperson, maybe for the sake of this provision let us remove the word ‘refine’ and it becomes ‘bid’. If you want the bid to be altered according to the contracting authority then let it be changed or varied according to the contracting authority’s demands but let us remove the word ‘refine’.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We have always witnessed these bidding processes and certainly when you read (2) and (3), you see that we are creating room for somebody to manipulate the bidding process. Unless the minister really has a convincing reason, these two should not be there. This is creating room for manipulating the process and certainly we cannot allow it as Parliament. Once you bid, you have bidded.

MR ALEPER: I do tend to agree with my colleagues. Madam Chairperson, if something does not add value or does not change anything, why do you need it? For example in this provision, even when this refined bid has been submitted, it does not change or improve the substance of the original so what is the essence of calling for a refined bid when it cannot change any substance? This still amounts to what my colleague said, that it may create room for manipulation and that is where corruption will be invited in. 

There is a standard law when it comes to the bidding process and I remember my colleague, hon. Okot Ogong, also brought it out.  If there is a standard benchmark, why do we again create windows where people will begin manipulating? The minister gave us an example, which you asked him to give and which I was not pleased with. He was saying that for example if in a bid the costs were not clear - I thought when a bid process takes place, the elements are already in the picture so why do you again give room for a bid to be refined and also cut the element of change in the cost? Does this carry any sense?

So, Madam Chairperson, I would think that this particular clause is very redundant and it gives a window to corruption. Thank you.

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. I agree with deleting the clause just as has been proposed. All of us have a common understanding about the bidding process. Once the bid has already been submitted, there is a time that they set for bid opening. After bid opening, you go further to evaluate. After evaluation, you recommend who should be given the contract but there is a moment where you negotiate. Time for negotiation is there and it is in Clause 26, which we are going in for. That is where if something is not very clear, you indicate to the contractor or the company that has won the bid that look, this specification is not very clear, we have to bring it on board and agree before signing the MOU. Therefore, I stand to support deletion of those two clauses that have been mentioned. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, it seems Members are not convinced with your proposals.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, in the normal procurement process there may be instances where - I know where the fear of my colleague Engineer Amuriat is coming from. Certainly it is a well-founded fear but you see in the bidding process, you do not need to be rigid. You need to provide room for provision of additional information from the bidders or as the word says, to ‘refine’ the bid, provided it does not materially affect their original submission -

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, hon. minister, how will you decide any or all? How will you decide who will refine their bid and then for the other people you say nothing? How will you decide that?

MR OTADA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think hon. Amuriat really reminded the hon. Minister and he knows that it is administrative practice that you can ask for missing, peripheral or additional information administratively. If we provide for purification, first of all people will have submitted their bids and you will have seen prices that people have bidded around. Now when you ask them to purify, it will be leaking exams for people. So for me, I would urge hon. Ajedra to restrain himself from leaking exams.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, I do take note of Members’ concerns and in that case, I will concede and we can delete them.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, hon. Members, I put the question that sub clauses (2) and (3) be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22

MR OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, Clause 22 is about restricted bidding and I want to apologise that in the report, it is talking about “open bidding”. It should be “restricted bidding”.

Madam Chairperson, 22(2) substitute for “law” the words “regulations made under this Act”. It would now read 22(2), “The procurement of a private party under the restricted bidding method shall be as may be prescribed by regulations made under this Act.”

Madam Chairperson, this is just for clarity. Thank you.

MR OTADA: Madam Chairperson, PPPs are very big projects that are born from searching far and wide. The presupposition that I have for making a case for restricted bidding is in a situation where I am soliciting for bids from people I potentially know within the country. Actually some companies are even classified and we can go and look for them. If we are talking about projects that require us to search from outside the borders of Uganda or Africa for that matter, I think the best way we can get value for money is open bidding. 

So for me, “restricted bidding” is another way of limiting ourselves to competition and especially for projects, which are of this magnitude. In any case, even the justification was made. We even made the point ourselves here that these are big projects that are not of emergency nature and, therefore, for you to say we have no time - because what other justification do you have other than time as a constraint for you to say, we need to have this thing fixed very quickly. So I still want you to think more deeply.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us her from the movers. What is the rationale for this restricted bidding? Where is the mover? He can explain why they wanted this.

MR KAJARA: Madam Chairperson, the clarification about restricted bidding is that even restricted bidding will be subject to competition. That is the clarification I wanted to make. After you have made a restricted bidding, the process has reached a certain stage and even that will be open to competitive bidding so it is not restricted as such.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you explain what constitutes restricted bidding?

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, the world over there are about eight or nine procurement methods. What has been enumerated here includes open-domestic, open-international, restricted, direct procurement, unsolicited bids - There are all sorts! It does not necessarily mean that every project will lend itself to restricted bidding. There may be projects of strategic security nature like defence where you need to first sign a MOU for example with the companies you are going to invite. 

Suppose you identify three companies who you think can be able to provide that information, you will first sign a MOU to say, “The information that I am going to provide you, for purposes of tendering, is restricted and therefore it cannot be made public.” Therefore, restricted bidding is a normal practice the world over and it has to be here. It does not necessarily mean that all projects will lend themselves to restricted bidding.

MR OTADA: Madam Chairperson, clarification. If we are to buy into your argument, hon. Minister, would you then consider the proposal to delete 23 because it does not therefore provide for any competition? It is sole. Would you trade that off?

MR AJEDRA: Direct procurement is one of the methods of procurement and it cannot be deleted.

MR BAHATI: I just wanted to inform hon. Otada that actually the three methods that we have stated here: open bidding, restricted bidding and direct procurement, are all accepted by the PPDA. We have it and there are conditions attached to every method that you use. The same thing applies to human resource management. There are times when we make it open, there are times when you make it restricted in the sense that for example you could want to undertake a project and no one is interested from the onset. You search for them. Do not think that everybody is interested in all projects. There are those projects that have a social component where nobody will be interested so there is nothing new here. We have it in the PPDA, there are conditions laid down and I think we should not tie ourselves to do -

THE CHAIRPERSON: So if they are recognised by the PPDA, they are part of our law already. Yes, so what are we arguing about?

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, we would not have a problem with restricted, direct and so forth if the minister had conceded on what we stood over. This is about transparency. By the minister objecting to bringing the agreement here, you create a lot of unnecessary debate because if Parliament was going to look at all these agreements, you could even have closed, restricted and so forth because at the end of the day, the peoples’ representative would know. So let us have a win-win situation. If you make concession on the other one, we give you an opportunity.

Regarding what hon. Bahati said, under the PPDA Act the process starts from a unit and we appropriate money. Madam Chairperson, the fear that is prevailing is that for the UK Government, up to now they are still paying for the underground railway because of a PPP, which was badly managed. Public Private Partnership agreements can be varied from time to time. 

Yesterday I was telling the minister of a situation where a contractor gets the Kampala-Jinja Road. For five years, Government puts nothing and says, I will collect my toll within a period of five years but within the agreement, they will put a clause that Government shall not build any other road that will disadvantage the Jinja Road in order to arrive at a certain number of collections per year.

Tomorrow the company can say that after a period of five years, I have failed to collect the money so Government should provide. This has happened in so many countries in the world and we have read about this. So, that is why as Parliament, we are asking for transparency in some of these things.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, we will come back to this other matter you are talking about but let us deal with the - If this is part of our law, there is nothing to argue. No, we are dealing with restricted bidding. Is it in the PPDA?

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, it cannot apply here because under the PPDA Act, we appropriate the money here but under a PPP, the borrowing is a process and involves agreement.

MR OTADA: Madam Chairperson, let me just say this. I think hon. Bahati persuaded the House on the account that if we are arguing in line with the PPDA Act, then we are all happy with it but if you look at what the committee is proposing, they are saying, “...under regulations made under this Act.” Are we talking about the PPDA Act? We should maintain the law as it is in the Bill and I am with you there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 22 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, Clause 23 “Direct procurement.” Insert a new sub clause as follows: “(3) The procurement of a private party under the direct procurement method shall be with Cabinet approval and under regulations made under this Act.” The justification is, direct procurement should hardly be used and subject to Cabinet approval to eliminate any abuse.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, it will take us back to the argument we had yesterday. As a ministry, we do not have a problem with the insertion of a new clause because there cannot be overlapping of functions. I know that we shall go back to those ones and I think I will develop my arguments at that particular time but I think the proposal by the committee is acceptable to us.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 23 -

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Chairperson, this is a very dangerous provision. Government is negotiating and also approving and yet in our Constitution, it is very clear that Government shall not engage with any institution or private party without approval of Parliament. So when we now allow Government and yet you know they are dealing with property of Uganda - as Parliament we need to think deeply about this. Ours here is okay, maybe the Movement is okay but in future we can have a dangerous government. This is serious.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So what do you propose?

MR OKOT OGONG: I propose, Madam Chairperson, that the government should enter into this contract with the approval of Parliament. They have to inform Parliament and then Parliament should approve. This is a very important thing.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, parliamentary functions are very clear; that parliaments shall make laws, provide oversight responsibilities in addition to many others. You cannot be the entity that makes the law and then come and approve. It does not work that way. There is an Executive that Parliament is supposed to supervise and oversee so you cannot -

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Chairperson, yesterday this matter took us a long time. We said PPPs are in form of back door borrowing and it is the function of this Parliament to approve all borrowing by Government. So whether it is front door, back door, side door, left or right door, it is borrowing and Parliament must approve it. It is our tax payers’ money and we must guard it so we are not going to allow you to go borrowing without the approval of Parliament.

MR AJEDRA: But, Madam Chairperson, if Parliament is going to be involved in approval, who is going to provide the oversight role? Should something go wrong, shall we take responsibility as Parliament and Cabinet at the same time? No, somebody must be held responsible.

MR SEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Hon. Members, this Cabinet approval that has been suggested by the committee is in between the processes. Parliament cannot be seen to be approving bids. Yes, but at the end of the day, as we said in the earlier provisions, we shall come back. Parliamentary assignments have been proposed by the committee and we shall get back to that proposal. But now this is procurement and it is in the process. The procurement is still ongoing so we cannot come in the middle of the day and then seek parliamentary approval. At least Cabinet as they are in charge of the contracting authority.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is an example of direct procurement, hon. Minister? Give us an example of direct procurement so that we can appreciate your proposals.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, there are innovations in this world and where an entity has a copy right for that innovation, which cannot be provided by any other person, that is the time you go for direct procurement provided there is value for money and it achieves the objectives of delivery of that service. So where there is innovation and where no other person can provide that –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Thank you. I wanted to get clarification from the minister and actually I thought that the House would have been more interested in this clause than the restricted bidding one, which we have just passed.

Hon. Minister, this is a PPP. Is Innovation part of the needs in developing countries that call out for Public Private Partnerships? You want to be in Public Private Partnership over an innovation? We are looking at infrastructure projects, we are looking for – Actually, for me to throw the spanner into the works, this clause should not have been here.

Hon. Minister, we were together in a certain committee before you became a minister. Something happened related to this section of directly picking out with no competition and you know what it has caused this country. Hon. Minister, can you reconsider this clause? If you are uncomfortable with Parliament approving then it should be deleted. You do not have to have direct procurement in a Public Private Partnership at all because this is a big problem.

Where we need Public Private Partnerships is where we do not have either capital, where we need infrastructure or in-telecom etc. This one we are going to undo every single thing. Fraudsters are going to come under this same clause and say, “Let us have direct procurement” and we shall have shot ourselves in the feet. Madam Chairperson, I move that the amendment that would be appropriate is to delete this clause.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, your question to the hon. Minister was whether he can give an example of a direct procurement. Recently, we went to China - and I am giving an example of direct procurement. The Chinese Government wanted a fast train and they thought that the Americans would sell them one but the Americans did not. So the only country that accepted to sell this fast train to China was Germany. So they did direct procurement and they explained this to us. I think that is how they copied this technology, and now they are making these fast trains themselves but that is how they started. So it is possible to have direct procurement and that was a Public Private Partnership.

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. It is common understanding again to all of us as to why sometimes you hear Members debate the way we are debating.

I want to refer us back to the time when we were debating this Bill. The committee submitted their report and if I could be allowed to quote it, in point 2.4 they stated that, “The committee therefore recommends that Clause 81,” - which we already passed – “be amended to provide for the approval of Parliament to be sought before an accounting officer signs any agreement.” This process ensures that proposed PPPs are affordable, provide value for money and commitment arising thereafter within the debt management limit and above all, are consistent with the national budget and policy priorities.

Remember in our debate we were so clear and we said, look we are in this world of capitalism and sometimes some of these people can come in a way that you get lost. So by involving the Parliament other than involving the Cabinet, you would have widened the area to a point that even the public can be in position to follow up. Remember Cabinet meetings are not open to the public but parliamentary meetings are. Therefore, I think the involvement of Parliament is necessary at this point. I thank you.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Chairperson, I want to inform Members that during CHOGM, Government entered into an arrangement with Sudhir over Munyonyo. Remember that one very clearly. There were no proper procedures followed and we have already lost that money. That is direct involvement without informing Parliament. We have lost that money and we have not gained it.

Remember, we also entered into an agreement with other companies and we have not received that money because of direct procurement whereby people negotiate before and they ask for their share. They say, “I am giving you this, where is mine?” 

Therefore, I would like to propose that since this provision is very clear and we are not going - when you say “direct” it means you just go and hand pick. That is direct; there is no process there. Because I am going direct, where is the boundary?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think it is implied that you know where you are going and you go straight there.

MR MUJUNI: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. We are not reinventing the wheel. I remember in the oil Bills, Clause 54 was on direct procurement. We realised that in some exceptional situations or circumstances, it is required and we put it here - say in security. You can say the procurement of a private party under direct procurement method, in exceptional situations like security, can only be with the approval of Cabinet. In this way, you are clear under what circumstances you can have direct procurement so that you do not leave it open. Otherwise, this is something that can always be there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So you are supporting the amendment of the committee?

MR MUJUNI: Yes.

MS ALUM: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. I think we need direct procurement because if you look at Clause 2 which we have not handled, (b) is talking about information, computer technology, telecommunications and telecommunication network. These are specialised and you can recall how computers started with Bill Gates. I see that, that can be direct procurement. There are discoveries, which are coming today, tomorrow and in the future and I think we need this direct procurement along that line. I support the minister on that but we really need to bring Parliament on board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So you have an objection with the proposal by the chairperson because he said, “...with Cabinet approval”.

MS ALUM: I am saying that since we need this direct procurement and as it involves a lot of money, we need Parliament to be involved.

MS AOL: Madam Chairperson, I was very happy with what hon. Okot Ogong said lastly because at first he said it is also to protect in case some other government comes in place. I think he also realised that during CHOGM, it was still NRM, which was leading. Right now, and unless the minister can clarify, I do not know why we should put direct procurement under PPPs. Why don’t we take it somewhere else because I hear it is a huge project? Why do we want to bring these big projects under direct procurement and yet all of us know what Uganda is, and all of us know how the ministers have actually let the country down many times?

You have to really clarify to us why we have to bring this one here. Why can’t we take it elsewhere where the projects are not very big? Where the projects are big, let us avoid this direct procurement. Maybe we need to just delete 23. Thank you.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, direct procurement should be there and must be there. There are emergency situations where the government needs to procure certain things very urgently, and these can only be provided by one supplier. I will give you one example since my colleague asked for one.

When we went to Malaysia, the military has a system that tracks all their units in the country and there was only one company that met all the requirements to physically locate the army units in the whole country. There was no other company that had developed that technology except one. Because it met the requirements of defence, permission was required from Cabinet and Government gave the go-ahead to procure directly. Of course, there will be negotiations. Somebody - (Interruption)

MS AOL: Hon. Minister, we know we go benchmarking so that we get what is practically possible here. When you try to bring in those places you went to and tell us how they track all the units, I do not know if it is possible with us here in Uganda. Are those things applicable here? 
Otherwise, we are going to cut and paste some things from maybe Malaysia and bring it here when it is not yet applicable here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, hon. Member, do you want to be stuck in the Stone Age? Really?

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, a way forward.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you touching on the same state as Uganda?

MR EKANYA: I want to propose a way forward. I want to ask the minister –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, members.

MR EKANYA: When you are developing the bid document, it is the user unit that will develop the specification. So, in this case to really ease and move forward, you make that specification that is only Bill Gates that has that facility - do you get me? When you want a Benz, you design and make the specification of the advertisement and the call for solicitation to meet that requirement. So, you may not even need this and we are wasting time for nothing because the contracting authority will make the specification; that we need a vehicle that can do a, b, c, d or we need laptops of this standard and you will only get –(Interjection)- just a moment. You will only get laptops supplied by Apple. So, this clause is just wasting our time. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Chair, I do not want people to confuse Parliament. The example that the minister is giving is about procurement of a particular subject matter. But what we are talking about is Public and Private Partnerships. We are not going to procure anything like computers. What we are saying here is that when we are to enter into any agreement with some people, we need to open it and people compete. When we want like this direct one, we are not talking that we are going to buy anything from Malaysia as that is known. But this is about partnership and not about any other thing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So you are saying that there is no procurement under the PPP. Is that what you are saying? 

MR OKOT OGONG: What we are saying is that when we are procuring – (Interjections) - let me inform you, hon. Members –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you suggesting that under a PPP there can be no procurement? Is that what you are saying? 

MR OKOT OGONG: What I am saying is that under the PPP arrangement, we are not saying that we are going to buy any commodity and Members must know that; we are procuring a commodity and we are saying that we have a particular investment venture and as Government, we want people to participate with us, come together and invest. But before you come, we want to open it and you compete on how you are going to invest with us as Government. That is what you should know because we are not talking about buying a computer. Not at all!

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, that is what I am asking. Are you suggesting that they should be no competitive bidding method under this law? Is that what you are saying.

MR OKOT OGONG: There should be.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is what it means. Hon. Ababiku.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you. Whether we use the method that we are currently using or if we insist on what we are trying to have as a law, procurement can never be avoided. In partnership, if we go to direct procurement, I think they now fear that we have rules based on the practices that we have. Therefore, I will pray that we must insert the part for the approval by Parliament and this will come under special circumstances because the peculiarity we have in Uganda is abuse of this where many people will be able to baptize specific projects of those ones that cannot be managed. So, Parliament should come in approve so that we make a watchdog over it otherwise, we cannot eliminate this because we need this in other circumstances.  I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, you are saying two different things. Hon. Mwesigye and then hon. Oboth.

MR MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Chair. Yesterday you said that we should go and research about this, and I actually did last night and listed them. There are usually two fundamental drivers of PPPs.

First, PPPs are crafted to enable the public sector to harness the expertise and efficiencies that the private sector can bring in the delivery of certain facilities, and services traditionally procured and delivered by the public sector. So, there is procurement and there should be partnership.

Secondly, a PPP is structured so that public sector body seeking to make a capital investment does not incur any borrowing. So, it can either borrow or not and this option depends on the capacity of the investment. It may borrow or not borrow. The borrowing in a PPP is done by the private partner and not the public partner – (Interjections) - the borrowing is incurred by the private sector vehicle implementing projects and therefore from the public sector perspective, there is procurement in the partnership.

The public may not borrow and therefore in our case, the government may borrow or not borrow. It depends on how you are structuring the partnership.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Muwuma.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much, Madam Chair. I want to agree with the position of Government or the minister in as far as procurement is concerned. Allow me to give an example. The other day we were looking at how best in the era of terrorism, we could secure some of our institutions like this Parliament. If, for example, we are to source for security installations here, it is not right and fair because we may not have the necessary resources or money to instantly pay the service provider. But through PPPs, we can source directly without advertising; and because of the sensitivity of this particular matter, you cannot go out and begin advertising that we want the following and put cameras here, among others.  

But through PPPs, you can say that we are interested in this particular item and then quietly, you do direct procurement and ask this person to keep managing and building capacity of those who will be managing this particular installation. I want to appeal and also interest Members that there are items we can secure or have through direct procurement and we cannot work without it. So, kindly Members, let us -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members –

MR MUWUMA: I was concluding by saying that even in Parliament here we all have interests - peculiar or particular; if this particular issue is brought here, this House deliberates in public – everything being debated here is being broadcast live and so if at all we say that we are discussing this particular procurement to get clearance or permission, everyone out there and the terrorists are listening to us on what we are planning to do. I want to appeal and conclude by saying that if we left it to Cabinet –

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I just want to seek clarification from hon. Muwuma. In this Parliament we have the Public Accounts Committee that handles classified audits and there is a procedure. So even if we say that Parliament is involved, we can establish a procedure that does not put the investor and details of security in jeopardy. The way we handle classified audit reports in this Parliament – we have handled it and you, Madam Chair, you constitute a committee that looks at it, the report is handled and it is brought to you that Parliament has cleared.

So, I want to agree with you but we should not surrender our responsibility. Let us put it to Parliament and Parliament will establish a system, which will not put the private party at risk. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, hon. Members, we are agreeing that procurement is essential and what we need to do is put in some safe guards. Isn’t it? The honourables here and there and then the Minister for Internal Affairs. 

MR OBOTH: We are getting all the facts that we need to know about Public Private Partnerships. We should not lose the focus and talk about procurement in the abstract. What do you procure in Public Private Partnership? Then the big question that hon. Okot Ogong was bringing out well - the procurement of a partner who can be able to provide what Government could not easily provide. 

We should not restrict our debate here to procurement of services and goods because that would be very petty and unfair of us. We are looking at who is able and imagine that there is somebody. Now my basis of reasoning is that when you have a direct procurement, it limits that ability to attract a partner and we have had cases in this country where you have several people bidding and only two reduced and the Minister of State for Investment knows this very well, right from his kidney and all the veins, that direct procurement would not work to procure one single partner to come and build here. What the minister is saying about security, you can target but if you do not qualify it, then you leave this to an abuse. When you target on matters of procurement of security equipment or a partner in providing security equipment, I have no problem with direct procurement. 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I would like to pursue a proposal that was sponsored by my friend, hon. Oboth, on complete deletion of this decision on direct procurement. In doing this, I would like to remind the House that PPP is just one form of financing that we are trying to bring on board. Before this law is passed, our country is being managed and we are doing projects mainly through two sources: our direct tax collections and other forms of levy and money that is borrowed. In case of emergency in my view, we could use the other sources of finance. 

In any case, when you are engaging a private partner, there are processes that you have to go through which will take a long time and if you are really dealing with an emergency, then it is no use using a PPP approach. 

In my view, we need to be transparent in this procurement; we need to be able to guarantee value-for-money in this kind of procurement. We also do not need to compromise the security of this country - and I am addressing the Generals in this House. When you bring a private partner to look into your security detail, then you are compromising the security of the country – (Interjection) - I am speaking as a lay person and not security expert. But by and large, I think that we need to open up procurement to competition and let the PPDA cater for direct procurement. This is provided for in the PPDA Act. We should not lose any sleep when dealing with this. Let us just go for the other form of procurement where there is competition and avoid as much as possible having direct procurement because it is subject to abuse.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The Minister for Internal Affairs.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: This law comes in timely to address our current challenges, make our economy very competitive and also give us, through some clauses, what I will call an “umbrella” during the rainy season. 

There is a question of timing and sense of urgency at times when a country or Government could decide to go for a specific technology with capability in the interest of national security. They will go directly to that one and then procure it. So, we are completely in agreement. If the minister could only provide a clause in the circumstances of national security, such a direct procurement should be allowed so that the government goes ahead together with the Cabinet and then Parliament, at some appropriate time, is informed. But otherwise, we need this clause and it will secure this country when the time comes. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I wanted to suggest that we add a proviso to deal with emergency and not just security. Supposing our road is blown away in a volcano and we need very quickly to get that road so that people can move from Kampala to Jinja - isn’t that an emergency? I was thinking that can we add a proviso about emergencies? 

MR KAJARA: We are looking at Clause 23 (1). Now the proviso that you are talking about is in Clause 23 (2), where it provides that the direct procurement method shall be used to achieve efficiency and timely procurement where the circumstances do not allow the use of a competitive method. I think that is enough cover and proviso. We cannot enumerate the circumstances because they are very many.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, the minister is saying that if you read sub-clause (1) and (2) together, it will resolve our worry. The proviso is in sub-clause (2). 

Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 23 be amended, as proposed.             

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 24

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: On Clause 24, about unsolicited proposals. In sub-clause 3 (a) (ii), redraft the sub-clause to read, “a feasibility study of the project as provided for in Section 14 (2) of this Act.” The justification, is for consistency. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Section 14 was stood over and so we stand over this until we finish with 14. Let us got to Clause 25.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.


Clause 29

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 29 – 

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair -

THE CHAIRPERSON: On Clause 29?

MR EKANYA: But we had an amendment on this clause.

THE CHAIRPERSON: On 29? But the chair has not – your chair is here.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: We did not have any amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I do put the question that Clause 29 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and greed to.)

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.


Clause 37

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Chair.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Clause 37 is about confidentiality. Insert new sub-clause as follows: 
“(3) Subject to sub-section (2), all Public Private Partnership agreements shall be published on the website of the ministry.
(4) An official of a contracting authority or of the department or a member of the project team or the evaluation committee who violates the provisions of sub-section (2) commits an offence and is liable on conviction, to a fine not exceeding 200 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding two years or both.”

The justification, is to encourage transparency and criminalise any breach of confidentiality.

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 37 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and greed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 38

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Clause 38 is on disclosure of interest. In each of the sub-clauses, delete the words “a member of the project team or the evaluation committee” and replace them with “a person appointed under sub-section 6(1)(a)”. The justification is to cater for all persons appointed by the accounting officer. The current provisions do not apply to a project officer, transaction advisor and process auditor. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 38 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and greed to.)

Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 39

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, before Clause 39, insert new clauses immediately after Clause 38 as follows:

“Dispute resolution
    (1) Any disputes between a contracting authority and the private party shall be settled through the dispute settlement mechanisms agreed upon by the parties in the Public Private Partnership agreement, or in accordance with the Arbitration and Conciliation Act.
    (2) A contracting authority shall require the private party to establish efficient mechanisms for handling claims submitted by its customers or users of the Public Private Partnership project where the private party provides services to the public or operates infrastructure which is accessible to the public.” 

The justification is that there is a possibility for unforeseen disputes to arise during the execution of the PPP agreement. Disputes may arise from PPP scope, contract terms and conditions as well as the private partner being acquired by another company or going out of business, effectively resulting in project schedule delays and additional costs to the government. These would require a mechanism of resolving disputes that may arise during the PPP project implementation.

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Members, I put the question - yes, hon. Ongom.

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you so much. I am happy that he has put a provision for arbitration and we realise what transpired between Uganda and Total where the arbitration was taken up to London and this cost this country so much. Here the provision is there for arbitration. In a situation that we have procured some company outside Uganda and they will give us their conditions - I do not know whether we shall have any provisions that arbitration will be done in and not outside Uganda. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Chairperson, where is the venue for the arbitration?

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, if you notice, I think we passed a clause that I cannot remember but it said that the laws of the country will govern. But additionally when you draft the details of the agreement, there will be provisions in the contract in terms of dispute resolution. So, I do not foresee a situation where arbitration should be taken out of the country.

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, hon. Kasule Sebunya.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I do not want to sound funny but I wanted us to improve our amendment by saying, “Any contracting authority shall be required…” and not require the private party in the amendment. Let us not require the private party to establish mechanisms. Let it be that the contracting authority shall establish mechanisms and not the private party.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think that we are dealing with two things.  “A contracting authority shall require the private party to establish efficient mechanisms for handling claims submitted by its customers or users…” - the customers of the private party. But let us deal with the issue of the venue.

MR EKANYA: Madam, I want to request the minister that we be categorical and say that all arbitration or litigation shall be in Uganda. Full stop. You see we have put in the other laws that it shall be according to the laws of Uganda but there is nothing that stops arbitration according to the laws of Uganda in Kenya. Do you get me? 

MR OBOTH: You quote.

MR EKANYA: He is somebody who has “seen” books. I just want to refer him to some of the countries like the US - [Mr Oboth: “I have not only seen books but I have read them.”] - that have not agreed to certain international agreements like the trial of the US armed forces outside America. You can legislate according to the constitution of the country and say that arbitration shall be in this area. You can bring foreign judges and prosecutors but the law suit is what we are talking about. So, in this case, we are talking about the country Uganda - [Mr Ajedra: “Information.”] - please, you can go ahead.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, the chances are that most of the private parties will be foreign – not all but some who will be in partnership with the locals. One of the reasons as to why the current oil agreements, particularly the MOU’s took a whole year to negotiate was because of the issue of the arbitration clause. 

I think that as hon. Oboth has said, we leave that to those who are going to negotiate so that there can be – circumstances will warrant whether we need negotiations outside or within the country. But the moment you prescribe it, it may not be suitable for some investors as they may not be comfortable. The big three partners held us hostage because of that one clause; arbitration clause. 

So, I think we need to be flexible on that and it should be left to the negotiators to determine that on a case by case basis.

MR EKANYA: In the report of the World Bank and International Organisations, what attracts business is profits. Any private party that comes to Uganda will assess; rule one, will they make profits? Therefore, for us to surrender our sovereignty – right now, we are spending a lot of money. In Supplementary Schedule No. 2, we are going to spend over Shs 100 billion flying to the UK to negotiate and do arbitration. Why would we open it again really, colleagues? 

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Chairperson, this Bill is very clear; it is about partnership between the public and the private. They are going to enter into an agreement and Parliament at this time cannot prescribe the terms of this resolution. It is the parties that are going to contract that will state the terms in the agreements and that is where they will put where they are going to do the arbitration. But for us now to specify it in our law, that is disadvantaging the other party.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, for whom are we legislating? For the foreign interests or Uganda? In Ethiopia, if you want to enter a joint venture, you must go with the Government and if you don’t want, you go. No questions about it and you go with their terms. They have built the roads, the airport – yes. Last year we went to Ecuador and when the President came to open our meeting, he spent almost four hours complaining about the unfairness of international agreements which are negotiated and arbitrated outside the jurisdiction of the other party. This is the President of Ecuador. Hon. Members, this is about our country and if they do not want, then they should not enter into contract with us. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, I agree with you that we are really legislating for our country. I think to suggest that we leave arbitration to the third party to maybe take it to London is to pass a vote of no confidence in the sovereignty of our nation. Have you ever heard America say that they are going to arbitrate in Uganda or Rwanda? I think it is really high time that we had confidence in our own systems. If a private company comes here, we are willing to give them an environment for investment and if they want to arbitrate, we shall sit here and arbitrate. 

I wanted to support the amendment of hon. Ekanya that we include that clause that arbitration will be done in Uganda so that we avoid the other situation of Tullow because it is not a good thing. In Ethiopia – actually there are countries that even require a percentage of investment by local people. You go to Ethiopia or South Sudan. I think we have opened so much the privatisation process and it is high time that we thought a little bit about our country and legislate for Ugandans.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Chair, I want to invite Members to this international arbitration law. It is already a set principle of arbitration and if we are going to contract with international partners, we are not going to go around the international benchmark that has been set for arbitration. It is very clear and if you want, I can bring the law - 

THE CHAIRPERSON:  You quote it. In what sector?

MR OKOT OGONG: If you want, I can even bring the arbitration principle and put it here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it an international treaty or principle? Just principles!

MR OKOT OGONG: And Uganda is a signatory.

THE CHAIRPERSON: To what principles? Signatory to what? You Table it here. Hon. Franca Akello and hon. Ssempijja. You Table it here. Yes.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you. I just want to plead with my committee chairperson here and the minister to concede on this matter because it is something very obvious that you will never go to any other country and you find them legislating against themselves. It will cause us no harm. I know as a member of the committee and these are some of the issues that we raised during the committee proceedings. But I really humbly request the hon. Minister that this is a very important – yes, you saw the way we suffered with the one of Total. We cannot allow it to happen here again. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you very much. Allow me to have a different view over this one. By the time you reach this point of arbitration, there is certainly a conflict. I do not want the chairperson to get the members to believe that it will always be surrendering our sovereignty when we decide to have this conflict resolution somewhere else. It could be in our interest to have this conflict resolved from somewhere else - a neutral ground sometimes. So, to me, we should not really take it that whenever we go somewhere to resolve a conflict, then we are surrendering our sovereignty because it could be in our own interests. Allow me to support – 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Clarification. I just want to seek clarification –

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, just to supplement the colleague; you see when the world is coming together, we should not seem to be building a wall around this country called Uganda. That is why I said that we leave that to those who are going to negotiate. 

The preference is that it should be resolved here but there may be instances, as has been noted, in our own interests that we resolve it in a neutral country. So, we cannot say that it can only be resolved in Uganda.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Hon. Minister, I want to know because you have always insisted that we leave it to those who are going to handle the negotiations - I want you to cite here the examples of whom. Isn’t it going to be the ministers and in any case, the ministers will have to be negotiating on our behalf as a country and yet we have not provided anywhere in the law that you will come and consult Parliament or elsewhere as you are negotiating. So leaving it as a blank statement will not work.

MS ALUM: Thank you so much. There is no doubt that in this Bill that we are handling now, we need arbitration. To the best of my information, right now the PPDA has formed a tribunal and I believe that in also this one, we must have a tribunal. Madam Chairperson, if you can allow me to suggest, that tribunal that will be handling petitions and complaints should have senior judges, senior procurement officers, senior business entrepreneurs to be in the tribunal to handle these kinds of complaints and disputes and if it does not go on well, then maybe later they can go to court. We need this in our law because PPDA has already formed this kind of arbitration.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, Minister for Internal Affairs and the Minister for Trade.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: This is a good law being put into place but let it not make Uganda very unattractive when it comes to such because some of the agreements will be internationalised and since 1986, we have been entering into agreements, there is always the Paris Protocol when it comes to disputes and international companies would enter an agreement with the country and prefer, in the event of a dispute, to be resolved on the basis of the Paris Protocol of resolving conflicts and that is why we have the International Court of Justice at the Hague. So, I think having an internationalised agreement with an independent internationalised basis of resolving a dispute will not take away our sovereignty in any way. But it will make us very uncompetitive and unattractive.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is this Act going to be taken for arbitration abroad?

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Chairperson, I stand to be guided. We are talking about a PPP. The implementation body or unit of a PPP is UDC – I stand to be guided and currently, we have projects under UDC that are under a PPP arrangement. So, what are we talking about? What are we auditing? If there is no provision on implementation of a PPP, I stand to be corrected. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Chairperson, the honourable minister is insinuating that we already have a law under which UDC is operating and to the best of my knowledge, we are actually just in the process of putting one law in place to that effect. Really, can you guide the honourable minister that we are still in the process of making the law and she actually is not right to suggest that UDC is already operating under PPP?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I think to the best of my knowledge, there is no existing law on PPP and this is what we are doing today.

MR AJEDRA: So, the suggestion that UDC is the implementer of this law is certainly fact. The law is still being made and we still have clauses in terms of how this law is going to operate. So, I don’t believe that UDC is – if there are clauses on a PPP, it is using the existing PPDA law which provides for alternative procurement.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Chairperson, did I hear UDC? Is it the Uganda Development Corporation? I would like clarification. Did you say UDC, Madam Minister? What is it? 

MS KYAMBADDE: It is under the Ministry of Trade. It is supposed to but we are still sorting out legal issues – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister for Privatisation has something.

MR KAJARA: Madam Chairperson, first of all, clause 18(6) of the public partnership agreement provides that the agreements shall specifically provide for the following and if we look at (r) –

THE CHAIRPERSON: We haven’t passed that yet. 

MR KAJARA: Clause 18(6)(r) provides that the agreement shall provide, first of all, the law to govern the agreement in (q) and in (r) it provides the procedure for resolving disputes between the contracting authority and the private party. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have not yet passed it.

MR KAJARA: We have not, Madam Chairperson, but I am just giving guidance. During the negotiation of the agreement, that is when you agree on the method of dispute resolution; that is when you agree on the law that will govern the agreement; that is when the partners negotiate where and when the disputes will be solved. So it is desirable that we don’t domesticate dispute resolution; we leave it between the parties to agree as the honourable member from Masaka said. If it is desirable that we have it in any other place, there it is. If it is in Uganda, so be it but it is a negotiation between the two parties. 

MR KWIZERA: Madam Chairperson, the hon. Minister is talking as if these people cannot be used in guiding those who are going to negotiate. This law is going to be a principle when you are going to negotiate. Secondly, issues that were done before the law was in place are ultra vires. They can’t be here and hon. Ministers, we should be nationalistic. When you say that, you seem as if you don’t want to be nationalistic to our country. We should build capacity for the people to be able to participate in negotiation but when you say that you want to go outside, it means you are losing confidence in yourselves and your human resource. So, we should build our capacity and give confidence even to those ones who will be coming to do business here.

MR BAHATI: Thank you. To hon. Kajara, I think when you are negotiating, what comes to us is the law to guide you to make an agreement. You don’t start with an agreement to make the law and I think that is very important and that is why we are here to make a law so that when we are making agreements, we are guided by the law. 

Secondly, contrary to what Gen. Aronda is raising, I think if you are a serious investor and you know that the country has a capability to resolve conflicts internally, you give them more confidence than a company that you think does not have the capability. You are going out to Paris to resolve a conflict - I think it is almost the opposite. So, I think, Madam Chairperson, that we reclaim the debate on this issue and move towards a conclusion of it and have arbitration here in Uganda.

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. I do not know whether it is I alone or whether I have colleagues who are also lost. In the event that we fail to arbitrate internally and we are saying here – we are putting the law that arbitration must be here but this is a partner we have got from some other country. What happens if we arbitrate and fail to agree on the arbitration once it is in the law?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we can provide that. In the first instance, it should be here and if you fail you can go abroad but to say that you straight away go there -

COL. (RTD) MWESIGYE: Madam Chairperson and honourable colleagues, thank you. I don’t think we are trying to reinvent the wheel. The rules and laws that govern agreements and arbitration are clearly laid in international laws and local laws. So, I don’t know what you are talking about. The laws are very clear; in Ugandan laws, in international laws, in WTO, I don’t know why we are wasting time over this. The laws are very clear and we are all lawyers; you know they exist and every person knows where these laws are embedded.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. When you follow this debate, I think the impression that is being given is as if we are trying to provide for arbitration in terms of all agreements but I think this PPP is specific. So, insisting that they should be done in Uganda is okay because this is specific in the area of a PPP so it has nothing to do with investment because this is a small subsection of other things that will take place but the way the minister is arguing is as if we are trying to say that all relationship with foreigners will be done in Uganda. I think this is in lieu of those who are interested in taking up this mandate of going for the Public Private Partnership. So, I think that insisting that they should be in Uganda is okay because if you want to be part of this arrangement, if there is any arbitration, you will start in Uganda because the mandate you are doing ordinarily is supposed to have been done by an authority in Uganda and then the authority is giving you that mandate. So, you should be able to know that if there is any type of arbitration, then it should be in Uganda first. Thank you. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, thank you so much for this opportunity. I was looking through our laws. We have the Arbitration and Conciliation Act of Uganda and if you look at the long title, it says “An Act to amend the laws relating to domestic arbitration, international commercial arbitration and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards.” Unfortunately, I have not gone through the entire law but what I want to say is once beaten, twice shy. In the Umeme contract, we hosted our own jurisdiction, we even hosted the jurisdiction of the Attorney-General and we stated that where any dispute arises, it will be resolved outside our jurisdiction. I think now that we are legislating for public private partnership, we should be very reluctant to subject Uganda to foreign laws. So, the court of first instance should have to be in Uganda to resolve this issue. That is what I want to submit, Madam Chair. 

MS MUJUNGU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. With this law in place, I know the public and the private partners will enter into an agreement and in this agreement, there will be an arbitration clause and the two parties will agree on this arbitration clause and where the arbitration will take place. In the event that they disagree, then they should not enter into the contract because that arbitration clause will be part of the terms and conditions of that agreement. And they will all not be the same agreements; they will vary. So, each agreement will be handled accordingly. So, Madam Chairperson, in my view, let the parties determine where the arbitration should take place. 

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I sat in the Ad Hoc Committee for Energy and we saw how our own negotiators did not even start with negotiation in Uganda and in fact, the international organisation and companies that wanted this agreement wanted it outside so that they can influence and either buy or connive with these people and at the end of it, we had a bad agreement. At the moment, the issue we are talking about is jurisdiction. Several countries have made laws that stipulate that arbitration is with their country and if you are not satisfied even at the first instance, there are several courts in that country that you can appeal to. If you fail internally, you can go to the Court of Appeal. If you fail there, you can go to the Supreme Court and so on and so forth. 

I do not think that our Judiciary will fail to determine the matter related to all the issues in the agreements. So, to even say that we put that in the next - I do not agree with that insistence on going abroad. Let us put that the jurisdiction is in Uganda and if you fail within our system, you can go international if you want but we should not stop it in the law that the first insistence is Uganda. We just put it that the jurisdiction is Uganda and for the rest, international law is there. If within the country you are defeated, then you can find your way to international arbitration but let us put Uganda as the jurisdiction. 

MS TAAKA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. We are talking about arbitration and we are making this law in Uganda and all the agreements will be made here for instance and if there is anything, I think this law is domiciled in Uganda. So disputes should be here; arbitration should be in Uganda and also, this brings me to think that we should include a new clause – (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you for giving way. The information I want to give you is that according to the law we passed here, section 20 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act says that the parties are free to agree on place of arbitration. If the parties fail to agree, the place of arbitration shall be determined by an arbitral tribunal having regard to the course and circumstances of the case. So, this Parliament had pronounced itself earlier and I don’t know if by default, we are amending the existing law that we had earlier agreed on.  

MR BAHATI: One of the reasons we legislate is to correct lacunas and also correct situations that we have gone through. We were here; it is actually still fresh; it is not even concluded that we were in London and not all of us are comfortable about why we are going to London in the case of Tullow. So, as much as we have that, there is nothing that stops us from correcting a situation that is bad. That is the reason we legislate.  

MS TAAKA: Thank you very much for the information you have given me. Actually, we are here to legislate and each case is also judged according to the circumstances but this is a PPP Bill which we want to form into an Act and this should be what we want as Ugandans and by the way, Madam Chairperson, I wonder why people are saying members are thinking that it should be arbitrated abroad or something. Who is a private partner? What is the definition of private? Private can be the indigenous Ugandan. So, why should they go and be arbitrated somewhere else and therefore, I propose that we include a new clause under clause 18 that we should be considering the private Ugandan if they have the capacity to invest before we continue with others. We should give them chance to build capacity for our country, Madam Chairperson. Thank you.

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We waited for this Bill, we have been asking for this Bill for a very long time and the Frontbench took their time to work on this Bill. Now that it is here, I wanted to allay the fears of hon. Aronda and the Ministers of Finance that you must understand as ministers of government what sovereignty means. In a private public partnership, you are dealing with the government and private people abroad –(Interjections)– in most cases yes, that is the reality and therefore, the government should give its conditions. There is no way you can turn out and say you are going to scare people from investing in Uganda because arbitration will have to be done internally in Uganda. That is not fair to a sovereign nation –(Interjections)– hon. Okot Ogong, I have listened to all the information because you remember we discussed from outside this same matter –(Laughter) So, my view, Madam Chairperson - 

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Chairperson, I respect hon. Reagan Okumu very much but I don’t want him to misinform Parliament that we had a discussion with him because as far as I know, I haven’t met him today –(Laughter)– therefore, is it in order for hon. Reagan Okumu, who I respect so much, to mislead Parliament by informing them that I discussed with him this matter? Is he in order yet I never met with him?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, unfortunately I was not in the corridors so, I do not know whether you met or did not meet. (Laughter) 

MR OKUMU: Madam Chair, that is the reason why parliaments have lobbies to interact with colleagues on matters on the Floor of Parliament and I did that honestly with my colleague and many members of Parliament watched me interact with him. So, Madam Chairperson, I strongly feel that having arbitration within Uganda will not scare any investor. Rather, it will give more confidence for investors to come in. 

There are other countries for example who have taken a certain stance like Ethiopia. You have given it as an example. Ethiopia is a start; they are being recognised by investors. There are so many investors yearning to go to Ethiopia. Even South Sudan which is a very young country we are helping today, they take their issue of sovereignty strongly. So, my appeal to the ministers is that please, we are not against your Bill. This is your Bill but we want your Bill to be strong enough. We have had experience in this country where the Front Bench have betrayed the nation. So, we should not allow that to continue. We should tighten whatever law we are going to put in place so that we are able to make a follow up. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I raised that issue with hon. Ekanya on whether we could legislate and limit the jurisdiction. It is obvious that hon. Members have been informed by experience that probably the previous laws have not been accommodative enough. What I want to inform ourselves is that when we make this law, which I have no problem with, it would be making the job of the negotiators to this country easier because on matters of arbitration, already there is a law. 

Secondly, the proposal which is a mid-road position to have arbitration both here and anywhere else because what you are looking at purely is not a court. The United Nations Commission on International Trade law provides for the rules on arbitration and just like hon. Aronda says on the Paris Protocol, we should be seen not to fear that that would stop us from legislating here but only what we need to know is that we would have already negotiated that clause on arbitration by enacting this law. That our negotiators will not have any say in the agreement but to say arbitration will be according to the Arbitration and Conciliation Act Cap 4. This law was made in 2000 and I happen to have been in law school at that time. It is not comprehensive but actually borrows from the Paris Protocol and the UN Commission on International Trade Law. So, Madam Chairperson, my position is that whatever we do, the sovereignty of this country is paramount just as our obligation to be internationally attractive commercially in an international arena. So, we need to strike a balance. 

What do we do when we are faced with this? We have the ability to make laws except to change a man into a woman but let us balance and strike a balance like guided properly from the Chair; that we could have a mid-road position where in the first instance – (Interruption)

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, you allowed us to have a middle ground by saying that the first call should be in Uganda. Now if we are to propose, the statement reads that any dispute between a contracting authority and a private party may be settled through the dispute settlement mechanism. May be we go according to the Arbitration and Conciliation Act and then the compromise shall be that or any other agreed mechanism –

THE CHAIRPERSON: You can do that as a proviso; that will mean that we delete the words “… settled through the dispute settlement mechanism agreed upon” and say “Any dispute between the contracting authority and the private party shall be settled in accordance with the Arbitration and Conciliation Act” and then we can add a provision that if one is not satisfied, they can have recourse to international law.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson and colleagues, I think we need to understand the principle of arbitration because people have talked here about a number of issues. When you have a dispute, the UN convention on arbitration is clear. The major challenge is, the two parties nominate the team to arbitrate. So, the situation of us going outside by the way is just for us to  surrender our sovereignty and put in – (Interjections)– please, allow me explain this issue, I will give you opportunity. The conflict is always when you are two parties, each party will be called upon to nominate a person of integrity and so, if the private party nominates and the government of Uganda nominates, the question of venue is paramount because it makes it easy because the investment is here in Uganda. So, it is not about going abroad because even if you go abroad, the Government of Uganda will –(Interruption)

MR KWIZERA: Madam Chairperson, the information I want to give you is that we are looking at jurisdiction in terms of a country or individuals who will be participating. You can have jurisdiction within Uganda and the parties can agree to invite other people who are not Ugandans. So, when we say that it should be in Uganda, it is not limiting us or parties from inviting people from outside with expertise but we reduce on the costs of our people who go to negotiate. 

MR EKANYA: Yes, that is it exactly. I want to allay the fears of the ministers that the private party will nominate their team. Let them fly here to Uganda and use our hotels. The Government of Uganda nominates. So, that is what arbitration is and how it is handled and that is how the UN Convention is handled. Madam Chairperson, let me conclude. Hon. Aronda, are you saying that if a private party came here and committed terrorism, we shall take him and try him in Kenya or America? We shall try him on a criminal case according to the laws of Uganda. Shall we have scared an investor?  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, you heard the Conciliation and Arbitration Act. What is the provision about nominating arbitrators because that will solve our problem because if it is embedded in the law?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, first of all, this law as you had read the proposed amendment that the parties agreed according to the Arbitration Act will not be in our hands because in the Arbitration Act of 2000, we thought we stated clearly that the place of arbitration will be determined by the party but today, we have to make a deliberate effort – (Interjections) – Madam Chairperson, what I am saying is that this Arbitration Act is not in our favour but what we can do - as Parliament, we passed the Succession Act. Hon. Oboth Oboth will agree with me and we gave the Succession Act powers to override certain laws - the Succession Act – when you are interpreting clauses of the Succession Act and it contradicts with other provisions of other Acts, the Succession Act takes precedent.

So, today, we must specifically state that this particular law, if it is our intention, should have to take precedent over certain provisions of the Arbitration Act because these provisions are already bad as of now.

MR EKANYA: Hon. Otto, you are right. (Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Chair, this is a very important law that we are making and we are making it because as a country, we want to jointly work to develop our country. We are making it because we do not have all the resources because this is another way of funding our development programmes and that is why we are making this law. It is because we lack resources but we are saying this is another way of bringing private investors, they bring in their private funds so that together, we develop the country.

Madam Chair, I want to give this example. Last year, some Members of this Parliament went to India; they had gone for that kind of arbitration but since the thing was in the country India, the country of partnership that they were with, they were arrested and harassed. 

That is why – [Mr Ekanya: “that is criminal”] – yes, that is where we are now going, because that is why, normally, you have to choose the venue of arbitration so that you are free, you are not harassed and you can freely decide on a neutral ground. This is investment; it is not a favour for Uganda. We are saying we lack - for example, Madam Chair, we have this –(Interjections)– please, Members – for example, we want to create this express road to Entebbe but as a country, we do not have the resources. Now, we appeal to investors –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Madam Chair, order.

MR OKOT OGONG: Am giving an example -

MR OKUMU: Madam Chair, order -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Point of order -

MR OKUMU: Madam Chair, the principle behind PPP is about efficiency because the whole idea is that the public cannot deliver and therefore, when you bring on board private interests, the element of management and efficiency will be achieved. Is it, therefore, in order for hon. Okot Ogong to mislead this House and the nation that the sole purpose of PPP is to attract investors from abroad? Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, we are also interested in local investors. Please, conclude.

MR OKOT OGONG: I was giving my example, Madam Chair, because it is very important and it can guide this Parliament. For example, I am talking about Entebbe express highway. Government decided that this road is very important but at the moment, as a country, we lack resources. So, we appeal to our business partners to come and invest their money and we agree on a private public partnership and that is why that road is going on without our own money being put in place.

And now, in case, there arises disputes between Uganda and that investor of the express highway, then the partner - the parties must agree that this is how we are going to address our dispute. This is where we are going to have a neutral ground so that I am not harassed because this is good for everybody. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, why don’t we just say that in accordance to the Arbitration and Reconciliation Act, because it provides for all those, venue and all that; it provides for them.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, we have to mention Uganda.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, I am taken aback by hon. Okot Ogong, who had some interests in leading this country at some stage. (Laughter) I think hon. Odonga Otto has made a point, that today, we are given an opportunity to go an extra mile, to make sure that we tie the knot and lacunas, which are in different laws. That is why, for example, we know that there is a method of direct procurement in the PPDA Act but we have gone ahead to say that let this method of direct procurement for this purpose of PPP be approved by Cabinet.

We would have chosen to say, let us go according to the PPDA. So, I do not think that there is any harm that we do to say that our country is a good country and if you want a dispute, you can handle it here. I do not think so and we are willing to debate this issue to the letter on this matter.

DR MUTENDE: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I would like to give this whole debate a historical perspective. You see, where we have been as a country – there was a time when nobody wanted to invest in this country. In fact, there was negative flow of investment from Uganda to other parts of the world. And it took a long time and a lot of effort by government and international community to win the confidence of investors to come and invest in Uganda again.

Indeed, Uganda even had to become a signatory to organizations like the Multilateral Investment Agency and other international agencies to be able to convince investors to come back and invest in Uganda. And, indeed, it has paid very good dividends. (Interjections) Now, I have just begun - this is just background really. (Mr Sempijja rose_) I hope you enrich this discussion.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you very much for giving way. The only problem is that we are talking about investments in Uganda. This country can invest even outside Uganda and indeed, Madam Chair, before Amin took over, Uganda had ships on the waters of Indian Ocean and my brother was an electrical engineer on one of those ships. So, I do not want people to limit this decision on basis that all investments of this country are supposed to be local. Thank you.

MR MUTENDE: Thank you very much. That was a bit of diversion. (Laughter) Madam Chair, we remember in this country, there was a time when assets which belonged to international investors were taken over. At one point, one leader had said government should have majority shareholding; another one simply came and said all foreigners should get out. That is the kind of background we had where the government just nationalised properties and investments. It has taken us a long way to get back on track. Why are we now thinking about the PPP? Many Members have contributed here to the effect that it is for the sake of efficiency that comes with the private sector, for the good management of the private sector but also to make sure that we achieve our target objectives as a government.

Now, where we are headed, we must make sure that the global investment community has confidence in us. True, let us make our domestic laws, which are very good; certainly, our arbitration laws should be very good but we should leave the window wide open for international arbitration. This is very important for us for the sake of the confidence of the people who want to come and partner with us in this project. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We need to take a decision.

MS OLERU: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. To me, first of all, the clause we have takes the interest of international trade. Then, secondly, Madam Chair, I love my country and I love the judges of this country but I also have my reservations.

I am thinking that with the current situation in Uganda, with all the Ugandans who love themselves so much, who are much more interested in money, not even their country, and believing that if we have a multi-billion company here, then we have this problem where they need arbitration, they can even bribe our judges because people do not look at their country but at their individual interests.

Therefore, I believe, may be, if we say that the interested parties would choose the area of arbitration, that one may even be better. Therefore, I am thinking that we should remain with our own – the article we already have in the law other than changing it. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you are agreeing with the proposal by the chairperson because that is his proposal that either they agree internally or fall back to the Reconciliation and Arbitration Act.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Madam Chair. It is unfortunate that we are discussing the arbitration, when currently, as a country, we are in London on oil and gas arbitration. At a later stage, I would want to ask if PSA recoverable costs are also not part of a PPP and not part of the loan, which requires parliamentary approval.

But the PPP we are talking about is actually an alternative. We are saying we are avoiding stress on Government, we are trying to attract direct foreign investments through multinational corporations and, I must add, not only multi-national because the local content must also be provided for. I would want the minister, at a later stage, to tell us how the UDC comes in here because the local content must also be provided for. The arbitration comes at the tail end of things going bad. We should also look at when it does not. 

So, given that background, I would be more comfortable looking at what is happening in London, we either go for the parties to agree or we go recourse to the law we made. We must be very mindful that the multi nationals we are talking about, by the time you go for arbitration, they almost have a strong case. So, we should try as much as possible to cushion and to protect - and I hope we are also going to have good negotiators this time round.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the new clause do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Schedule

MR AMURIAT: I want to introduce a new provision. I do not know where the House will decide to put this one but in my view, it is a very important provision, that if we omitted it, we would probably leave some gaps in our law.

This is how we handle consortiums or consortia. I wish to propose that we introduce a new clause with the headnote, “Consortium”. 

I am proposing this, Madam Chairperson, because I realise that Uganda is moving towards introducing or using consortia in this country. If you are following the media, there are five consortia, and one independent firm that have been shortlisted for detailed bids for the development, implementation and operation of the oil refinery for the field and the pipe line. So, I think it will be useful for us to cover this category of people.

Reading from Wikipedia, “A consortium is an association of two or more individuals, companies, organisations or governments with the objective of participating in a common activity or pooling their resources for achieving a common goal.”

I envisage that we will have this kind of arrangement coming to play and yet, unfortunately, it is conspicuously missing from the proposals made by the minister in the Bill. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker and hon. colleagues, I would like to seek your indulgence that I introduce a new clause entitled “Consortium” and these are the elements of the clause:

    1) Where a bidder is a consortium, constituted for the purpose of bidding, for a project under this Act, the bidder shall submit the bid in the name of the consortium.

I do not know whether it would be easy to follow if I just read from my iPad or it would have been preferable that I bring a hard copy here tomorrow if you accept but I really do not mind reading this. This is not circulated to everybody but I really do not mind reading it. It will probably make sense to the House.

    2) A consortium under sub-section (1) shall submit together with the bid proof that each member of the consortium has accepted to a joint –(Interjections)– we do research- my friend, if you are sitting here without caring about doing research, then you are in the wrong place. (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: I appreciate the effort of the honourable member holding the Floor, really to go an extra mile to make sure that we have a good law. However, I also want to invite him to look at what we have been debating, especially on the issue of the private party, because a private party is defined – section 11, it says “a private party in a PPP shall be a special purpose company incorporated under the laws of Uganda”.

A special purpose company actually can be a consortium. So, I want you to reflect on it and if you think it is catering for your needs, then we do not have to labour. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But also, hon. Members, I think it is unfair for you to read an oral amendment. For some reason, Members have refused to write submissions. It is really hard now to put all this together in one’s head. I do not think you are being fair to the House.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chair, can I be allowed to bring a written submission tomorrow?

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you for that guidance, Madam Chair. I would have agreed with the concerns of hon. Amuriat but when you look at the principles of the Bill, in tandem with the cross-section of the Bill, the consortium is provided for. In addition to that, most of the cases some of us who have trained in PPP – (Laughter)– hon. Cecilia Ogwal can bear me witness because she trained in Australia. Most of the cases of PPP – it is where Government has failed to provide a service and is calling for investors to provide that service, which is equitable to both of you as partners and 70 to 80 percent is the government, which looks for that service it wants to provide because it has failed to pool resources –(Members rose_)– I can take your information since you have it. 

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, the information I want to give the honourable colleague is this, that in PPP, that special purpose vehicle is actually a consortia of companies, who are legal entities and registered; who agree to form a special purpose vehicle for purposes of implementing or providing that service. I will give an example. If you had to build a dam, there will be a contractor, the person who is going to construct; there will be the operator, once the contractor has finished his work, the operator takes over to do the operations and maintenance for the concession period; the financiers will come in to provide the money, of course, Government being part of the agreement. So, the SPV is nothing but just consortia of legally constituted companies.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that the Schedule do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, before the chairman talks about clause 2, I have a –

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, in clause 2(1)(a), insert the word “Subway” between “Rails and water”, and that would now read, “(2)(1)(a), “Roads, rails, subways, water and air transport facilities including harbor and port facilities, airport and airport facilities.” 

The justification is, subways should also be included. 

In sub-clause (1)(i) delete “Prospecting for and mining”. The justification is that this is dealt with under the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production Act and Petroleum) Act and the Petroleum (Refining, Gas Processing and Conversion, Transportation and Storage) Act.

Sub-clause (1)(j), substitute for paragraph (j) the following, “(j) Agricultural processing industries.” The justification is that strategic industries are ambiguous or vague and should be specified. Agricultural processing industries should be included in priority PPP projects for they would add value to agricultural produce, hence enhancing the economic contribution of the agricultural sector that employs over 66.5 percent of the population of Uganda.

Insert sub-clause (1)(k), “… or any other project as the minister may, by statutory instrument approve.” The justification is, there is need to encompass the other infrastructure that are not enumerated.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 2 be amended as proposed by the chair.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

New clause after Clause 4

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Chair, this is the other long one, which dealt with the committee or the unit.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, the new clause after Clause 4 was stood over yesterday. The thinking of Members was that having a board as opposed to a committee would bring in more authority. The thinking of the committee is to the effect that the committee can do similar jobs like a board, if only they are empowered in our legislation.

Madam Chair, the committee comprehensively handled this on the functions of the PPP committee and also the powers of the PPP committee. And these are bench-marked positions in the region with our neighbour in Kenya. I wish to inform this august House that the framework that we have proposed in this is a similar framework that is also available in Kenya, in their laws but, Madam Chair, we would benefit further, like I said yesterday, from the wisdom of this august House. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, yesterday, I read the new clause and I did not complete it. I beg your indulgence - there was an aspect related to establishment of a PPP project team. I do not know if I could go into it now.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please, go ahead. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Chair. 
“(1)	A contracting authority that intends to enter into a PPP arrangement with a private party shall establish a PPP project team. 

(2) 	A project team established under sub-section (1) shall be headed by a project officer and shall be composed of officials with the required technical skills appointed from the staff of the contracting authority as the authority shall, in consultation with the unit, consider necessary for the performance of its functions in relation to the project under this Act.

3) 	Where, due to technical requirements of a PPP, a contracting authority does not have the appropriate officials to be appointed as project officer, process auditor or transaction advisor, the contracting authorities shall under the PPDA Act procure a person with the appropriate skills and expertise and experience from outside the contractual authorities to act as such.

Functions of a project team

(1) A project team shall on behalf of the contracting authority: 
a) 	Identify, screen and prioritise projects based on guidelines issued by the committee.
b) 	Prepare and appraise each project agreement to ensure its legal, regulatory, social, economic and commercial viability.
c) 	Ensure that the parties to a project agreement comply with the provisions of this Act.
d) 	Undertake the procurement process in accordance with the Act and where applicable, the PPDA Act.
e) 	Monitor the implementation of a project agreement entered into with the contracting authority.
f) 	Liaise with all key stakeholders during the project cycle.
g) 	Oversee the management of a project in accordance with the project agreement entered into by the contracting authority.
h) 	Submit to the unit annual or such other period report on project agreement entered into by the contracting authority.
i) 	Maintain a record of all documents, documentations and agreement entered into by the contracting authority relating to the project under this Act.
j) 	Prepare projects in accordance with guidelines and standard documents issued by the committee under this Act.
k) 	Where the project agreement involves a transfer of assets, ensure that the transfer of assets at the expiry or early termination of a project agreement is consistent with the terms and conditions of the project agreement.
 
(l)	Carry out such other functions as maybe assigned to it by the contracting authority.

(2) 	In performing its functions under sub-section (1) the project teams shall report to the unit and shall-
(a) 	implement the recommendations and guidelines; and 
(b) 	submit such information as may be required by the unit.”

Madam Chair -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair -

HONOURABLE MEMBERS:  He is a Member of the committee. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is he a Member of the committee? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, you are aware I am a former Leader of the Opposition, and the report they are talking about was signed before I was retired (Laughter). So, it means, I am not a party to this report. (Interjections) Yes, you see, the problem of having people who do not want to listen, Madam Chair. You know some people behave in a way that their mass body cannot even correlate with the head. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, hon. Nandala, you speak since you did not sign the report. Tell us what you wanted to propose.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: My chairman now, before I was not his member, has read some amendments and I was trying to check on my iPad, I could not see them. That is the reason why I was standing up to ask, which section of the iPad I should check to get that information. (Interjections) It is not there. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Check page 21 of the chairman’s report. Your iPad is there. Did you come with your iPad or it remained in Sironko? (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I have a smaller iPad. So, I am always - on technology, I will never go wrong. So, if it is there, Madam Chair, I seek your indulgence. The Chair has read many sentences and I have noticed two things, that there will be a project officer or project committee. He has not put who appoints it; he has also mentioned how they should act, but supposing they err, who disciplines them? He has not mentioned anything on that, because these are people who could err and need to be disciplined. So, that is why I was asking, where I can check for it. 

So, page 21, Madam Chair, they have just passed it to me. I need help of the chair to help me, who appoints the project committee and how are they disciplined if they err. If somebody makes a complaint, what are the review processes?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, the contracting authority can be a ministry or any department within a ministry or an agency and all these ministries have accounting officers. Like I had stated, the technical people required will be appointed from the staff of the contracting authority and the person who will be responsible for appointment will be the accounting officer and if it is the ministry, then the accounting officer will be the permanent secretary.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, Madam Chair, if that is true, is it explicitly stated here that the person who will be appointed will be the accounting officer?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Check on page 20 of your small iPad. (Laughter)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, allow me draw the attention of my hon. Colleague to establishment of PPP project team, sub clause (2), you will find all those details there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that –

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, in principle, we do support the amendment but we wish to introduce a new clause under establishment of PPP project teams, to introduce sub clause (2) as follows: “A project team established under sub clause (1) above shall be composed of – 
a) 	a transaction advisor unless a contracting authority has adequate technical capacity to propose a preparation and implementation; 
2) 	officials from the contracting authority with the required technical skills; 
3) 	a project officer who shall head the project team and/ or any other persons appointed from outside the contracting authority.”

Madam Chair, at this infancy and in most cases, a transaction advisor is very important in PPPs because these are highly complex transactions, which require the expertise of a number of professionals, just to name a few, we need a team of lawyers to draft the agreement; we need engineers; we need architects; we need all sorts of professionals, particularly infrastructure projects. Therefore, we believe that once we have a transaction advisor, it will address the concerns raised by our hon. Colleague because a transaction advisor is there to advise the project team in terms of the necessary steps that must be taken to be able to deliver the project.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you have an objection, hon. Chair?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, before we do that, I would like to seek guidance - the minister says he is bringing a transactional advisor, that one I have no objection. But who does the review? I am asking this because if we are bringing a transaction officer, there are two more steps now we have to go; there must be a mechanism of review, either immediately or even in future. The reason I am bringing in the review supposing there is collusion and nobody wants to talk about it now but in the future you see it clearly that there was collusion. At what stage are you bringing in a review policy? If you give that, then I will be comfortable to go with what you are raising.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, you see, once you have a project team established and they have developed a project including feasibility studies, it is feasibility study report that will form what we call the PPP committee to decide whether this project should go under PPP or it should go along the traditional route, which is based on the feasibility study. Should the feasibility study be on the affirmative that, yes, it can be handled as a PPP, then the implementation of the project will start. The monitoring unit that is going to be established is responsible for monitoring the day to day. If you go through the Bill, you will find that there is even a higher level, where issues relate to variations of contract or terms whatever it is, should there be any, then the matter must be referred to the PPP committee at the higher level. So, those are the benchmarks that are checks and balances that have been put in place.

MR BAHATI: I want to agree with the minister on his suggestion but am just wondering because in the report, we see a number of things that the minister is talking about but Clause 8, transaction advisory is already there in the report; there is a process audit; issues that were raised by the former Leader of the Opposition. So, I do not know whether you are reading the same report. I do not know what –(Interjection)– but amendment is already there. So, we need to be guided so that we debate from a point of information.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, the recommendation of the committee is better than the one being brought by the minister. If you look at the recommendation of the committee, where the contracting authority does not have the appropriate officials, there is an alternative that has been given in sub clause (2): “Where due to a technical requirement of a PPP, a contracting authority does not have the appropriate officials to be appointed as project officer, project auditor or transaction advisor..” that the minister is trying to import as an amendment. 

It is actually already captured in the committee report. It goes on to say that “...the contracting authority shall, under the PPDA Act, procure a person with the appropriate skills and experience from outside the contracting authority to act as such.” So, Madam Chair, this is something the committee has comprehensively dealt with. So, our formulation is better than what the minister is proposing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that the clause be amended as proposed by the chairman of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the amended clause does stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, Clause 5, we propose the deletion of sub clauses (5) and (6). The justification is that these have been handled in detail under the new clauses establishing the PPP team.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that the clause be amended as proposed.

Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, in sub clause (1) of this clause, we propose to rephrase paragraph (a) to read as follows: “To appoint the project team and any other person required for the implementation of the project.” In sub-clause (1), we propose the insertion of a new paragraph immediately before paragraph (a) to read as follows: “To solicit for a private party for a project.” The justification is that the actual solicitation of a private party is done by the contracting authority for which the accounting officer is responsible. 

In sub-clause (1), we propose the insertion of a new paragraph (e) to read as follows: “To take custody of a project’s agreement made under this Act and monitor compliance with the terms and conditions of the agreement contained therein.”
The justification is to enhance functions of the accounting officer and ensure efficient monitoring of the PPP projects.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question –

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, we wish to retain what was proposed in the original Bill. The functions of the accounting officer are: responsible for appointing a project officer; a transaction advisor; a process auditor and the project team. This is the team that will deliver the project to the people. So, for the accounting officer to efficiently monitor, he must be responsible for the implementation of a project. That is why I propose that we retain Clause 6 (1) (a) as it appears in the original Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, thank you very much. The minister is saying we should retain this - maybe for only the project auditor and not for the process auditor. A process auditor should be independent of all the processes. That is when they will be able to audit efficiently. The only person who can appoint the process auditor should be the Auditor-General. This is because the process will be auditing an activity of Government that has been processed by the accounting officer and their team.

So, given the fact that already it will be defective by having the accounting officer appointing the project team, I would suggest that – okay, if there is a provision that gives the accounting officer the powers to appoint a project team, this paragraph will be redundant. So, is it the accounting officer who appoints the project officer and the team? If that is yes, then the appointment of the process auditor is not the function of the accounting officer.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, I have no problem with the proposal made by the former Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nanadala. I just want to point out that the project officer should actually have no role in the procurement process. This is because this is the responsibility of the accounting officer.
The function of the project officer is an internal arrangement that is made within. Otherwise, the person who should actually be accountable is the accounting officer. So, I am reluctant to accept the proposal as moved by the responsible minister.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, we should not make this a ping-pong sort of discussion because at the end of the day the accounting officer is responsible for the performance of that contract. When you read clause 1 (b), you realise that it talks about protecting the project against forfeiture, theft, loss, wastage, misuse of any property placed under the control of the private party.

So, if the accounting officer is going to be responsible, it does not mean they are going to do the job. There must be some people to do that job and those people include: One, the project officer, who will be the desk officer and coordinate the project; two, the transaction advisor, to advise the project team; three, the project team that we have talked about.

I have no problem having the process auditor coming from outside the jurisdiction of the accounting officer. But for the accounting officer to be held responsible, the human resource that is going to implement this project must be appointed by him.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, shall we then have a new Clause 7 to deal specifically with the process auditor and their appointment by the Auditor-General – that the process auditor shall be appointed by the Auditor-General; that will be a separate clause. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, you are right the process auditor should be appointed by the Auditor-General. But how will the transaction advisor be procured?

MR AJEDRA: They will be procured in accordance with the PPDA Act because he will be providing a service to the contracting authority as an advisor in terms of how the project is going to be executed.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I am still wondering, what is the difference between the proposal by hon. Nandala-Mafabi and what the chairperson of the committee has conceded to.

In the PPP, the work of a process auditor – and I thought we had agreed that way – is similar to that of the internal auditor. Now if we are really immediately handing it over to the Auditor-General, which is an external process, then at what stage shall we have the internal audit process? This is an internal audit process, the way we have internal audit taking place in every Government entity. I don’t know why the chairperson of the committee has quietly handed over these duties to the Auditor-General?

MR SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would like to welcome the hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s proposal that we need another person to appoint the process auditor. However, I propose that this be done in the armpits of the internal audit department. You know that in the new law, we are creating an Internal Auditor-General and I think those are adequate controls.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you have got some changes coming?

MR SSEBUNYA: No, what I am saying is that there is an internal audit department in all ministries. So, the process auditor can operate in the armpits of that department. That will be much better.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, he/she will not be appointed by the Auditor-General but by the accounting officer? So, we leave it as it is?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, allow me to make some clarification. The internal auditor is supposed to help in the internal processes. By the way the Auditor-General depends on the work of the internal auditor. In this process, there is nothing here that forbids the internal auditor to audit it. In fact they are supposed to assist the accounting officer in the process. But now here we are talking about who will audit the process and that is why we are saying there must be somebody independent who will come to audit the process.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chair, I would like to inform my senior colleagues that we are establishing a project team. The kind of auditor that we are looking for is that one who will be part of that project team. Issues of independence are paramount but when you bring in the Auditor-General, it means you are now introducing the external auditor into that team, yes by all standards the external auditor cannot be part of the project team.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we should leave it as it is?

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, when you read the South African PPP, you realise that they have what is called an internal audit process. That is different from what my colleague, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, is talking about. That is provided for under the Auditor-General’s arrangement. But this internal auditor, (Interjection) yes he will not be entirely independent, but he will ensure that all the processes that are going to be detailed in the manual are actually followed by the project team. So, he has to be part of the project team.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that the clause be amended as proposed by the –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, before you put the question – I have no objection when you say this will be an internal auditor. But an internal auditor cannot be part of this process. This is because the moment you allow them to be part of the transaction, you will be compromising them. So, while we are doing this, let us make the internal auditor independent. That is why I agree with the proposal by the chairman of the committee. Maybe we need to introduce a clause to say that there will be a process auditor appointed by either the accounting officer - but again when you give those powers to the accounting officer then the internal auditor cannot audit their appointing authority. There must be another person to appoint the process auditor.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, the proposal we are taking on is that the internal auditor who exists in Government will handle auditors in departments of Government. In this case the process auditor should be appointed by the Internal Auditor-General.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But when will that person come into office? We can’t legislate in anticipation.

MR EKANYA: Okay, in that case for now - you know all internal auditors throughout the country are appointed by the Accountant- General. We can put it like that and when a new law comes in place, it will be applicable.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair that is why I am making a proposal that we should introduce a provision to say that the process shall be audited by an internal auditor. When you do that – even under the current arrangement, they will do that. And when the arrangement is changed, still the person responsible will appoint somebody to audit the process. My suggestion is that in that clause we should insert a provision to say that there will be a process auditor who will be the internal auditor.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay? Hon. Members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced after Clause 6.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 6 be amended as proposed by the chairperson of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I move to introduce a new clause, I don’t know which numbering that will be, but to say that there will be a process auditor who will be an internal auditor. Whoever appoints him/her – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: No, not just like that. (Laughter) Madam Chair, hon. Nandala-Mafabi should take note that he is being captured on the Hansard. (Laughter) Anyway, I would like to move that new clause should read as follows: “There shall be a process auditor who shall be an internal-auditor appointed by the Accountant-General.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that that new clause be introduced.

(Question put and agreed to.)
            
Clause 7

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, I move that in Clause 7, we delete sub-clause (1) (c). The justification is that the actual solicitation of the private party is done by the contracting authority for which the accounting officer is responsible. Transfer it to Clause 6.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, that is a delegated function. Once you state that the accounting officer will appoint a project officer – the function of solicitation is delegated to this desk officer. So, it can’t be the accounting officer to again solicit for a private party. It is a process to get that private party. And that is why we have the project team where the desk officer will perform that function; it is a delegated function.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, allow me to seek clarification from the Minister of Finance. What is the role of the Uganda Development Corporation (UDC)? Can you help me understand that before I move on?

MR AJEDRA: Uganda Development Corporation is a Government corporation. It will use this law once it is passed because it also enters into business ventures with other parties. I can give you the example of Soroti Fruit Factory –(Interjections)– I don’t know whether it is there or not. But UDC as a Government corporation is like –(Interruption)

MR SSEBUNYA: On the matter of the creation of the UDC – that UDC will operate like any other Government department. It will be a contracting authority. It will procure using either the traditional PPDA law or use the PPP we are going to pass.

MR AJEDRA: So, this law is not being made for only MDAs. The National Housing Corporation can use it; the Civil Aviation Authority can use it; the Uganda Forestry Authority can use it; a ministry can use it –(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Hon. Minister, the reason I raised this matter earlier – and I thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for raising it again – was that this country would be more organised, and if we had brought in the principle of UDC, I am sure we would do a better job as a country. Our local content aspect would have been also taken care of. That is why I was saying that we should not discuss this Bill as if it is for only multinational corporations or direct foreign investment alone. Why don’t you, at this point in time, assure us at what stage is the UDC – I don’t know whether it is going to be a Bill – I don’t know how you will call it because we are now hearing about units and so forth. That is a very important component because our earlier intention of the PPP was not just to rely on foreign companies; we would want to hear from you about where the UDC is going to be as we proceed.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, the Minister for Trade and Industry asked the right question but probably at the wrong time because we are handling PPP issues not UDC. However, it is an important point now that there are some PPPs that are being handled by UDC, according to the information available.

But as we talk, we are creating a unit under this law. So, would it be probably right for us to create a transitional clause under this law to take care of those we have already taken on, or is it assumed that UDC will now go away so that we can handle this under the new unit? We need to pronounce ourselves on this so that we can get clear clarification of what is going –(Interruption)

MR AJEDRA: No, to solve this issue – you see we are not creating this law for a particular institution. As I said, UDC is a Government corporation like any other Government agency. It is free to apply the PPDA law where appropriate. It is free to use this law once it is passed to undertake any project they may wish to implement. But the question is – and we have been talking about it for quite a long time, that Kampala-Jinja Express Highway – the people who are competent to handle that transaction are in UNRA under the Ministry of Works and Transport because they have the expertise to do that. There is no other company that can use this law to construct the Kampala-Jinja Express Highway.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, what hon. David Bahati was asking is – you are talking about the future – about the existing PPPs that were done without this law being in place? Where do they fall? That is what he wants to know.

MR AJEDRA: Okay, that is not to say that we have not done any PPPs in this country. There have been some. If you recall, when the chairperson of the committee was presenting the report, there are quite a number projects that have been done under the PPP arrangement. But the question is: how were they procured? When you read the PPDA – unfortunately I don’t have a copy here with me –

THE CHAIRPERSON: We gave you the iPad, don’t you – (Laughter)

MR AJEDRA: I will need to open it, Madam Chair. But as I was saying, under the PPDA Act, there is a section that says that “any other procurement that offers value for money” – it does not specifically mention PPPs; so that is the exit section under which most of these projects have been handled, whether it was privatization or purely PPPs. This law sets the parameters and the process within which a PPP must follow.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, the point on UDC is very important. Government has to come out clear on it. We are now talking about a private party that operates under limited liability. The purpose why governments establish companies or corporations is also to deal with the aspect of interference with sovereignty so that a private party enters into a PPP with another company, which also has limited liability –(Interruption)

MS TAAKA: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. There are two UDCs. So, which one are we talking about? (Laughter) Madam Chair, there is UDC and there is also the UDCL – Uganda Development Corporation Limited. So, which one are we talking about?

MR EKANYA: Thank you so much, colleague. In this law, we need to come out very clearly. Otherwise, if we leave it like this without bringing UDC on board, every contract being signed by contracting authorities which will be Government departments – the contracts will be signed for example between Ministry of Works and private party X – that is why we need a limited liability company that will be signing on behalf of all the institutions of Government of Uganda so that a private party from, for example, China or Korea with limited liability can also enter into an agreement with a limited liability in Uganda but with Government having a stake. Otherwise, if we pass it like this, we will be putting our country to –(Interruption)

MR KYAMADIDI: Madam Chair, with due respect to the shadow Minister of Finance who is also a Member of the Committee on Finance, where he should have aired those brilliant ideas, I am constrained to enquire whether he is in order to legislate in anticipation? First of all, there is no part of this Bill – I have read the whole of it on the iPad – where UDC is mentioned. So, for the hon. Member to introduce a new Bill – I don’t know whether it is shadow Bill or not – it is ridiculous. So, is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I thought you are aware about the objectives of this Bill. What you are introducing substantially alters the objectives of the Bill, completely.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I have been consulting Government informally and I was told that before we complete this Bill, Government or Cabinet will have had a decision for that clause to be introduced. That is why I am happy that the Minister of Trade and Industry said that the consultation process –(Interjections)– yes, I am telling you what I know as the shadow Minister of Finance. 

So, when I saw the Minister of Trade and Industry come in, I thought she had a position of Government. Otherwise, we are now putting off a matter that is very serious. I hope that the Minister of Trade and Industry will clarify on it.

MR MUKITALE: Point of procedure, Madam Chair. I have been constrained to seek your indulgence. Some of us and the country at large have been waiting for this PPP. But we also have a strong support for UDC and we are aware that without the collaboration of the Government ministries as far as this is concerned, and the big expenses we are about to incur in the Oil and Gas Industry, which I also don’t see coming up in this Bill, I would like to suggest that the ministries concerned as mentioned in the previous list of projects – roads, oil and gas, trade and industry – consult further. This is because I feel they haven’t consulted enough –(Interjections)– not the committee, but at Cabinet level. I can see a mismatch and a discontent and the lack of an integrated approach –(Interjections)– yes, unless the line ministers come here to give evidence to the contrary. 

Madam Chair, would it be procedurally okay for us to defer this item for those responsible ministers to bring us evidence –(Interjections)– I am not questioning the committee. All I am saying is that we have a problem to continue with this Bill without evidence of coordination or an inter-ministerial approach to this issue.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, honourable member, this is a Cabinet Bill. The presumption is that Cabinet sat and discussed it before it came for the first reading.

MR MUKITALE: But the Minister of Trade has just told us about the consultations that are still going on.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, if I can respond – let me –

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are lobbying for trade to take over this?

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, there was a policy developed and which was passed by Cabinet. It was on the basis of this policy that this Bill was developed. Furthermore, for those who probably do not know, a PPP is an alternative procurement method. I repeat that it is an alternative procurement method that was not accommodated in the current PPDA Act. We are not making a law for a particular institution. We are making a law for the whole country. That is why we said that municipal authorities – initially, we had opposed the introduction of the municipalities in this Bill. But now municipal authorities are free to use this Bill when it comes to the execution of projects. 

Further, any Government agency or corporation will be free to use this law when enacted. If the Ministry of Education, for example, wants to build its headquarters, there is the accounting officer who will prepare the project, submit it through the process for purposes of entering into a PPP arrangement with a party. That is why I am saying we are not making this law for any particular corporation or agency or ministry. The law is for the country; and as I said, it is an alternative procurement method. I beg to submit.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I want to thank the minister –(Interruptions)

MR MUKITALE: Madam Chair, it is an alternative financing method and not an alternative procurement method. I just wanted to correct that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The government provided two items – a service and a good. The reason I raised the issue of UDC – Cabinet may have agreed but the role of the UDC in this must be stated clearly. UDC is the Uganda Development Corporation. I don’t know whether there is also the UDCL.

Madam Chair, the role of UDC should come out clearly. Why I am saying this is because – we are looking for a road as my brother was saying – incidentally many roads all over are privately owned. But the technical people who know more about the construction of a road are the engineers at the Ministry of Works and Transport. However, there are people who will be charged with the duty of managing that project. The project cannot be managed by the ministry. There should be another entity to manage it and that is what other countries call the development corporation. That is why I raised the issue of UDC, a company that was formed - where is its role in this PPP arrangement?

Madam Chair, the Ministry of Finance may have forgotten about this issue. I am not ready to create another parallel organisation to the Ministry of Finance when there –

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I thought the UDC was created by an Act of Parliament, which has not been repealed. The law is still there and who is stopping it from participating? All we are setting are the principles of how we will operate. We are not creating any entity here; we are just agreeing on the principles.

NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, that may be true but when you look at this critically, you realise that people are trying to create an entity –(Interjections)– you will see or just have a look at clause 12. So, Madam Chair, what I want to propose –(Interruption)

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, when this debate started, one of the arguments was that PPPs create contingent liabilities and I can’t say they don’t. When you have a limited company like the UDC, the company is limited by an Act of corporation. So, when the project fails, what happens? There is an investor who has spent $500 million on the proposed Kampala-Jinja Express Highway and the contract is signed by UDC Limited - where does the investor get the money from?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, the minister –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe let us hear from the minister in charge of UDC.

MRS KYAMBADDE: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I want to begin by saying that we all know the history of UDC, which has been the financial arm – I am sorry for diverting you from the PPPs; I will explain why. 

The UDC should have been the financial arm of Government. But a few years ago, it became a limited company, which was not appropriate and Cabinet decided – and the President also issued a directive that it should be a parastatal. At the moment the UDC is managing projects under the PPP arrangement. One of them is the Soroti Processing Plant. And that is an issue that has been on this Floor – why isn’t it moving, it is because we have not solved the legal issues surrounding it.

We have amended the UDC Act but we have failed to get financial certification from the Ministry of Finance –(Applause)– in spite of the fact that there is a presidential directive and Cabinet ruling. The reason I am standing here is to ask for a saving clause in this Bill –(Interruption)

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Chair, I want to inform my colleague that, as ministers, we are bound by collective responsibility. So, whatever is not going on well in Cabinet –(Interjections)– yes, we should go back to Cabinet. We can even request the Speaker – we don’t have to come here and apportion blame on the Floor of Parliament.

MR AJEDRA: May I conclude, Madam Chair? I was still holding the Floor –

THE CHAIRPERSON: The Minister of Trade is asking for help on how we –

MR AJEDRA: Can I conclude, Madam Chair?

MR KAKOOZA: Procedure, Madam Chair. The point of procedure I would like to seek is: the Executive is making our work as a committee very difficult. The Bill has been with us for quite a long time. The Bill came from Cabinet. The pressure we are getting from Government alleging that Parliament has refused to pass this Bill and that that is why there is no legal framework. They are also blaming Parliament that investment is not coming in because there is no legal framework.

But honestly speaking, this collective responsibility – the Bill has been with the committee and many amendments have been done. There are a number of workshops that have been run – there is no clause in this Bill where UDC has been talked about. If we bring it in now, that is going to change the principles of the Bill.

Whenever we do the first and second reading, we get into the details of the Bill. But right now to start dealing with the raw data by changing the principles of the Bill is procedurally incorrect. I don’t know whether the practice of this House is now changing –(Interruption)

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, if we read the definition of a “contracting authority”, we will know that this is not the problem of the PPDA. That clause says that a contracting authority, amongst others, shall be the MDAs – ministries, departments and other agencies doing the procurement of public works. And the UDC shall be part of those MDAs. So, this law is just to operationalize their work. It has nothing to do – and it cannot stop the law from proceeding because finance is administratively refusing to give money to UDC.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, we shouldn’t mix issues. At the point when the Government Chief Whip gave wonderful information to the Minister of Trade, that minister was saying that her concern is how we can transfer the existing PPPs, if there are there – if they are there, we have created clauses in this Bill to do monitoring and evaluation. So, we need to bring them on board. We are now creating a central unit at the Ministry of Finance to monitor all these.

Our understanding is that once we do this, the unit will continue to monitor the process. So, how do we now bring on board the new ones? That is where the issue of UDC and the certification implications come in. I think those will be solved appropriately in Cabinet; I agree with the Government Chief Whip. But for now, can we provide for a transitional clause? We can formulate that with your permission.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But I don’t know how you can bring this law to apply retrospectively. I don’t think you can.

MR KWIZERA: Madam Chair, I would like to be guided because we are being dominated by the Members of the committee. They are defending their committee idea but I think they should allow us to put in our input.

Secondly, as to the Cabinet’s responsibility, I want to say that is an administrative measure. If there is something wrong observed, there is nothing that bars such people from saying such out.
But Madam Chair, my concern is about these ongoing PPPs and we cannot close our eyes because they are there. The question is, how we relate those on going with new ones to come in. Can’t we have a saving clause of a transitory clause to say that this law can also has capacity to oversee the existing ones or that this law can be used on the existing ones? Otherwise, are we going to have two regimes of laws? Look, Bujagali is there. We have the Commonwealth and we have the Express High way that is going on. How do we relate these to the other one? We cannot use laws for the same sector.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I would like to plead with my colleagues. Worldwide, governments create these parastals in order to enter business. The error in this law, Madam Chair – and this is a matter that I thought Cabinet should have dissolved – is that the contracting authority – the PPP contract will be signed by the accounting officers and that means Government of Uganda.

While a private party is a limited liability company – the Minister of Finance told us here that suppose somebody brought in $5 million and the limited liability collapses? But who will be the shareholders of this limited liability company?

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, we have made several steps forward. But we cannot also ignore the fact that the Ministry of Trade has brought up an issue.

Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, are you suggesting that Government should have an investment arm that should be incorporated into this law and that that arm will be the equivalent of the UDC? We have had examples and honourable minister, you know that CDC is the investment arm of the British and it is doing business here. It is also a limited liability –(Interjections)– what is your problem? Why can’t you harmonise these so that trade – actually the PPP issue is nothing but trade.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Oboth, are you saying that instead of describing the ministries and government departments as the contracting party, the contracting party should be the UDC?

MR OBOTH: We should be having an investment arm, which will not be a problem. Otherwise, if this is the same Government, there will be no problem at all.

MR ODOI: Thank you, Madam Chair. You will notice that I sat here this entire afternoon listening very attentively. I want to say that I have been able to pick a number of things. One, let me try to address the question of the ongoing PPPs. The Minister of State for Finance was very clear on this matter. The ongoing PPPs are procurements that were made under the existing PPDA. They are subsisting legally binding contracts running and they will run their full terms. You do not need this law to alter their status. They are there and legally binding and so this law will have no effect on them.

Madam Chair, I also recall that you ruled that we are not making any attempts to make this law operate retrospectively. It will only operate from the day it will be assented to moving forward. So, there is absolutely no problem here. I would like to request that we move on and pass this law. (Applause)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I would like to thank the hon. Jacob Oboth because he has brought - there will be an investment or a development company –(Interruption)

MR FOX ODOI: Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you, hon. Nandala, for giving way. We can and we have been contracting private entities as Government; Government ministries and departments have been contracting private entities, doing business with private companies and signing contracts with private companies. It is possible; it has been done since time immemorial. So, we are not going to change it today –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I have now understood that my brother hon. Fox Odoi does not understand. (Laughter) No, listen. I, Nandala-Mafabi, here, I supply fuel; I get a contract with Government to supply them fuel. I am not doing Government work; the fuel they are going to use is to go and build a road and to provide services. What we are trying to do now is, we want companies to come here privately, to do what Government should do, like build a road, a hospital; that is what we are looking at. Now providing –(Interjections)– please, give me a chance so that I develop this case.

And now, where we are going, it is not the government to build the road, but it is the private entity to do it. That is why we are saying in many areas, even in America, those roads where you pay, there is a corporation called development corporation which is in charge, which deals with the private entities; they agree that “we are giving you a contract to build this road; you will collect road toll for 50 years.” You have not understood, I have discovered. (Laughter) Please, let me develop my point.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I am trying to raise this issue because now it is quite important that we cannot do away - we are going for PPP, that is very good but you cannot leave out Uganda Development Corporation and create another entity to move this process.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi wouldn’t it be covered under the definition and any other body established by Government and mandated to carry out public functions. Does that knock out the UDC?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But, Madam Chair, I would be very comfortable to move this process that UDC must appear somewhere –(Interjections)– not like one of the entities if you want - why are people against UDC? Uganda Development Corporation was formed by us; UDC is the business wing of this country for development and now, you are trying to tell me that the Ministry of Energy –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Madam Chair, I am giving the former LOP information. When I stood up earlier on, I had spoken to the chairperson of the committee and told him that I had observed a loophole. When I stood up, and I was ignored, I wanted to bring it in. What I wanted to bring in is that this law would not be complete without putting in place an organization, a company or some kind of an institution with due diligence which would play a role on both sides; it would insulate our own interests and the interests of the private investor.

We would need due diligence. So, as far as I am concerned, the information I want to give the former LOP is that the UDC we are talking about - I know and I have investigated, there is UDCL which belongs to individuals. However, we are yet to find out why the government has been putting money in that UDCL; that is important. It is a private organization, owned by individuals, but Government has been putting money there. So, we have to find out and review this UDC –(Interjections)– I am giving a former LOP information. Why are you stopping me? (Laughter)

Madam Chair, the UDC of the UPC Government is a different entity and that is what he has been stating that this was formed by us, it is there in our statute books; it was formed by Parliament. We know, but we have yet to distinguish the UDC we are talking about now, if it is to be an investment arm. That is why I am pleading with Parliament, although I was not supposed to speak, but I am pleading with Parliament that before we complete this Bill, we must have an institution that will deal specifically with due diligence.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I want to thank the Chief Opposition Whip for the information. I would plead with your indulgence, these people want to educate me and I am ready. Let me start with hon. Bahati and hon. Kwizera.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chair. First, to correct the impression, I am not a lawyer but I do not think hon. Fox Odoi is right to say that existing PPPs can go on for 99 years under a different law and then we have another law on PPPs moving on because they were contracted by the other one. I do not think that is a smart way, even if it was legally right but it is not a smart way of doing business. The best way would be to save them on a new - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Bahati, are you going to ask Government to breach those agreements? They have been done; they are on-going.

MR BAHATI: No, but you see, we have been struggling, Madam Chair, with PPPs, that is why actually we have been wanting this law. 
The second one about the role of UDC, the way we have created it, we are in a way creating a mechanism to manage PPPs because we have said the Minister of Finance will be responsible.

Under that, there will be a specialised unit to handle PPPs; it is there, that is what we have created in the law. There will be a specialised team project with all the laws. So, I think, to me, there is an institution that we have created here; it actually means in my opinion that UDC we are slowly saying, “stay on the side.” Thank you.

MR KWIZERA: Thank you, Madam Chair. The information I would want to seek is that we know that Government is a bad business entity; that is why we privatise all the companies. So, now, we need a specialised agency that will deal with the other party at par, because when you deal with Government, you are dealing with nobody; you are dealing with civil servants who are there today and tomorrow and they have no reporting mechanism.

The minister who is here today, tomorrow is going to be reshuffled or the PS who is there tomorrow will be reshuffled but when you have an agency like UDC, you will have specialized business people to deal with on a company and they will be at par. (Applause) But if you risk and you want to say unspecialised ministers, uninformed ministers who are not business people to go and deal with business people, we have had it in many companies like Munyonyo, that is what happened –(Interruption)

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, certainly, there will be differences in opinion but for the honourable colleague to suggest that some of us are not business people; we are not investors, I think it is - Madam Chair, I do not think there is any indication anywhere, either in my communication or in my defence, where I am saying I am making this law for myself. I am certainly not naive also to think that my position as the investment minister is –(Interjection)– But I am on a point of order. So, Madam Chair, is the honourable colleague in order to insinuate that we are making the law for individuals and that some of us are not businessmen? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, he is not. Now – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I have got the information I wanted and so I will conclude like this: The people in the ministry should not get worried that they are being eliminated; they are still there. The only thing is that we want to do it better. And you know when somebody says that the minister will create a unit – you mean it is angels that run the Ministry of Finance? If you think so, you are making a mistake. That is why I say that if you have a parastatal which can do the work and remain in place, it is better not to deal with a department but with a an institution well known for development – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, there are strong arguments both for and against this matter. Perhaps we should sleep over it and then we re-convene tomorrow after we have had time to reflect on all the positions because no one is giving way – the minister is not giving way and Members are not giving way either.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chair, there is an impression that is being created among Members that the PPP unit that is going to be established is going to be either the business arm of the government or it is going to be operating as a company. That is not the case –(Interjection)

MR MUJUNI: Madam Chair, as we sleep over this urgent matter, may I get clarification from the minister whether it is indeed true that they have denied the Minister of Trade a Certificate of Financial Implication for whatever she wants to bring forward. (Laughter)

MR MUKITALE: I want to seek for an additional clarification from the minister. In the debate we have had, it is abundantly clear that 20 years of privatisation and liberalisation have left us without a feeling that Government can still have a role in state participation in the direction of this country. And for that reason, as we sleep over this matter, I would like to request the minister that as he comes back tomorrow, he should come with an assurance that he is not planning to hand over the economy to foreign arms. This is because in the current PPPs – I can give you an example; one of the consortiums you currently have in the oil and gas sector – even before we talk about the pipeline and refinery – the one of the Total, CNOOC and Tullow, the 48 percent law of local content is not being implemented. And why is that so? They are saying the local companies lack capital and yet this would have helped the companies to build their capacity.

So I do not want us to pass a “good” law in terms of procedures and legalise it and yet it is an imperialist law to make the PPPs take over the economy. My dream for PPPs since I joined the last Parliament was to have a law that will enable citizens –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, we should not confuse things; when the new world order of 1993 – of privatisation – came into this country, it was a different policy. A PPP today is an agenda in an economy whereby the country is on a different agenda. Is the honourable member in order to say that we are still thinking the same way as we were under privatisation? This is a new and different arrangement. Is the member in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, the Member is taking into account where we have been. So please move for the resumption of the House.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Public Private Partnership Bill, 2012” and passed it with the following amendments:

    (i) Clause (2) has been passed with amendments. 
    (ii) A new clause after clause (3) has been introduced and passed.
    (iii) A new clause, (4) has been introduced and passed.
    (iv) Clause 19 has been amended and passed. 
    (v) Clause 20 has been amended and passed. 
    (vi) Clause 21 has been amended and passed. 
    (vii) Clause 22 has been amended and passed.
    (viii) Clause 23 has been amended and passed.
    (ix) Clause 24 has been stood over.
    (x) Clause 25 has been passed without amendment.
    (xi) Clause 26 has been passed.
    (xii) Clause 27 has been passed.
    (xiii) Clause 28 has been passed.
    (xiv) Clause 29 has been passed.
    (xv) Clause 30 has been passed.
    (xvi) Clause 31 has been passed.
    (xvii) Clause 32 has been passed.
    (xviii) Clause 33 has been passed.
    (xix) Clause 34 has been passed.
    (xx) Clause 35 has been passed.
    (xxi) Clause 36 has been passed.
    (xxii) Clause 37 has been passed with amendments.
    (xxiii) Clause 38 has been passed.
    (xxiv) Clause 40 has been passed with amendments.
    (xxv) Clause 41 has been passed with amendments.
    (xxvi) Schedule – clause 2 has been passed.
    (xxvii) A new clause has been inserted after clause 4, 5 and 6.I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I thank you for staying up to this time and having a vibrant debate. But I think Government needs to work overnight so that tomorrow we have a way forward because arguments from both sides are strong. So please help us and resolve the issue so that tomorrow we can move. House adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(House rose at 7.52 p.m. and adjourned to Thursday, 15 May 2014 at 2.00 p.m.) 

