Tuesday, 15 May 2012

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, good afternoon. You are most welcome to this sitting of Parliament. I have observed that the committees are very busy handling issues to do with the budget and other matters under their various committee mandates. I thank you for carrying out these tasks and in a timely manner. I am advised that as of today, we have met the Budget Act deadline of 15th of this month and we should congratulate ourselves for doing that.

Honourable members, Parliament is due to be prorogued this week and I am aware that there is a lot of business still pending and more is still coming. In order to be able to complete as much business as possible, I suggest that our proceedings will have to be very particular in observing timeframes for completing particular items of business. I also wish to implore members to, as much as possible, be precise and concise in their expositions. If we observe such simple rules, we will save a lot of time, which can be allocated to handle other items.

Honourable members, in the previous parliaments there have been assessments conducted on the performance of Parliament and individual MPs. The members were generally not happy with the criteria chosen for assessing them and the subjectivity shown in the whole process of assessment. It is in that connection that the leadership of Parliament, specifically the Office of the Speaker, decided to contact the Inter Parliamentary Union (IPU) to assist the Parliament of Uganda with designing an assessment tool.

The IPU gladly accepted to give the support and accordingly, a team of consultants from the IPU Secretariat arrived over the weekend to help us in this exercise. The exercise begun this morning and will continue until Friday, 18 June 2012 in the Parliamentary Conference Hall beginning every day at 9.00 a.m. It is for this reason that I wish to request you to attend and actively participate in this exercise. It is my hope that this Legislature will be enabled, through this exercise, to develop objective and verifiable indicators against which the performance of Parliament and individual Members of Parliament can be measured.

The other matter I would like to raise is the issue of the completion of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, which has been delayed for a long time and has caused some challenges. Of specific concern on the rules is the matter of the election of the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA). The rules are holding up the elections of the Members of EALA. 

The next Assembly is expected to be in place on 4 June 2012 when members-elect will be sworn in. For Parliament to be able to beat the deadline so that the processes leading to the elections of the Members of EALA, Uganda Chapter, are in place, we have to move very fast and conclude with the adoption of the Rules of Procedure. Following the East African Court of Justice ruling last Thursday, 10 May 2012 the matter has been thrown back into our court for determination of the criteria to elect the EALA MPs. It is for this reason that this is the priority business that we are going to handle this afternoon and hopefully complete it.

Honourable members, I request for your understanding, patience and statesmanship during the discussions of the regulations on the elections of the East African Legislative Assembly representatives, which is a very important matter now but rather contentious. Every member is entitled to his or her views, and let us respect them so as to uphold the dignity and honour of Parliament. 

Honourable members, I urge you to do the needful so that we can produce and reduce the anxiety on our colleagues who are vying for these positions. You are better placed to know what electioneering is all about. Many of you have not yet even recovered including possibly the Speaker of the House.

I wish to thank you for fruitful deliberations this week. The possibility now is that we will be proroguing Parliament on Friday. We are extending the sitting to Friday to enable us conclude the business that is very urgent and quite long. If you look at today’s Order Paper, you would understand exactly what I am talking about.

In the VIP Gallery this afternoon we have our consultants supported by the IPU to help us do a self-assessment of our performance of the First Session of the Ninth Parliament. They are Norah Babic, IPU Secretariat; Herbus Burger, Parliament of South Africa; Sonia Palmeiri, Parliament of Australia; and Charlotte Cousins, Parliament of Ireland. Please join me in welcoming them. 

Please kindly ensure that you fill the questionnaires, which have been put out in your pigeonholes, to assist in this assessment. Please leave the filled forms with the Clerk to Parliament. This is important because of the difficulty we are facing with members going to the Chamber to do this. A questionnaire form has been designed to ease your work and I have a copy here. So kindly pick it from your pigeonholes, fill it quickly and correctly and submit it to the Clerk’s Office as soon as possible, preferably before Thursday because we will then have only one day left. So, do that, honourable members, as if your life depended on it because actually it does - your life as a politician. Thank you very much.

3.52
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Like you have guided, I want to be very brief. I just want to raise a matter of national and urgent importance. 

My name is Chris Baryomunsi and I represent Kinkizi East in Kanungu District. As you may have read in the media, the main route to Kanungu is through Rukungiri via the gouge, which we call Enengo. On Sunday I was in Kanungu District and I had just passed through that bridge. Shortly after, a trailer which was carrying 50 tonnes of cement was crossing that bridge when the bridge collapsed. I am sure most of you have seen the pictures in the media, which hon. Jim Muhwezi, who is equally affected, is showing me. The bridge completely collapsed. 

This route is the lifeline of Kanungu. It is actually the umbilical code to Kanungu, which has now been cut off. The reason why this truck was using that bridge is because the route which is used by heavy trucks between Kasese and Kanungu had its bridge also collapse weeks earlier. I am actually now an internally displaced person together with the Prime Minister because we cannot easily access Kanungu District. 

For us in Kanungu, it is actually a crisis. When I received the phone call that the bridge had collapsed, I was with one of the businessmen in Kanungu. When he heard the news, he immediately rang his shop telling the attendant to increase the price of cement to Shs 50,000 per bag. So the prices immediately escalated. So, now the economy is in a challenge.

I am raising this matter to request Government to assure me of the emergency measures it is going to put in place to enable the people of Kanungu access Kanungu and also get out of Kanungu. (Ms Karungi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable member, finish with your urgent matter.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, I request that if possible, after my submission you could allow her to supplement because she is the Woman MP of Kanungu. I know that even hon. Jim Muhwezi is equally affected. 

What we are requesting, as leaders from Kanungu, is that Government should urgently provide measures on how we can reach Kanungu and get out of it. Also, consequently, that bridge needs to be reconstructed. I want to mobilise members to support the supplementary budget which will be brought to have this bridge constructed. 

Mr Speaker, there is an alternative bridge, which was being constructed by Government, to enable access to Kanungu from Rukungiri via Rugyeyo Sub-county but it has delayed. The information I have is that the contractor who was given the task – M & B Engineers – shared out money with engineers in the Ministry of Works and Transport and the ministry gave a certificate of completion to the contractor and yet there is no bridge. 

In the response from the Minister of Works, I also want to know what the truth is; I want to know why that bridge has not been completed and yet all the money, totalling Shs 1.8 billion, has been paid. (Interjection) You know, the issue is so important that even the Prime Minister is concerned because there is no way he can reach Kanungu right now except maybe by air.

Mr Speaker, the bridge which was being constructed connects to Rujumbura County and Kinkiizi East through Rugyeyo. It is called Birara Bridge. Shs 1.8 billion has already been expended as far as I am concerned, but the bridge has not been completed. If it had been completed, we would be complaining -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, why don’t we restrict ourselves to the emergency now? That would bring unnecessary debate on the matter yet I have given you three minutes to raise that issue. The rules allow us 15 minutes to make interventions and I am not going to extend time on this because I do not have it.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The reason I am raising it is because part of the solution is to complete that bridge as a temporary relief as Government constructs the other bridge which has collapsed. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. This is a clear matter. Honourable members, you are raising something else but let me first conclude this matter. I do not think this matter should be subjected to debate. It is very clear that a bridge has collapsed and there is a truck on it. All that we can listen to is – Maybe I will allow hon. Karungi and hon. Muhwezi to make short comments; half a minute each.

2.58
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Kanungu is in a very sorry state just as hon. Baryomunsi has said. My prayer is that this House and Government take this matter more seriously and they do the needful with immediate effect. Businesses are at a standstill and nobody can move into or out of Kanungu. 

Since Kanungu is located at the corner of Uganda, it is a serious problem. When I say this, I believe that most members will agree with me because they have been there and they know what I am talking about. Thank you.

3.03
MAJ. GEN. JIM MUHWEZI (NRM, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As hon. Baryomunsi has said, the collapsed bridge is the artery of the economy in the hinterland both in Kanungu and Rukungiri. As we speak now, prices of commodities are going up because there is a lot of trade going on. I do not know what will happen to the market at Bikurungu in Bwambara. So, it is a matter of urgency and Government should come up with an immediate rescue operation to save the people of Rukungiri and Kanungu. 

Kambuga Hospital in Kanungu is the only government hospital that serves both Rukungiri and Kanungu areas and beyond. Right now, our people can only go to missionary hospitals of Nyakibaale and Kisiizi. Therefore, they need more money. 

We should not downplay the issue raised by hon. Baryomunsi of Birara Bridge. This was done a long time ago when hon. Nasasira, who was the Minister of Works then, visited Rugyeyo with us the MPs. People sang songs listing a number of people who died every year – students crossing the river on their way to school – and all of us were crying. Hon. Nasasira promised he would provide a bridge. We mobilised people and they dug roads from both sides –  Nyakinengo in Nyakagyeme from Rukungiri side, and Rugyeyo from the other side in Kanungu. They dug the roads using hoes up to the bridge. Up to today, the bridge is not there and now we are being told that a certificate of completion was given out yet the bridge is incomplete. This is serious. 

So, I suggest the following, Mr Speaker: One, that the Mitaano Bridge be repaired immediately. In the meantime, the smaller bridges at Ncwera should be reinforced to allow trade to go on. 

Two, the bridge at Kyabahanga should be constructed. The bridges at Rushaya, Njororo and others – we have a big problem because Rukungiri is a mountainous district so the issue of bridges should be attended to urgently. Meanwhile, the health centres in the affected areas should be stocked with enough drugs because there is going to be a delay of supply of important medical stuff. Thank you. 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Muhwezi. May I have the Minister take the Floor. 

3.03
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Mr Speaker and dear colleagues, I thank my young brother, hon. Baryomunsi, for raising this issue of the collapsed Mitaano Bridge on the Rukungiri-Kanungu Road. This has affected, as he has said, the transportation of people and merchandise not only in Rukungiri but also to our neighbours in DRC. 

As hon. Baryomunsi said, this happened on 13th and the cause was an overloaded truck. So, when you hear me talking about vehicle weight control, this is what I am talking about - gross weight and axel load control. So you should be supporting me whenever I am talking about these things. 

Mr Speaker, this was in addition to what had collapsed at Ntungwe some weeks ago. The cause of this, as hon. Baryomunsi has talked about, was overloading by a trailer but also the driver failed to manoeuvre the trailer safely through a single-lane bridge. These are single-lane bridges. We are also investigating vandalism by the bad Ugandans who might have removed some parts from the bridge. Lastly, maybe it is because of the long time we take before inspecting these bridges. These issues are going to be looked into and then rectified. 

What has my ministry done so far? Mr Speaker, yesterday I sent two teams to the site- a team from the Ministry of Works and Transport and a team from UNRA. I sent them to go and assess what damage has been done to the structure and/or the sub-structure. The inspection will be widened to include other roads, as hon. Muhwezi has said, to check on their capacity - what load these bridges can take. 

This bridge which collapsed is a 65-metre span and as I talk, we do not have any Bailey bridge in the country of that span. This means we need to import to immediately repair the collapsed Mitaano Bridge. However, the bridge which collapsed earlier, the one at Ntungwe, we can handle immediately. As I speak, we have been constructing a bridge at Muzizi and that bridge is more or less finished. So we are going to dismantle the existing Bailey bridge there and transfer it to that side. I hope in a month or so we would have dismantled and assembled a new bridge for people to use at that place. 

I have directed my people to ensure that in future they carry out inspections on all the bridges to see their status. I have also put in place a semblance of requirements for emergency response - culverts of different sizes and the Bailey bridges - so that we can respond faster than we can do now. We are planning to replace all the old bridges because bridges have a lifespan. 

By Friday, a team of road maintenance gangs will be in the area to ensure that roads leading to the DRC and within the Ugandan side are handled. Other routes like Bwambara, Nyamirama, Kanungu, Ruzizi, and Hamurwa-Kanungu, Kamuragihizi are going to be worked on to ensure that all roads within are motorable, to ensure that our people can move very fast- (Interruption) 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened carefully to the minister and he says he is getting this information from the ground. The road that connects Kanungu via Kabale through Hamurwa Bridge is actually in my sub-county and my constituency. The information I have is that as we speak, this bridge is also not passable. So, is it in order for the honourable minister to begin misleading the House that this is an alternative route yet at the moment it is also not passable?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is not very good practice to subject the Speaker to rule on facts that are outside the Speaker’s knowledge. (Laughter) I am not aware of the state of which bridge. I do not even know the name of the road and now you are calling me to rule on a factual situation. I am unable to rule on that point of order. Please, wind up.
 
MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. If my colleague was listening, I said that my teams are in the field inspecting all existing bridges and we are not going to divert things which are not in a position to carry the load. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, as hon. Baryomunsi said, I have already directed my people to ensure that in a few days the Birara Bridge, where what is remaining is just casting the deck, is done and then we can have a reliable route within the area. This is going to be done.

On the certificate, I got a report and I instructed the PS to carry out investigations. I have not yet got the report but if it is true, what will happen is obviously known to all of you. In my ministry we do not condone or tolerate corruption- (Interjections) - We shall be very harsh on them and disciplinary action or prosecution will take place. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Prime Minister. Two minutes. (Laughter) 
 
3.12
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, especially for limiting me to two minutes. Since you did not limit any one else like that, I will stick to that. 

First, I want to say that this problem of broken bridges is a problem affecting Kanungu and Rukungiri districts now but actually it affects other areas, mainly areas that are mountainous. We also have a problem currently in Bududa District. So it is a general problem in the country. 

I just wanted to assure the House and the country that we have decided to build capacity within the country to respond to situations like this whenever they occur. It is a fact that, as the minister said, we have a few Bailey bridges. One is being taken to Bududa and the other is being dismantled from Ruzizi to Ntungwa on Katungulu-Ishasha. 
	
We have taken a decision to build greater capacity than we have now. That 65 span bridge cannot be handled in a short time; it is going to take a long time. It means we have to acquire a 65-metre long Bailey bridge, but it may not make a lot of sense. We may have to do the construction, which may be faster.

In the meantime, in addition to what the minister said, we have decided that all the roads leading to Kanungu, including the roads which were dug by hand which hon. Jim Muhwezi mentioned, from Rukungiri through Birara Bridge through Rugyeyo to Kanungu, will be handled. It is not only the bridge at Birara which is going to be handled in the next two weeks but also grading the road so that it is motorable. For the next two weeks, as an emergency programme we are going to grade all the roads which he mentioned. 

It is true the bridge from Hamurwa to Kanungu has a problem but of course as the honourable MP may know-(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Is the Prime Minister in order to give a litany of Government plans for bridges and roads in the country yet he is the area MP where the bridge collapsed and the sitting Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda? Is he in order to come to this Parliament and give endless explanations yet he has failed in his role as a Prime Minister to ensure that bridges in his area, let alone the whole of Uganda, are in good shape? (Laughter) Is he therefore in order to continue being the Prime Minister when his home has actually caught fire? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Prime Minister has taken advantage of the situation to make some explanations. Please close.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to inform my young brother, the hon. Odonga Otto, about something he did not know, that I am Prime Minister of the whole of Uganda and therefore, I speak for him. I speak for the problems he has in his constituency as I do for many other places. That is why I have been talking about the nodding disease, which is a problem in his area, and I think that is my duty. Finally-(Interjections)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order. A Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda has ably asserted himself as such and is alluding to a situation of nodding disease in the area I represent. The issue of nodding disease is very prickly and has been there since 1998. The Prime Minister is asserting that he is in charge and that is why he is talking about this nodding disease. Meanwhile, he is talking too late with little action. Is the Prime Minister in order to blindfold this House that he is concerned about the nodding disease, which has been there and the people are dying, including the elders now, without Government’s able intervention? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I see on item No. 5 we have a resolution on the nodding disease. The other week, the Prime Minister was not here; it is possible that he takes it seriously and that is why he is here today to deal with this matter of the motion. Can we move forward. Please, conclude.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Finally, Mr Speaker, I just wanted to add, and this is for the benefit of members, that obviously, as the minister said, one of the causes of the collapse of this bridge was the 50 tonnes of cement loaded on the truck. That was unlawful. This bridge has a lifespan of 55 years and it was built in 1969. Therefore, it was still within its life. So, that is the main cause so far. 

Two, both are criminal acts - overloading of the truck with 50 tonnes as hon. Baryomunsi said and vandalisation of the bridge by people who steal metal in order to sell it as scrap. The Government takes a very dim view of these acts. I want to assure this House that we are going to take very stern measures against these criminal acts, which are not only in my area where I come from but are prevalent in many parts of Uganda. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. In the interest of time, I am looking at the situation in the House and I will not allow any other matter to be raised. We will deal with your matter tomorrow, if you will allow me. I am in charge. Honourable member, would you like to wait for me to finish my communication? 

I use my prerogative under rule 22 of our Rules of Procedure to make an amendment to the Order Paper. I will suspend Item No.3 on ministerial statements and schedule them for tomorrow, plus additional statements which will come tomorrow. In the meantime, we will go to the next item.    

MR SSENGENDO SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. It is now three months since the Prime Minister assured this House that he is going to present a report on all the fire outbreaks in this country. He gave us two weeks and it is now three weeks. Is it procedurally right for the Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business to always continue making commitments and he does not fulfil them? That is the point of procedure I wanted to raise, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Prime Minister, you are reminded that there is a pending statement on the outbreak of fires which has been on the Order Paper as business to follow. 

MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, I would have loved, while exercising your prerogative under rule 22, to also remind this House of a commitment which was made by none other than the Leader of Government Business. A commitment was made regarding the payment of ex gratia retirement benefits to people who served in the shared presidency under Legal Notice 5 of 1980, namely the late Justice Nyamuconco, the late Justice Musoke and Mzee Wacha-Olwol. 

I raise this because in our Hansard of Thursday, 15 March 2012, the Prime Minister made a commitment that the relevant minister would make a comprehensive report to this House. To date, this report has not been made. We are worried for Mzee Wacha-Olwol, the only surviving member of the shared presidency, who is clocking 90 years old anytime. At that advanced age, we are worried that his health is deteriorating day by day. I want to get this commitment from Government because it was made earlier on. This issue was substantially raised by hon. Betty Amongi. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, certainly there was a commitment made on this issue. 

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca B. Mbaguta Sezi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to make a commitment that our ministry will make this statement on Thursday because it is ready. However, the point is that the provision has been made and we are going to pay all past leaders, of whom Mr Wacha-Olwal is among. He is one out of many, including the late Justice Nyamuconco and the late Justice Musoke. Thank you.  

ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US$150 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING THE UGANDA MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM IN SELECTED MUNICIPALITIES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall that the debate on this matter come towards conclusion and a motion was moved for the question to be put. I put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion was for the adoption of the report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by Government to borrow US$ 150 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing Uganda Municipal Infrastructure Programme. I put the question for the adoption of the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, on item No.5, I have been requested by the movers that we should deal with it tomorrow. Is that correct, hon. Alaso and hon. Anywar?

3.27
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, we have agreed that the voting go on. This motion is very sensitive - we are talking about lives of children in Northern Uganda, we are talking about a disease which has no boundaries, so it is probably a time bomb for our country. We want to go on record as members of the Ninth Parliament on this matter, so we request that we vote by show of hands. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter is not yet substantially ready for that kind of proposal because we had skipped it. Can we go back to item No.5?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO DECLARE AREAS IN UGANDA AFFECTED BY THE NODDING DISEASE SYNDROME A HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCY AREA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall that we had debated this matter exhaustively and the motion was moved for the question to be put so that we can take a decision. So, I put the question to the motion that the question be put – (Interjections) – The motion is not yet taking the decision on the motion. The question I am putting is in relation to whether we should conclude by voting that the question be put. In other words, should we conclude the debate? So I put the question that the question be put.  

              (Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion. The motion is for a resolution of Parliament to declare areas in Uganda affected by nodding disease syndrome a humanitarian emergency area. There has been a proposal by hon. Beatrice Anywar that we take this vote by show of hands –

MR ONDONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, without prejudice to the question you are putting, I want to find out, before we go to vote, whether there is an issue to vote on. We must be told what is being done and what has not been done. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was done when we debated this matter. Honourable members, when we take a decision on this, there is still the substantive motion on which this incidental motion came. Hon. Alaso rose on an incidental motion arising from the debate on a motion which was by – (Interjections) – Sorry, it was a statement from the minister. It was the discussion on that statement that brought the issue of the motion. 

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, it would be very painful if the motion on nodding disease polarises the House. This is not a matter of caucusing, this is not a matter of political opinion or political ganging; this is a matter of life and death. This is a strange disease and it can spread to anywhere.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would wish that you guide the House that in voting on this issue, the roll-call be called and a person declares himself or herself as “aye” or “nay”. This is a matter of life and death. We want to know people’s stand so that if this disease broke out in Kanungu, we can stand with the people of Kanungu. It is very important that we vote individually so that our people can know that we are concerned about the lives of our people. Mr Speaker, I request you to guide the House on this matter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House has passed a resolution already on nodding disease. We all recall that, don’t we? A motion was passed and part of that motion required the minister to give an update statement or progress report on what the ministry is doing on the issue that Parliament had already passed a resolution on. 

Last week, it arose that the Minister for Health gave a status report on the progress so far made on the issue of nodding disease. So, we already have a sitting resolution made by this House. It was from the discussion of the report of the minister that an incidental motion was moved. This time, the terms proposed for the motion of a resolution of Parliament was to declare areas in Uganda affected by the nodding disease syndrome as a humanitarian emergency area. That is the motion now. So, this would be the second motion complementing the first motion. Are we now clear on what we are going to take a vote on? The proposal is that we do not do this vote by voice voting but by roll call and tally. That is the proposal. 

MS ANITE: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want some guidance from you. Whereas we will want to vote either in favour of or against this motion, we would really want to understand the implication of declaring the area to be in a state of emergency –(Interjections)- because for me –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me guide you. I have understood your point. There was a whole discussion on this matter and it is not up to the Speaker to start explaining again for members who did not have the opportunity to attend that sitting. There was a full discussion and we had reached a voting stage except that we were not able to take a vote. That was the only challenge. 

We had reached a stage where all that was required was for us to make that decision to take a vote. However, we were unable to take that vote because we did not have sufficient quorum to take a decision, and that is why we adjourned. So I am not going to re-open this debate. No!

THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, the matter of nodding disease is a very serious matter and of serious concern to all of us in the country. We really need to take a decision on this. The issue that is being raised by the members is that quite a good number were not here when we were concluding this debate and they are prepared to lend the necessary support. The implication of an area being declared an emergency area is something that they would like to vote on when fully comprehending the implications of the area – (Interjections) – Yes, they would like to vote from an informed point of view. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am the executor of our Rules of Procedure. The rules dictate as follows: When a motion is moved for the question to be put, that motion shall be voted upon without debate. We have just said that the question should be put and we are now opening debate. We cannot open the debate - (Interjection) - I thought I was talking about procedure, honourable member. I am guiding you on procedure, so first listen and then you will raise your procedural point. 

The Rules of Procedure bind me to do nothing else, permit no further debate, except to put the question on the motion. That is what the rules tell me. Yes, procedure.

MS KABASHARIRA: I oblige with your guidance, Mr Speaker, and we really do not want to also look like we are inconveniencing you. However, what we want is not necessarily the resolution but to know the implication of a humanitarian emergency. What is it? What will the implication be? This is what we want to know, and then we make a decision accordingly. Does it mean forming quarantine in the northern part of Uganda? Does it mean that whoever is coming will be tested? Does it mean only taking necessary equipment? We just want to know. If only one could explain without opening the debate. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that was the subject of a two-and-a half hour debate last week. (Applause) I was sitting here. You were possibly not here but I was here and other members were here. We reached a point where we should have taken the decision. If you want this matter reopened, you know how to proceed but you cannot proceed in the manner that you are trying to proceed. I now put the question.

MS ANYWAR: I am still seeking further guidance –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

MS ANYWAR: It will be sad if the issue of life and death separate us as Members of this Parliament. I would want that as we are going to vote on this issue, we, the members of this House who represent the very people who are dying, remain as one as it has been the practice of this House for disasters elsewhere. 

Mr Speaker, I would like that you guide in such a way that even if we are showing hands, it should not be a matter of life or death on our part as representatives. It should be accepted in good faith and we go on record on where we fall on this issue. I seek this guidance and also make my passionate appeal to Members of Parliament. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, one more time; this matter of nodding disease syndrome was debated by this House on a motion moved by hon. C.D. Lowila and it was passed by this House. Are we together? That motion was passed by the House. 

The current motion is whether the areas affected should be declared a humanitarian disaster area – that is the motion. We already have a motion on nodding disease passed by this House. The issue now is, and I have read it a few times, whether the area affected by this nodding disease syndrome should be declared a humanitarian disaster area. Are we together now? 

Let me read the motion: “Motion for a resolution of Parliament to declare areas in Uganda affected by the nodding disease syndrome a humanitarian emergency area.” That is the motion now. It is not whether we are going to recognise nodding disease or not; no, that is not the motion. The motion now is on whether we should declare those areas affected by this syndrome a humanitarian emergency area, and the proposal has been made that the vote be taken by show of hands. Should I put it to vote? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This matter was debated, a discussion went on and some of us formed an opinion as a result of the ministerial statement. Questions were being put to the minister but the motion came on the Floor before the minister could clarify on the questions which arose from his presentation. We would need to satisfy ourselves that Government has failed to do something for the nodding disease syndrome in order to declare the area an emergency area, and some of us spoke over the matter in that debate. 

The guidance I want to seek from you is whether you could allow the Minister of Health to clarify on a few issues which were raised during debate. This is because a chance was not given to the minister to explain and answer. Therefore, I want to request that you give the minister a chance to clarify on the few questions which were raised to enable the members vote on the matter.  

MR KIWANDA: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. You have already ruled that this matter was debated and two and half hours were given to the debate. When someone comes here and says we should repeat ourselves, actually that person is declaring his absence from the House always. If you were here and did not get this – (Interjection) - You should be in the House and follow the proceedings of the House. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, if we are changing the voting, the procedure here has been that if somebody proposes a way of voting, it should be brought as a motion and we first put a vote on the way we are going to vote before we vote on the substantive motion. So, if hon. Anywar has a proposal that we should vote by show of hands, that should be the motion and we could vote on it first and then go to the substantive motion. 

MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Whereas I appreciate the way the motion is on this Order Paper, before we can vote, - we do not mind even voting by show of hands or names - I would like to seek clarification from you. Recently, the minister was very clear on the nodding disease syndrome in this House. I am also aware that in Teso as we speak, we are fighting with Hepatitis B; in Rakai, there is an issue of Foot and Mouth Disease; in Busoga, we are singing about jiggers; and in Western Uganda, people are crying of Epilepsy. Mr Speaker, Uganda being a tourist attraction – (Interruption)

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, we have discussed the nodding disease syndrome over and over again and right now it is being compared to Foot and Mouth Disease. Is it in order for an honourable Member of Parliament to compare human life to animals? Do we have the feelings, really, to compare it to jiggers and cows? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, have you raised a point of order? Okay – (Laughter) – Honourable members, I have a point of order on the Floor. Would you like to listen to my ruling and then you can raise your issue? 

Hon. Jacqueline Amongin was on the Floor when a point of order was raised and the rules require me to rule on that point before you can proceed. The issue is whether you can make comparisons with the substantive issue that we are discussing today, whether you can relate the issue of Hepatitis B happening elsewhere to an issue that has been substantially already discussed by the House. 

Honourable members, I have said that a motion has been moved that the question be put and we have done that. All that is left is to put the question. So, any person rising to debate is completely out of order. So, if you are seeking guidance to understand or a point of procedure, that I would understand.

MR BALYEKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to refer to rule 80 of our Rules of procedure: “A Member shall not in or before the House or any Committee, take part in the discussion of any matter in which he or she has direct pecuniary interest unless he or she has declared the nature of that interest to the House or Committee.” 

Mr Speaker, this area is where you come from; do you think it is in order for you to preside over this matter because they say it is by show of hands and you also represent those people? (Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought I heard the honourable member reading about pecuniary interests. Pecuniary interest is financial interest in the very ordinary and plain English that I also fairly understand well. So, coming from such a region does not vest upon you any pecuniary interests.

Secondly, the matters that we are discussing have no element of pecuniary interests that are being raised, which would make me be in conflict and so declare my personal interests. I do not have any pecuniary interests. 

The honourable members would have done well by first consulting the Oxford English Dictionary – (Laughter) – or the Advanced Learners’ Dictionary to understand what the word “pecuniary” means. I think that point was misplaced. I hereby rule the honourable member completely out of order. Honourable members, I would have asked for the honourable member to withdraw the statement but this – (Interruptions) – No, it is okay. 

You know, when matters of this nature are raised, it is similar to a matter that is raised of contempt of a judge. There is a judge who said that great judges do not have contempt. I am one of those who think that this office is a great office and so we should not indulge ourselves in holding members in contempt of the Speaker’s office or something like that. Just as judges do not have contempt, great Speakers do not have contempt, I suppose. In the circumstances, I will not ask the honourable member to withdraw the statement. 

Let me guide on this matter this way. Under rules 82, 83, 84 and 85, the procedures for voting are outlined, and they also extend to rule 86. Rule 82 provides for voice voting, where the Speaker calls out those in favour of some matter to say, “Aye” and those not in favour to say “no”. 

Rule 83 is for secret voting. This rule is about circumstances under which the House can vote by secret ballot. 

Rule 84 is about voting via roll call and tallying. This is where the Speaker calls a member’s name for them to either vote “yes” or “no” openly. 

Rule 85, which we have used here on some occasions, is by division lobby. This is where we can have the House divided into two lobbies with those in support of a matter to the right of the Speaker while those against to the left lobby. Under rule 86, the Speaker can, on his or her own discretion, order a division on a particular matter. 

We have been using the procedure of show of hands because members just agreed to use it. However, the last time this procedure was used, I cautioned the House about it because it is not provided for in our rules. However, because members had agreed to use it as the best method to resolve the matter, we adopted it. 

Now that I have guided, can I now understand what proposition is being made?  -(Interjections)- Roll call and tally will mean that we call members one by one and they vote.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. First, I must apologise that I was not present when this debate took place but I have asked the Deputy Leader of Government Business in Parliament. 

This is just in good faith. When someone asked about what “emergency” means and so on, I thought that was important for two reasons: First, to see whether the motion complies with the Constitutional provisions on the declaration of emergencies. Secondly, - and this is much clearer in my mind – whether this motion does not have financial implications and whether, therefore, we would be acting in compliancy with our rules 55 and 108 of our Rules of procedure.

The reason I am raising this is not because, as hon. Cecilia Ogwal was saying, I think there should be any partisanship in it. As the minister must have explained before, Government has obviously done what it can. We have put in a lot of resources to handle that problem in Northern Uganda. 

Let me also inform this House that I convened a meeting with international donors to raise money for this problem. So, it is not – (Interruptions) – I am on guidance and it has precedent over a point of order – so, Mr Speaker –


HON. MEMBERS: Order!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let us have some order in the House.

THE PRIME MINISTER: Those who are shouting are obviously not in order –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, let us have some order in the House so that we can proceed.

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. You have guided this House and ruled on this issue that what we are left with as a House is just to vote on the motion about the nodding children of Northern Uganda. Is the honourable Prime Minister in order to start to challenge your ruling and draw us back to the debate in which you have already ruled? Is he in order, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a matter can be so important but the way we handle it can make it look so unimportant. So, instead of creating this commotion, why don’t we move in a systematic way? 

My understanding of the rising of the Rt hon. Prime Minister was that he had both a procedural point and a constitutional matter to raise on this subject. That is the point on which he arose. I was still gauging to see where he was going, whether he was actually going to begin debating or whether he was raising a procedural point and constitutional issues that needed to be raised. That is what I was waiting for. In my judgment, I will take a decision on that. 

Can we allow him to finish raising the matters he is raising? He is quoting the rules and he is quoting the Constitution. After that I will rule on it because it is a point of procedure.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rose on two points; one, on the question of a declaration of a state of emergency. Our Constitution, Article 110, which hon. Anywar may take the opportunity also to read, provides for a state of emergency - who declares it, under what circumstances and what it means. (Interjection) I did not think it was necessary to read all of it because it was obvious. 

Arising out of that, I raised a second point, which was financial implications, citing rules 55 and rule 108. So, I was simply seeking, as a matter of procedure, the guidance of the Speaker. (Interjection) I can read the Constitution. Article 110 says: “State of emergency. (1) The President may, in consultation with the Cabinet, by proclamation, declare that a state of emergency exists in Uganda or any part of Uganda if the President is satisfied that circumstances exist in Uganda or in that part of Uganda— 
(a) in which Uganda or that part of it is threatened by war or external aggression;
(b) in which the security or the economic life of the country or that part is threatened by internal insurgency or natural disaster; or
(c) which render necessary the taking of measures which are required for securing the public safety, the defence of Uganda and the maintenance of public order and supplies and services essential to the life of the community.” 

Now, in the Rules of Procedure, rule 55 reads as follows: “Motion with regard to settlement of financial matters. Parliament shall not proceed on any motion, including any amendment to a motion, that in the opinion of the person presiding makes provision for any of the purposes set out in rule 108 unless the motion is introduced by a Member or a Minister on behalf of the President.”

Rule 108 reads as follows: “Rules regarding settlement of financial matters.
(1) 	No question shall be proposed upon any Bill, motion or amendment which has not been introduced or moved by a Minister if in the opinion of the Speaker, the object of the Bill, motion or amendment is to make provision for any of the following-
(a) the imposition of taxation or the alteration of taxation otherwise than by reduction;
(b) the imposition of a charge upon the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda or the alteration of any such charge otherwise than by reduction; or
(c) the payment, issue or withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda of any moneys not charged on that fund or any increase in the amount of that payment, issue or withdrawal; or

(d) the composition or remission of any debt due to the Government of Uganda.

(2) Unless introduced on behalf of the Government, the House shall not proceed upon a motion, including an amendment of a motion, the effect of which would be to make a provision of any of the purposes specified in sub-rule (1).”

I am therefore saying that when you look at what is being proposed, are there financial implications or not? If there are no financial implications, then maybe it does not make sense because it means we continue as we were. However, I thought the purpose was to pass a motion which would alter the situation in the affected area. Therefore, I cite these rules and the Constitution, Mr Speaker, to seek your guidance whether we were on the right side of the Constitution under our rules. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the points raised by the Rt hon. Prime Minister are certainly valid. However, you can see that there has been a big mistake, and that is why I was reading from the text of the motion. The Rt hon. Prime Minister was reading from what is written on the Order Paper, but there is a difference. 

The substance of the motion is, “Motion for a resolution of Parliament to declare the areas in Uganda affected by nodding disease syndrome a humanitarian disaster area”. The motion that was debated was “humanitarian disaster area”. For some reason, the people who made the Order Paper substituted the word “disaster” with the word “emergency”. 

The motion we are discussing is what I have read. The word “emergency”, which appears on the Order Paper, is therefore not a correct representation of the text of the motion, which says “humanitarian disaster area”. I am just correcting the record so that it is understood properly. 

The second issue raised by the Rt hon. Prime Minister is whether we have appreciated whether there are issues of financial implication on this motion. The question is: would it have financial implications if it was declared? If it does, what are the constitutional implications of a motion that would bring financial implications? That is the question he raises.

In the debate of last week on this motion, that particular aspect was not debated - whether there were financial implications on this motion or not. I am, therefore, going to use my discretion to allow debate only in this limited area - whether it raises financial implications. If it does, then there would be issues, but if it does not then there will be no issues. Okay, are we together on this? 

On the issue of whether it was an emergency, Rt hon. Prime Minister, we have now understood that it is “disaster” and not “emergency” as it is on the Order Paper.  That will not raise anything. So, I am going to allow 20 minutes of debate on whether there is financial implication because all the other things were discussed. Are there financial implications in this motion? Debate is now open.  

4.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, the concern of the House is certainly legitimate because the matter before us is very serious. 

I would like to emphasise the fact that my ministry took over the coordination of the response to this challenge. We drew up a budget amounting to Shs 15 billion, which we have already communicated to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The Ministry of Finance is mobilising resources to address this challenge, so I do not know what this will now mean. To declare a place a humanitarian disaster area is to indicate that we have been overwhelmed and, therefore, we want other people to come and support us.  

I have also been privileged, Mr Speaker, to participate in a meeting, as the office which is coordinating, chaired by the Prime Minister, where we drew the attention of all our partners to mobilise resources. The budget that I have indicated to you has already been presented to the Ministry of Finance and I am happy to report to this House that there is a positive response from the partners towards that effect. I just wanted to put this on record. 

4.17
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When you talk of disaster, then we also come in as people who are specialists in such situations. When you declare a place a disaster area, it means that even if people are supposed to travel to that place, they should not. It also implies that people should not move form that area-(Interjections) - I am talking from a professional point of -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the matter we are debating now is as to whether there is financial implication or not. 

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Sir. In the last minute, I will say that once a place is declared a disaster prone area, it has financial implications. Thank you. 

4.18
MR KRISPUS AYENA (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam):  Rt hon. Speaker, I would like to offer a very simple definition. When you talk about financial implications in relation to the provisions of the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure, I would like to believe that you are talking about implications which are financial in nature over and above what is already provided for.  Government is therefore being called upon by the very motion to put in more money.  

I think what the motion is talking about is to actually have a clarion call to the international community and all and sundry that there is a focal area of problems. The Government has put in Shs 15 billion, and like the honourable minister has said, the Government is now overwhelmed; the Shs 15 billion so far may not be enough.

When we talk about financial implications, I think we are just talking about implications that seem to gravitate around the pocket of the Government and not necessarily any other person. So, in this case, Mr Speaker, I would like to hazard the suggestion that in this particular case there is absolutely no financial implication because we are not asking - (Interjections) - This motion is therefore fit and proper to be considered and proceeded on by this august House. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.20
MR JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Rt hon. Speaker, we are striving to find out whether we should declare the areas affected by nodding disease as a disaster area. You have requested us to find out whether it does have financial implications. A number of us do believe firmly that this disease is affecting a number of human lives. We believe that even a single life is sacred and divine. Whether it implies financial implications or not, I believe that we have to declare this area an area of human disaster. 

Secondly, the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness has told us that there is a positive response from the donors, but he has not been specific to tell us how much and when these resources will be available to meet the necessities or to treat this disease. I would like to ask him to really come to the specifics and tell us about this. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.22
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to sympathise with my brothers and sisters in the North because they are faced with this problem. However, you cannot talk of disaster without talking about cash to handle or to address the problem. Anybody in this House who will rise and use this microphone to hoodwink our representatives that you are talking of declaring an area a disaster area without money, I am requesting you, our voters are not fools. (Laughter) They also know that politely, you are advancing their cause to ask for more funds to go and alleviate the situation. 

So the issue should now be: is this the only area where disaster should be declared? We have more critical areas like in my constituency where currently there is cholera and people are dying. Cholera kills faster than nodding disease. Why can’t you declare my constituency a disaster area? There are five people who have died and over 300 are affected - (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Several ministers who have come on the Floor of this House have pleaded to this Parliament that this disease does not even have a name. The whole Government of the Republic of Uganda - it is on the record of the Hansard - have even failed to genetically classify where the disease belongs. Nodding disease is just Oxford English. 

Is hon. Tinkasiimire in order to compare a disease like cholera, which is known to infect people who go to the toilet and do not wash their hands, to a disease that the government does not know the cause of and even the President suggested we should go and spray the area with helicopters? Is he in order to compare a known disease like cholera, which is related to hygiene, to a disease which is killing our people and no one knows the cause, not even the Government? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it would be a failure of duty on our part to make this debate look as if we are opposing the fact that there is a problem called nodding disease. Parliament has already resolved that matter. Parliament has pronounced itself very clearly that nodding disease presents a problem. So, any member who is standing up to make it look as if it is not a problem is not being fair to this Parliament. (Applause)

What we are dealing with now is different. This Parliament has said there is a problem, and this Parliament has said put money aside. The minister came and said money has been put aside and all of it has been raised. This is what the minister said. All the Shs 15 billion has been raised and disbursed except that they are doing it in phases, but the money is there. So, this Parliament has already pronounced itself on the fact that there is a problem and that money should be put aside to deal with it. The minister reported that this money has been found to deal with it. Okay?

The issue we are dealing with now is different, and honourable members let us be clear on this because we do not want the people of Northern Uganda to have this impression that this House is disagreeing with the issue. The impression we gave two weeks ago was clear, that this Parliament is concerned and money must be found urgently to deal with this. That same resolution requested the Executive to give periodic review reports on what has been done to deal with this situation.

In the minister’s report that was tabled, and my recollection of the debate because I happened to have chaired that debate, the money was available. They are now trying to phase the release of these funds to deal with this problem in phases. That is what I heard. So, the motion that we are now debating is whether those districts that are affected by this situation should be declared a humanitarian disaster area. Now we have even gone beyond that debate in the sense that we have now zeroed it down to whether this particular motion, if this House is to pronounce itself on it without future challenges, has any financial implication. 

The implication is that if it has financial implications, then we are barred by the Constitution, we are directed by the Constitution that it can only be brought in a certain way. If it can be shown to this House that it will have financial implications, then the Constitution dictates that there are certain ways through which this matter should be handled. In other words, private members are prohibited from raising such a motion unless that motion or Bill is proposed by the government. That is what the Constitution says.

That is why I used my discretion to allow us debate this particular matter because it was not debated in the last meeting. That is why I have allowed this. I am requesting members to restrict themselves to this particular issue - financial implications or no financial implications - and then we will take one way or the other. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I want to inform, through my submission, my honourable colleague Odonga Otto. When this matter persistently featured in the debate of the nation and there was a supplementary coming from the Ministry of Finance, I put it on record and said, “Please, look for money for this particular problem”. I strongly supported the cause. 

Even in the Budget Committee where I sit as an ex-officio, they convinced me that money had been allocated amounting to Shs 3 billion and released to the Ministry of Health to handle this problem. They said that more finances, as the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness has said, are being looked for and are coming in. But to rise up here when all of us have disasters in our respective areas- (Member timed out.)

4.32
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise guidance. If we are to find out whether there are indeed financial implications, the only thing we need to look at is the content of the motion.

The motion is very precise; it is basically a one page motion. It is only premised on three points, and I want to bring them to the attention of this House. One, it urges Government to immediately declare the areas affected by the nodding syndrome, including the districts of Kitgum, Lamwo, Pader and Gulu, a humanitarian disaster area. Two, it urges Government to mobilise the international community, development partners, donors and well-wishers to urgently support interventions to avert the suffering of the people affected by the syndrome, especially the children. Three, it urges Government to urgently table in Parliament the report made by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on the nodding syndrome in Uganda to enable Parliament monitor and follow up on the interventions.

Mr Speaker, this precise motion in its preamble also recognises the Shs 15 billion that Government has set aside. So, I do not see any financial implication that is outside the Shs 15 billion that is already recognised. (Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, this is a House of sane people. The previous speaker is trying to tell us in his submission that this motion is seeking for mobilisation of donors. He is telling us that this motion is recognising that Government has already set aside Shs 15 billion. Is he in order to again start insinuating that there is no money involved yet he is talking of donors and Shs 15 billion? Is this Shs 15 billion paper or money? For God’s sake, really, why does he want to confuse this House? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are beginning to make this thing look like there are divisions over this matter and that is unfortunate. I have repeatedly said that Parliament has already passed a resolution and it has directed Government to look for money to deal with this. It was on the basis of the report presented by the Minister when the debate was going on that this motion was brought. Is that okay? So, we should not make it look as though this Parliament was not concerned at all about the plight of the people in Northern Uganda or those affected by the nodding syndrome. 

Please, please – (Interjection) – Can I finish with what I am saying? Honourable members, we might have to arrange another session to train members on the Rules of Procedure because if after a year of engagement in parliamentary debates we still fault ourselves on our rules, it means there is still a problem. However, I will forgive all those ones. 

What we are dealing with is whether there a financial implication, and the honourable member was answering the issue I raised. That was his debate. He said that there was no financial implication and that is his opinion. 

The implication is if there are financial implications then there are other implications. If there are financial implications, it means that the motion has got to be moved either by the Government or if it is moved by a private member, it has got to be supported by Government. (Mrs Ogwal rose_) 

Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, would you like to sit down first? This way of handling business is not going to help us; instead, we are going to begin looking funny, as though we were debating whether nodding syndrome is a problem. We are even beginning to make statements like “those people affected”. No, it is the whole country. Let us focus on it and deal with the constitutional issue of whether there is financial implication or not and find a way of resolving it without us losing sight of what we are dealing with. Hon. Karuhanga, please complete.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for your wise guidance. The honourable member raised something on point No.2, the one that urges Government to mobilise the international community, development partners, donors and well-wishers. It does not say that Government has no financial implications as to the effect of what probably should come from the donors or whether Government should actually replace whatever they bring. (Interruption) 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank my colleague for giving way. When we talk about financial implications – I have also read the Constitution – it is in respect to implications on the Consolidated Fund. It is not just financial implications the way our colleagues perceive it. If it has no financial implication on the Consolidated Fund, it can have financial implications on me and I have no problem contributing. That is the information I wanted to give so that members debate within the correct context. Thank you. 

MR KARUHANGA: As I conclude, Mr Speaker, (Interruption)

LT GEN. (RTD) ALI: I have information; why be discriminative? (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I want to inform the House that we are all sorry about the nodding syndrome which is affecting out people. We also want to say that ever since this disease started, Government has done a lot - (Interjection) - If it is not enough at least it has done a lot. Maybe it is the government’s fault not to inform the country. Otherwise, Government has gone very far. 

My understanding, Mr Speaker, is that perhaps, as the Constitution says, this issue can only be successful when both sides have agreed amicably and come out to the world for assistance. The requirement is not only to tackle those children affected because these children demand constant attention and care. So if they are only three in a family of nine, the other six, even though they are not affected, will need attention because their parents are occupied in keeping the affected ones. Therefore, whatever the government has may not be enough to supply even the six who are not directly affected because it concentrates on the sick ones. Therefore, it is necessary to seek support outside. (Applause) 

Now, in order to seek support from outside, we need the two sides to agree. The Prime Minister had already met the donors asking for support. Now, to allow the politicians on either side to also look for assistance without ignoring Government support, maybe the Prime Minister has to make his meeting with the donors public and write formally to the Opposition so that they can use that authority to go and look for support. However, it is not fair to deceive ourselves. Whether you call it disaster or whatever name you give it, there is an implication because the other six members of the family also need support. 

So, there is no point in voting - (Interjections) – Yes! I would suggest we go back and agree. Personally, I would suggest that we write a formal letter of our meeting; after all, Government has already contacted the donors who the other side are going to contact. We shall have to make this formal. If we need to come back, then we come back here and the motion will then be moved by Government, not confused people, - (Laughter) – especially now when you say you vote by show of hands. Why vote by show of hands when we are trying to rescue our people? This is divisive. Showing of hands is intimidating. So, this is the information, Sir. (Laughter) 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I appended my signature here as part of the movers of this motion. I am actually the mover of this motion, seconded by hon. Beatrice Anywar. I did hear the Deputy Leader of Government Business - actually a friend of mine whom I always do not antagonise on the Floor - refer to the movers as confused. I want to know whether he really means that Alaso is confused because I am the mover of this motion. It would be very sad, first for the people of Serere who voted me and who know that I am not a confused woman, and then the FDC for which I am the Secretary-General, and for my family to know that I have been branded confused by this honourable Parliament and by the Deputy Leader of Government Business in the Parliament of Uganda. Is he in order? If he is not, Mr Speaker, I will wait for your ruling but I am really uncomfortable. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have listened to this debate and I have listened to the statement from the Deputy Leader of Government Business. My recollection is that he said, “Stop confusing people”. That is what I heard. If there was any statement that had the implication of saying that the movers of the motion are confused, which I did not hear, I will ask the honourable member to state what he stated and then I can rule. I did not hear him say that the movers of the motion are confused. That one, I did not hear.     

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I said we human beings are capable of confusing people – (Interjections) - Yes, everybody can confuse people; why not? But I did not mean her. I meant somebody who brought the motion that people should vote by show of hands. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt hon. Member, did you say the person who moved that motion is confused or was confusing people? Please.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: It has the effect of confusing people, but those who are also able to be confused. It has the effect of confusing. If you are on the surface, you can even be confused. (Laughter) It has divisive implications because if you show your hands and if I do not show hands, what will they understand? This is divisive. What is very important here is that both the Opposition and Government must agree for the sake of our people. We should not politicise the nodding disease. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Anywar, are you going to rule on this point of order which has been raised? Honourable members, any statement that has the implication of suggesting that an honourable member of this House is confused is unfortunate. If the Rt Hon. Deputy Leader of Government Business made any insinuations or statement to the effect that any honourable member of this House is confused, he should withdraw it. 

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I do not know, Mr Speaker, whether there is something for me to withdraw because I did not say people are confused. I have no evidence on that. I said we are also human beings capable of being confused. Those who are capable of being confused are here and those who are not capable of being confused are here. I do not know the statistics of how many have already been confused or not. (Laughter) So, I have nothing really to withdraw, Mr Speaker. Sorry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let hon. Karuhanga wind up.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In conclusion, it is quite disheartening when we begin looking at the nodding disease as a political matter or as a regional matter. I want to make a very serious appeal – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga, the issue is not nodding disease; the issue is whether we should declare the areas affected by this disease disaster areas. On the issue of nodding disease, Parliament has agreed. Please, that is part of the thing that we need to take a decision on. 

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have already mentioned what I had to say directly on financial implications. I would want us to be very genuine with each other and read that motion letter by letter, sentence by sentence. Let us be honest to each other in this House and put it on record as to whether this motion has any financial implication on the Consolidated Fund. It has none. I would like to appeal to hon. Tinkasiimire that it is not about Northern Uganda; this is a disease that can get anybody in this country. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have exhausted my 20 minutes. In fact, I have exceeded them by 30 minutes, and so I have done 50 minutes on this particular issue. This is part of why we will need this – (Interjections) - The honourable Speaker is speaking and members are - I am going to ask hon. Abdu Katuntu to speak then I ask somebody from the Frontbench to speak and then we conclude this matter. 

4.53
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before I make my point, I would like to remind colleagues that these sessions of Parliament are broadcast live. The people who are affected by this particular disease are watching. What I have noticed for the last two hours is a little bit of excitement and laughter. Indeed the lady, my colleague there, has been laughing and I have been looking at you -(Interjections)- and I am ready – I have been watching who has been laughing and I can even mention the name –(Interruption) 

MS NTABAZI: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I have always respected hon. Katuntu as a senior member of this House who knows the proceedings of debates and behaviour of Parliament. I have been in this Parliament for almost one year and watched the Frontbench of the Opposition, even the backbenchers of the Opposition, laughing where there is no need to laugh. Is it in order for the hon. Katuntu to pinpoint Harriet Ntabazi in this House -(Interjections)- and intimidate me, infringing on my rights as a Member of Parliament who is voted by my district, a whole district not a constituency like him? (Laughter) Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I still recall a statement I made when a general statement was made in the past by the Prime Minister in relation to a matter which was before the House. A member shot up the way the honourable member has raised a point of order. In Acholi, if you find a group of dogs playing around and you throw a stone, the one which yells is the one which has been hit by the stone. I am not sure whether the honourable member who raised the point of order is the only lady on that row. (Laughter) The hon. Abdu Katuntu said “the honourable lady” and did not point at any particular person. 

I was observing the proceedings; hon. Katuntu did not mention any member’s name. It is, therefore, difficult for the Speaker – Honourable member, are you on phone? It is difficult for the Speaker to ascertain whether the reference was made to hon. Harriet Ntabazi when there are seven ladies sitting on that bench. It is difficult for the Speaker to ascertain that. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, actually –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member shall proceed to the point.

MR KATUNTU: Yes, and I meant no harm to anybody. I was trying to remind everybody that when conducting serious business, this House should do it with decorum. That is all. That is the point I was making. If anybody disagrees with me that we can conduct business without decorum, that is okay because that is the way the colleague wants to conduct the business.  

Let us look at it this way; the provisions of the Constitution in Article 93 are very clear. The contents of Article 93 have been transplanted right from the Constitution to our Rules of Procedure. They are in pari material. Okay, let me not speak law; let me speak English. They are word-for-word, the same. What we are looking at is if we pass this motion, will Government be required to look for more money other than that which has been provided for in the budget? That is the point. 

The Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness has come on the Floor and said Government has identified Shs 15 billion to cater for this problem. I wish to remind honourable colleagues that sometimes, money can be reallocated. We can budget and say Shs 15 billion is for the nodding disease but along the way, it can be reallocated and it caters for a different aspect of the budget. That is a daily occurrence. 

Last time, the minister told you that we passed money for his department which he had not yet received. This motion can assist without further strain on the budget. If this money has been identified, let Government not divert it to any other sector because the area is a disaster area. That would not have any implication whatsoever on the Consolidated Fund. It is happening daily. Ministries get money and reallocate it to some other areas which they think are priorities. This motion is saying this is a priority to disaster and the money for it has already been identified. Why can’t we ring fence this money for this disaster? 

In case this money is not enough, we are calling upon development partners – in fact, it will not be the first time. This Parliament has even mobilised resources amongst members, got the money and donated it even to the Police. In the Seventh Parliament, we raised Shs 200,000 each and gave it to the Police because we had realised that the Police was having a problem with transport and fighting criminality.

The only problem I see is that the House is charged. I do not know where the problem is today. People came right from the first second and we are charged. I do not know why. There could be some crisis which has caused this atmosphere. (Interjections) This atmosphere is not the usual atmosphere. 

I implore colleagues; we could be in the mood for some other thing but can we sort out this matter in a nationalistic way. People have problems and people are dying. I cannot imagine this nodding disease in Bugweri. I cannot imagine it! If it was in Busoga, I am sure all the honourable Members of Parliament from Busoga would be talking the same language, including hon. Majegere - (Interjections) - I want everybody, for example, who comes from this sub-region where this disease is and is not talking the language to support me because they are seeing this thing – (Interruption)                 

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, when hon. Baryomunsi talked about the bridge in Kanungu and Rukungiri, most Members of Parliament from that area, including the Prime Minister, stood up and even spoke about how far they had gone in mobilising resources to make sure that the situation is put under control. 

Secondly, I remember, when we had a problem in Ankole - the cows had a problem because of the environment - Parliament had to move in quickly to get money and sort out that problem, and if I remember clearly we declared that area a disaster area. So the information I want to give, as an elder and as a man who has been in this world much longer, is that it is important that when we talk about this – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please give the information.

MR SABIITI: The information I am giving is that we should take this matter serious. This motion was really intended to help the situation. With this information, I beg to submit. 

MR KATUNTU: We do not have to be in a position of adversary on this particular point. In fact, I would have suggested that the Leader of Government Business should have gotten in touch with the mover of the motion and they harmonise positions; this debate would have been even shorter. 

This adversarial hostility going on, to the extent that one colleague even had the guts to accuse the Speaker, is absolutely unnecessary. This is a time when you need leadership, in situations like this. I call upon the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to take leadership now and we have this thing come to a conclusion –(Dr Baryomunsi rose_)– Hon. Baryomunsi, I request you to hold on; I do not want to stay too long on the Floor. Allow me make this point to the Prime Minister. 

Rt. hon. Prime Minister, take leadership at this point and have this matter resolved in the interest of our suffering people. We do not want the sort of images being shown on television; they indicate that actually some sections of this House are insensitive. Mr Speaker, the challenge is to the Prime Minister. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the VIP Gallery this afternoon we have a two-time Member of Parliament for Gulu Municipality, hon. Norbert Mao, who also became the Chairman of Gulu District. He has come to witness the proceedings of the House. Also, I have hon. Patrick Mwondah, former Member of Parliament for Bukooli North. He has come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please join me to welcome those two former Members of Parliament (Applause). Hon. Norbert Mao is also the President-General of the Democratic Party, I have been reminded. (Laughter) 

5.09
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you have repeatedly pointed out, the debate now is really of a technical nature. The debate is whether this motion or the passing of this motion would have financial implications or not.

Of course, hon. Mwiru – I hope I am pronouncing it properly because in my language Mwiru means –(Laughter). Hon. Mwiru made a good point, that when we talk about financial implications, we mean implications on the Consolidated Fund. It could not be anything else. Hon. Katuntu is laughing; is he at liberty to laugh? (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I asked this question and you are absolutely right that hon. Karuhanga was not correct to raise debate on the disease because that is not the debate now. We are all clear on that, and we are together. The question that arises then is: if there are no financial implications, why do we want to pass this motion? 

Government has already told you the steps it has taken. I would like to correct hon. Katuntu that Government has not identified Shs 15 billion. Government only informed you that we have estimated that for us to contain that situation in the North, we need Shs 15 billion and what we have spent so far is Shs 3,750,000,000 – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Prime Minister for giving way. The Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness came here and said, “We have a budget of Shs 15 billion”. The Shs 15 billion, in my understanding, has been approved but the problem is that we do not have money. 

We agreed that we need Shs 15 billion, and we have allowed you to charge the Consolidated Fund with Shs 15 billion. Now, in this case you are saying you met with donors and they have agreed. The clarification I want to seek from the hon. Prime Minister is this: If we declared this a disaster area, don’t you think it would be faster for you to get money from the donors since you have failed to get it from the Consolidated Fund and yet you are supposed to take care of the lives of Ugandans?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I want it to be stated clearly on the Floor of the House that money was not given for the nodding disease. I would even resign my seat if the Prime Minister would show me any single account in all the district hospitals that shows that money left the centre to the districts. 

Instead, the information we have from the Ministry of Health officials is that in a meeting presided over by the Prime Minister, hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi, he arbitrarily reduced the budget from Shs 3.7 billion to Shs 110 million. He then directed the Shs 110 million to be used for taking relief supplies. 

Further information I have is that the Prime Minister removed Shs 600 million from the PRDP funds to buy a brand new Mercedes Benz for himself - (Interjections) - I will testify to this. No single money has been received in the PRDP districts and I want you, Mr Speaker, to institute maybe a committee of five Members of Parliament who will go and be shown which account that money has gone to. We should stop being fooled because we are tired!

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Christine Ondoa): Mr Speaker, I want to give information about the dispatch of funds to the districts. The plan for response to the nodding syndrome is in two phases as we said. Phase one, which is for the dispatch of funds, was to run from January to December 2012 and phase two from January to December 2013. The Shs 3.85 billion is therefore meant to cover the period from January to December. 

As we heard, it is true that by the time we gave the statement, the funds had not gone to the districts but we have a plan. We did not dispatch the funds because we wanted districts to open accounts separately for the nodding syndrome. We instructed districts that by 18 May 2012, all the accounts should be ready, and we have all the districts and how much we shall transfer. It is not because we held the money but we wanted the accounts to be ready so that they do not mix these accounts with the primary health care funds. As I talk now, for three of the districts the money has been dispatched. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which districts? Do you know the districts?

DR ONDOA: These funds from the Ministry of Health are out of the Shs 2.75 billion that the Ministry of Finance accorded to us. Ministry of Health is to receive Shs 1.8 billion; Gulu District receives Shs 50 million; Pader, Shs 115.7 million; Lamwo, Shs 101.36 million; and Kitgum, Shs 98.5 million. These are the details that I have.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I just rise to give supplementary information. It is true that the challenge is big. It is also true that the challenge has presented faces - there is the medical challenge and also the welfare challenge. 

I want it to be on record that we have done the following: we have dispatched food in two categories. The first category is to take care of the children. We have dispatched enriched food or fortified meals for the children. I will be very happy if this House allows us tomorrow to bring – (Interjections) - I did not know that my colleagues wanted details with mathematical precision of what we have done. I am happy that hon. Odonga Otto -

We have also distributed food to the caregivers. If a family has 10 members, for example, each member of that family is entitled to about four kilogrammes of posho and two kilogrammes of beans at any given time. If you multiply this by the number of people in the house, some families have got up to 40 kilogrammes of posho. We have also taken trouble to make sure that we reach the areas that were very remote. We have also tried to feed the children in the centres. 

It may not be fair to indicate that nothing has been done, but what we know is that the challenge is huge and we are doing everything it takes to make sure that these children are taken care of. We realised that initially, the deaths were mainly because of malnutrition but we have to a great extent checked the malnutrition. 

Having said that, and before the Prime Minister takes the Floor, with your permission I want to make it abundantly clear here that resources and interventions are being made. I would propose - although I do not know under what rule but the experts will help guide me on this – that the members go together with my team to make an on-spot assessment of what we have so far done. I will be very happy to take the members to Lamwo, Pader, Kitgum and Gulu so that they can come and debate this thing and take a decision with a very informed position. 

The impression that may have been created is that nothing has been done. I will be very happy to lead a team of members to look at the welfare interventions while the Ministry of Health could lead a team of members to look at the challenge that we have tackled on the medical front. I thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I also thank the colleagues for the information they have given. I firmly resist taking myself to the level of hon. Odonga Otto – (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: I rise on a point of order. I hold a Bachelor’s degree in political science, I am a student of a Master’s degree in international relations, and I hold a Bachelor’s degree in law and a diploma in legal practice from the Law Development Centre. I am a Member of Parliament who has been here for 11 years and I am married with five children. (Laughter) I am also the chairperson of the Government Assurances Committee. Is the Prime Minister in order to insinuate that he is not at my level and yet he has only one degree? (Laughter) Is he in order to demean a person of my calibre who has even published two books? Is he in order?        

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will agree with me that this is a sitting in which I have had to pass the biggest number of rulings. (Laughter) The Prime Minister said he will not bring himself to the level of hon. Odonga Otto. Apparently, the level of hon. Otto is much higher than that of the Prime Minister. (Laughter) So, in my understanding, the Prime Minister is simply saying he cannot compete with hon. Odonga Otto because hon. Odonga Otto is much higher. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, you are absolutely right. That level is beyond me. 

I was asking a question because to declare a place a disaster area, it means that you have tried by all means available to you and you have failed to cope, and therefore, you declare it a disaster area. I accepted, Mr Speaker, your correction of the Order Paper because if we called it an emergency, as I explained we would have to comply with constitutional provisions in order to pass a motion declaring an emergency. I am glad we are not doing that now. 

Even with the idea of a disaster, having heard what we have done, and there are many other things which have not been listed here, I know for sure at my level as opposed to hon. Odonga Otto’s level, we have spent money in establishing treatment centres for the nodding disease syndrome. We have established so far three treatment centres, and one of them is in his district – (Interjections) - No, I am not at his level, therefore I am able to see what is on the ground, which has cost us money obviously. So, when we say that we declare the place a disaster area, I have absolutely no doubt that there would be financial implications. 

There are intended to be financial implications because if it was not the case, then one would accuse us of just gesturing. Why declare a place a disaster area unless your intention is to raise more money to give you greater ability to handle that situation? Why? 

Therefore, I thought hon. Katuntu was making a good point, because he said the rational and prudent approach to handle a matter like this, where there are obvious financial implications, and we are losing it on a technical basis - As I said, we are not opposed to what is happening or what we need to do in order to improve our capacity to handle this situation in the North –(Interjections)- definitely not! We are simply saying that in so doing let us comply with our Rules of Procedure and with our Constitution. 

If there was need to raise more money, maybe because the identification of the Shs 15 billion is not enough, then let us meet and talk about it. After that, either you move it with the consent of Government, which is what the rules provide, or a Government minister brings it so that you speak with one voice on this question of managing the nodding disease syndrome in Uganda. Therefore, Mr Speaker – (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, hon. Prime Minister, for giving way. You argued a few minutes ago that there should be demonstration - in other words, justification - to the effect that the interventions the Government of Uganda has made are not adequate. I would like to draw your attention to the provisions of food. When you are giving people who are in the disaster area food, by the World Food Programme standards and the standards of the International Red Cross one person is supposed to eat 0.7 kilograms per day. In other words, what hon. Musa Ecweru said to this House is that he has given them food for about five or six days. That is it. So, just by using the illustration of food alone, it means our own abilities as the Government of Uganda are inadequate. 

Secondly, I would like to remind the Prime Minister, who has been here for a long time, that there is a precedent to this matter. When we choose words like “urge”, the words are carefully chosen to urge Government. In fact, this is not the first time a motion is passed on this Floor. It has been a precedent on this Floor that when Government is merely being urged, at that stage there is no requirement for financial implications. 

In 2003, this Parliament passed a resolution urging Government to declare Northern Uganda a humanitarian disaster area and that resolution was supported and carried. In 1994, there was a declaration; where is the difference when Government declared in 1994 that the animals in Nyabushozi were so short of water that it was something they wanted to mobilise resources for? 

So, what Parliament is doing this afternoon is simply to express our feelings. It is our feeling as the Parliament of Uganda that what is happening in Northern Uganda is at a disastrous level. We would like to make that expression to our Government. We would like to urge; we are not the ones declaring but we are urging you, the Government of Uganda, to declare it a disaster area. 

Lastly, if there is a precedent that this motion is struck out on the basis that it will have financial implications, may I ask which other motion will ever be moved in this House that will not indicate to Government the need to spend money? I think the legal brains in this House know better how to define the direct charge on the Consolidated Fund. This is not yet a direct charge; this is urging, drawing your attention and focus, and then deciding that you will charge the Consolidated Fund. I thank you. 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, hon. Prime Minister. Indeed you are a good one. The clarification I would like is whether in the analysis you have given here, you perceive the motion on the Floor to insinuate that the government contribution – what you have so far started - has not been acknowledged by us, not even by the movers of the motion. In my view, the motion is not moving in that direction. The motion is positive in the sense that it is giving support to Parliament in view of what Government is already doing. It is also about sounding the bell to call people, including those in the affected areas, to give support to this disastrous situation.  

If we follow this motion along these lines – The Leader of Government Business stated here that they have had meetings with some donors. That also means that you have realised that Government needs support from other stakeholders. In the circumstances, I would like to plead that you accept the support from this House towards your role as Government. Also, accept the motion so that you can now mobilize those other stakeholders to come and help in sorting out this disaster. That is the sense in which I see this motion. Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, my response, Mr Speaker, is that the motion on the Order Paper, for which a motion to put the question has already been passed, reads as follows with the corrections that you made: “Motion for a resolution of Parliament to declare areas in Uganda affected by the nodding disease syndrome a humanitarian disaster area.” I think that is the amended motion and that is the debate we are having.

The point I was making in response to, and agreeing with what hon. Katuntu was saying, is that it is a technical one because our rules and the Constitution are clear. If we are to pass a resolution that has financial implications, then you do it with the consent of a minister or by a minister of Government. That is all.

My proposal, therefore, is that before we pronounce ourselves on this with the obvious consequences that I look at now, we stand over this particular decision and we all come together with the movers of the motion and discuss and agree. So when we come back here, we will not spend so much time disagreeing on a point where there is actually no point of substance in terms of disagreement. I beg to propose.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before I announce that proposal, I would like to inform the House that rule 108 actually requires that discretion be exercised by the Speaker, that I should be the one to determine whether that matter has financial implications or not. I have simply declined to do so because of the nature of the subject. I could not say it has or it does not have financial implications. I thought it is a matter that we needed to think about carefully so that at the time of pronouncing ourselves, we will not be doing it because the Speaker has directed. So I have chosen not to exercise that authority of the Speaker.

However, I also think that the debate has been enriching. The proposal by the Prime Minister is that as a way forward, the movers sit with the Leader of Government Business in the House and his team and agree on how best to handle this matter as regards to the prayers in the motion.

Now that we have spent almost two hours on this matter, it shows that as a House we are serious about it, we are not joking. So we should pat ourselves on the back. However, the question is: how do we resolve it without acrimony? Is it possible that we allow the mover and seconder of the motion together with other members interested in this matter to meet the Prime Minister with his team before they come back to the House probably on Thursday? Is that okay? Should we allow them time to meet between now and Wednesday so that they can report back on Thursday? Also, please be informed that Parliament will be prorogued on Friday.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, this motion has been tabled in good faith. In the circumstances, I have no problems discussing it with the Prime Minister on how to make it better and report back to this House. In fact, I thought even tomorrow, but since you guided on Thursday –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you are comfortable with tomorrow, I have no problem.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I think that is not the challenge. The challenge is that probably you will still have to give guidance on it. I am saying this because what the Prime Minister is concerned about is the technicality of the financial implications. So, even if we sit with him and he continues to hold that view, we will still require your guidance. 

If what the Prime Minister is only asking us to do is to amend the text of the motion without necessarily implying that there is an impediment of a financial implication, that would be much easier. So, probably, you need to guide us before we get into the discussions because there is already an absolute position on the matter having a financial implication. Otherwise, if we get a “no” response, it cannot move and it will be thrown out. However, if we are guided into the direction that there is no financial implication, then we will know we have a way into which to proceed. That way, time will not be wasted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have decided to defer the exercise of the powers given to me by the rules deliberately. If you come back on Thursday without any agreement, I will exercise that discretion with utmost precision. 

For avoidance of doubt, nobody should think that I have declined to make a ruling on this matter; I simply want the House to guide itself on how to move it forward. I am doing this because if you go one way or the other, we do not want the implication in the public to be divisive. We should move as one House. We moved as one House before when we passed the original resolution and I think we should again move as one House at this level. Hon. Odonga Otto, are you speaking to the same matter? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I have consulted the Leader of the Opposition and we are agreeable with the final submissions of the Prime Minister. However, we want on record the people that you will delegate to have that meeting. I would also think Thursday is so soon because those of us who are the MPs from the affected areas, and even this small committee that will meet the Prime Minister, we would want to see the accounts, ask about where the money is and call our districts to find out whether they have received the money. 

What we want are results. I would still think that you state, for the record, the parties that will meet the Prime Minister so that we can iron out these issues, like what the Minister of Health stated -(Interjection)- Yes, but the motion is premised on issues because at the end of the day when we meet with the Prime Minister, we will be able to come back to Parliament and say, “Yes, this account No.302 of Pader has received money or this centre in Pader is actually functioning.”

I would still think that if we are going to agree with the Prime Minister’s position, then the movers of the motion and probably two or three other people be added and then we have a concrete reporting mechanism. If we report that everything is home and dry, it will still remain at the discretion of this Parliament to decide what to do.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, what timeframe are you proposing? Is Thursday okay? Can I propose some names, although I will not name the Prime Minister’s team? 

I will ask the mover of the motion, the seconder of the motion and hon. Karuhanga, hon. Chris Baryomunsi – (Interjection) - There is no gender in this? There are already two women! Is that enough? So they are hon. Alaso, hon. Anywar, hon. Karuhanga and hon. Baryomunsi. I will not name the ministers who will be involved because that is a Government decision. I am not naming people who are supporting it or opposing it but I am just naming members who can look at it critically. I think hon. Chris Baryomunsi has a certain opinion, hon. Karuhanga had a certain opinion and so they should all go there and come and guide us on Thursday about how best to resolve this matter. Honourable members, thank you very much. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE ON THE AMENDMENT OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to take a decision on this matter. I would love if the honourable members would resume their seats because we would require numbers to take this decision. Members, I urge you to remain in your seats and we proceed to take a decision on the matter. That is why we are here. It is a critical time for us to take decisions, so let us take the decisions. 

You recall that we were at committee stage of these rules and we had gone a long way. We are now supposed to take votes on some issues that had been proposed. So, the rules were at committee stage. 

COMMITTEE STAGE

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you will recall that we had reached a stage where we adopted rule 11 of our Rules of Procedure in terms proposed by the Treaty. What we are now left to do is to go to the details of how we carry out the elections through Appendix B of our Rules of Procedure. 

There have been consultations on this and a draft of the results of the consultations has been generated by the Directorate of Legislative and Legal Services of this Parliament and submitted. I do not know whether members have the copies; if so, that is the subject of what we are going to discuss. 

In the meantime, can we ask all the members who are in the precincts of Parliament to come back to the House so that we are able to move forward with this debate. Honourable members and respective whips, please make sure that our members are in attendance so that we can move forward with this. 

As we said before, there is a timeframe within which we should finish the adoption of this amendment to the rules. It was a subject of litigation. Judgment was passed by the East African Court of Justice on the 10th of this month and another judgment is coming on the 19th. All are subject to our issues, which we are trying to solve. We have been accused of an inordinate delay in dealing with the Rules of Procedure, so it is important that we finish with the rules as fast as we can. 

Honourable members, you have looked at the proposals. The rest of the things had been addressed; the only issue that remained for resolution is what now appears on that paragraph of the appendix. The issue was on, I think, nomination. The principle of what was a subject of the pending discussion is what is now contained in schedule 4. If you look at schedule 4, which is on page 13 of 14, that is the matter that had remained pending. Are we together? That is schedule 4 to our Appendix B. Schedule 4 relates to the sample of what would be the ballot paper. 

The proposal is how many people would be nominated from the party in Government, how many people would be nominated from the parties in the Opposition and how many people would be nominated from candidates independent of political parties or organisations. That is where the crux of the debate was, and then also the suggestion of how many would be nominated and how many would be voted for. In essence, it is establishing numbers to be assigned to the party in Government, the Opposition and Independents. Honourable members, that is the area where we are required to take a decision but the rest of the matters were clear. Have I captured it properly? 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think we had a little bit of consensus on all other aspects but I thought we should just put it bluntly that we failed to agree on that particular part of Schedule 4, which I also see being reflected on page 5, item 13. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes. So, it is item 13; I had failed to locate it because this is not the marked one that I was using. Paragraph 13 of the appendix and also contained in the sample ballot paper, which is on page 13, Schedule 4. So, let us focus on pages 5 of 14 and 13 of 14. Yes, can we have discussions on this? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, let us start with page 13, Schedule 4.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Schedule 4 is derived from paragraph 13. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Let us deal with the schedule first; it is very important. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Alright. 

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Chairman, we are seeing different schedules. There is one where they are saying, “Candidates from the party in Government” and the second one where they are saying, “Candidates from the Opposition parties.” If we are to go by the Treaty, it means that each party must have its own sheet. 

What I am trying to say is that if the party in Government has its sheet that is saying one to eight, it applies that all the parties in Parliament should each have their own sheet on which to tick off the people. That should be the first thing to be dealt with. If you look at it, the first one is talking about Government and the other one is talking about Opposition parties but the Treaty is not saying that Opposition parties should be separated from the party in Government.
 
My argument is that each party should have its own sheet on which its candidates are. From there, we shall determine the other things in paragraph 13. You cannot group these ones together. This can only apply when talking of Government and the Opposition. When you talk about parties, it is different, Mr Speaker. I hope you get my argument. 

MR FUNGAROO: I have something very brief here. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us first deal with this particular issue. 

MR FUNGAROO: Yes. On page 13 where the Leader of the Opposition has cited, I would like to concur with him and draw your attention to the ruling of the East African Court of Justice in Arusha; I hope you have your copies. The matter in contention was the representation of each political party in this Parliament in the East African Legislative Assembly. Let me take you to page 22 of the ruling, point 9, the decision: “In view of our findings above, we find and hold that the Applicants have made out a case that the 2006 Rules do not conform to the Treaty. Accordingly, they are entitled to orders that will restrain the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda…” (Interruption)   

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, hon. Kaps Hassan Fungaroo, for yielding the Floor. It is actually on page 19, the last paragraph, and I will read it: “Clearly, there has been an inordinate delay to amend the Rules on the part of the second respondent…” The second respondent is actually the Attorney-General of the Republic of Uganda as a representative of Parliament. “Without doubt the delay has locked the Applicants out of the EALA and has, understandably, frustrated them.” The second applicant they are talking of is actually the Democratic Party and Mr Mukasa Mbidde. 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you for that information. I suppose you have copies of the ruling. I am, therefore, suggesting that on page 13, Schedule 4, we need to make sure that there is a table for each party to have nominations and, therefore, to participate. I rest my case here. Thank you. 

DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The last time we debated this matter, I think there was contention with respect to the ruling by the East African Court of Justice after DP and Mr Mukasa Mbidde had gone to court. Part of the ruling had come to the public and this matter was referred to the court. 

I think some members anticipated that maybe the court, in the final ruling, would prescribe the various flaws. However, we have accessed a copy of the judgement and if I could read, on page 14 of the judgement it says: “We, therefore, do not consider that it is the Court’s duty, at this juncture, to give guidance to or interpret for the Legislature of Uganda on what does or does not constitute compliance with Article 50 or Article 50(1) of the Treaty because it is not the issue in contention. The issue about the Rules in this reference is that they have not been amended to conform to Article 50 of the Treaty…”

So, what DP and Mr Mukasa Mbidde had taken to court was that this Parliament had not amended the rules to conform to the Treaty, particularly Article 50 - (Mr Odonga Otto rose_) - Just hold on, I will allow you but hold on.

The court says it is the duty of this Parliament to determine how the various interests are represented. So, that is what we are determining now, and I think even Article 50 is very clear because it guides that as you constitute the team, make sure the parties in the House, as much as feasible, are represented. Issues of gender and other interests must also be accommodated but the rules must be determined by the National Assembly. Therefore, the court re-stated the position that it is us to determine the various slots. 

The proposal, which had been brought, was that given the different interests in this country and the House, the ruling party would have six slots, the Opposition two and the Independents one slot. This is the proposal, which is on table and which we should vote on. I would want us not to have a prolonged debate. That was the proposal on the table. I can take the information from hon. Otto.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I am so excited today about how everyone appreciates the law when you have just started. The information I want to give is two-fold. One, when you are reading a judgement, there is what we call orbiter dicta. In a layman’s words I can say, “Dr Chris Baryomunsi is a good man, however last week he stole a vehicle.” Now, you will have to ask yourself, which is the substance of the judgement; are they talking about you stealing the vehicle or you being a good man? In other words, when you are reading this judgement you do not take the “by the way” as the gist of the ruling. 

However, the information I want to give you is that if you see page 11 of the ruling, the second paragraph states, “For clarity’s sake, the impugned rules provide as follows…” - these are the rules, which have been removed – “…elections of Members of EALA shall reflect the proportional party membership based on numerical strength of the parties in the House…” 

Mr Chairman, maybe the other word “impugned” is a little difficult, but what has been removed from the rules is this provision that talked of numerical strength. It has been removed, and the court stated here, “For clarity’s sake, the impugned rules provide as follows: …the elections of Members of EALA shall reflect the proportional party membership based on numerical strength of the parties in the House…” This is the former rule, so I do not know why you are clapping your hands. The issue of numerical strength does not arise now. That was the former rule. 

What remains, which this Parliament should check themselves against, is just the various political parties represented in the House, shades of opinion, gender and other special interests. So, numerical strength is now history; it has been removed from the Treaty. That is the information I wanted to give you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and I thank hon. Otto for the information. Earlier on, you ruled that he was above hon. Amama Mbabazi. You should rule that I am above him now because when you read Article 50 of the Treaty, it is very clear. Maybe for avoidance of doubt, let me read it: “The National Assembly of each Partner State shall elect, not from among its members, nine members of the Assembly who shall represent as much as is feasible, the various political parties represented in the National Assembly, shades of opinion, gender and other special interest groups in that Partner State, in accordance with such procedure as the National Assembly of each Partner State may determine.”

In other words, the framers of the Treaty were saying that as you constitute the team, be as accommodative as possible, be as inclusive as possible but the final decision is made by the House on how you distribute the slots. Definitely, when you are looking at, for instance, representation in the House, you must apply the quantitative test to that action. In this House, for instance, Ugandans voted and 70 percent showed they belonged to NRM; you cannot ignore that fact. You must give chance to everybody but you must take note of that fact.

The second issue is that as we draft our rules, we must also address the question of participation. I think following the judgement in the Jacob Oulanyah case, anybody who is eligible and has interest to contest for the various slots must be accorded the opportunity to participate. That is why in the schedule on that table, the proposal is that if you allocate two slots to the Opposition, the Opposition will bring more than two members to the House and then the House will vote on two members. If those from DP, UPC, JEEMA are among the various members brought, they will have participated in the elections.

I think that is the import of the ruling of the East African Court of Justice. Even us who are not lawyers can easily understand it, Mr Chairman. Therefore, the matter to determine now is for this House to vote on that representation in terms of the numbers and the slots and the matter ends. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, I think we are debating now. There will be no point of guidance at this stage; let us debate. 

MR KYEWALABYE MAJEGERE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I wish to differ with the Leader of the Opposition’s suggestion. He said that the format of the forms on schedule 4 should be amended for each party to have a form. This Government is run under the multiparty system whereby we have the Leader of Government Business and the Leader of the Opposition. Are we together? (Laughter) 

In a multiparty system, numerical strength is key, unless you are suggesting that we return to a no-party system. As long as we are under a multiparty system, we have to recognise the Leader of Government Business and the Leader of the Opposition. That is why we have here two forms – one for the Government side and the other for the Opposition. That means both the Government and the Opposition can have their candidates.

The thing that Dr Baryomunsi has not emphasised while reading the statement is that at the end of Article 50 of the Treaty, it is written, “…as each Partner State may determine.” That means that it is up to us, the ruling Government –(Laughter)- Mr Chairman, I need your protection. So, let us amend whatever we intend to amend but bearing in mind that we are under a multiparty system where the Opposition and the government side are the key players and then the other partners can come in. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I will not take any point of procedure or clarification or anything. Let us debate and avoid hiding under those points. 

MR HATWIB KATOTO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am not a lawyer but a professional teacher and a businessman by destination. When I was reading through the ruling, I came up with certain conclusions which will assist us as Parliament of Uganda. 

First of all, they referred the matter to the Parliament of Uganda. That is a fact which I want someone to challenge. The other thing is participation. So, I request that we allow anyone who wants to be voted to come and participate. Another thing is that we should vote as Members of Parliament. 

So, Mr Chairman, we should make laws depending on those two factors. Once they capture these two fish – voting and participation – there is no one who will take us back to court. For that matter, I would like to inform our colleagues. Of course, you know we are the majority. We are not saying that we shall take all the slots; we shall get two from your side and one Independent, but this time we shall not give DP and FDC. Thank you. (Laughter)

MR JAMES AKENA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I, too, wish to refer to page 18 of the ruling on the last paragraph. For avoidance of doubt, allow me to read it out: “The essential requirements for EALA elections provided in Article 50 of the Treaty are that: 
•	The National Assembly shall conduct an election; 
•	sitting members of the Assembly are not eligible; 
•	elected members shall be nine; 
•	the elected members shall represent, as much as is feasible- 
a) the political parties in the National Assembly; 
b) shades of opinion; 
c) gender; and 
d) other special interest groups; 
•	the procedure for elections shall be determined by the National Assembly. Any election, or rule or procedure for election, of EALA members that departs from the above clear requirements risks contravening the Treaty.” 

Now, many of us are very willing to use the force of numbers to ignore the Treaty. This is a fact. If you wish to contravene the Treaty, you have the numbers to do so but anything – Let me read the last part again: “Any election, or rule or procedure, for election, of EALA members that departs from the above clear requirements risks contravening the Treaty.” We can go round in circles or disagree but the Treaty is very specific – (Member timed out.)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We, from the Democratic Party, did not go to court for the sake of numbers and rules; we went there for participation and to have elections conducted in Parliament. That is why in fact there were even costs. 

Like my colleague from UPC has said, it is about political parties present in the Assembly. If I may refer you to what hon. Katuntu raised – the paragraph on page 19 – it says, “It is also a delay which, if not addressed, could adversely impact the commencement of the next EALA term.” We do not want to frustrate the commencement of the EALA. 

My colleagues from the ruling side said that they give us two because we are members from the Opposition and they take the lion’s share. It is not about the lion’s share. As much as we are on this side of the opposition political divide, in our individual capacities in our mother parties, which form part of the Opposition, we have also got our ideologies, we have got our constitutions. That is why the Treaty is clear about this. 

Like it has been said, it is about the political parties. So, Mr Chairman, let us not be hoodwinked by killing the spirit of the law. I would have thought that as members of this assembly gathered here we would have come out with a consensus such that we do not become an embarrassment in the entire region. What is wrong with sitting here and amicably settling this and we say, “Okay, you are six and we have five parties; here, you take your numbers, three -(Interjections)- Let me make it clear as I wind up. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Mutumba made a statement that we should not kill the spirit of the law. What about the law itself; or should we focus on not killing both the law and the spirit of the law? You can actually kill the spirit and leave the law.
 
MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I had the benefit of being in this House when we were deferring this matter. Actually, this matter was not deferred because we were waiting for the Mbidde ruling. This matter was deferred because the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda made a ruling to the effect that the Attorney-General of the Republic of Uganda frames a question for reference to the East African Court of Justice. To date, no question which was framed has been laid on the Table and no ruling made in respect of that particular matter.

However, when court made a judgement, it made an order which summarised its judgement. The effect of this judgement is that when Parliament is deliberating on these rules, it conforms to Article 50 of the Treaty. What does the Treaty say? I am on record in this Parliament that my understanding of Article 50, when you apply the literal rule of statutory interpretation, which is to the effect that where a statute is clear and unambiguous you give the literal meaning, irrespective of the consequence.  

What does Article 50 say? Article 50 says that representatives shall be elected not from amongst the members of this House and shall represent as much as is feasible the various political parties. What does this mean? Is it feasible as of now that every political party in this House can be represented? The answer, in my opinion, Mr Chairman, is yes. 

What is the effect of this? The wording of this provision of the Treaty was very clear. It started with political parties - it made it mandatory – and it then qualified this with “as much as is feasible”. That qualification means that where it is not feasible therefore, each political party cannot be easily represented. 

The same Treaty talks about shades of opinion, gender and other special interest groups. What does this mean? It means that when the political parties are electing their members, they must take into consideration gender and other interests. 

I conclude by saying that the Attorney-General of the Republic of Uganda owes us an explanation as to why he did not comply with the ruling of the Speaker of Parliament. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let us try to refocus this debate and see how we are moving. Let me say first that it is not up to Parliament to construe, with the exactness that is required, what the interpretation of this judgement is. Even if we stayed here for a year, we will not be able to come up with a correct interpretation of this judgement of the East African Court of Justice. What this Parliament is enjoined to do is to pass these rules of procedure and look to God hoping that we have complied with the Treaty. That is what we need to do. 

When you quote this paragraph of the judgement and the other paragraph, all you are trying to fit in is just making it difficult for us to move forward. May I guide, therefore, with the counsel of the people who have spoken very clearly on these issues, on what the implications are and so on and so forth. Our mandate is only one - to make the rules in compliance with the Treaty. It is not us to ask to judge whether we have complied with the Treaty. It is not up to us. That is for somebody else to judge whether we have complied with the Treaty. We cannot do it here. 

What we can do is to pass what we believe to be compliant. However, if somebody is aggrieved by what our belief is - that we have complied and yet we have not - the person to take that decision is the courts of law. 

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I need your guidance. In that case, for what reason would we be reading this judgment if we are not going to convince our consciences that we have complied? 

I have two more points. One, I have said on this Floor before that injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere. In constitutional petition No.28 of 2006, Jacob Oulanyah, the petitioner, went to court because injustice was committed against him.

Two and finally, I beg that we do whatever we are going to do here today in good faith. Any bad faith, any ill feelings, wherever they could be hiding, will be reflected, unearthed and will be penalised appropriately.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, that is exactly what I have said. This House should do its best to comply with the Treaty but it cannot judge on whether we have complied with the Treaty; it cannot! We have no capacity to. However, we should try to the best of our ability to comply with the Treaty. It is up to somebody else, when we have tried our best to comply with the Treaty, to think that we have failed. In that case, the adjudicator will not be us anymore; it will be somebody outside our Parliament. That is the guidance I was trying to give. Is that correct, hon. Sseggona? 

Honourable members, I volunteered this guidance; nobody asked me to. Anything that is going to ask the Speaker to continue making decisions on this issue shall not be entertained by the chairman of these proceedings. So, debate. Bring your strong points forward and lose on the Floor if you will or win. So, I am going by sets of three. I have finished three from here. 

MR KRISPUS AYENA-ODONG: Mr Chairman, I rise with a lot of passion on this matter but meanwhile, I want to be very impartial. The only reason we made reference to the East African Court of Justice was because we wanted interpretation to guide our debate in this House so that when we make our Rules of Procedure and conduct our elections, we shall conduct our elections in conformity with the principle enunciated in Article 50 of the Treaty. Article 50 of the Treaty has been interpreted in three different cases, which have been well received by members of this Parliament. 

The first one was the Oulanyah case. In the Oulanyah case, they talked about various political parties. They did not talk about any party but they talked about various political parties represented in the House.

The other thing, which I think is very instructive and by which we must be guided, is the fact that in the Oulanyah case, they talked about numerical strength being anomalous -(Interjections)- Well, the Jacob Oulanyah case specifically said even the matter of numerical strength is anomalous. In case they were wrong in that one, in the reference which was given by the East African Court of Justice, they specifically impugned that provision of the rules which gave credence to numerical strength. 

The evil which this Parliament must avoid, and I must say this as a professional lawyer, is giving a reference for representatives of this House being rejected in EALA, or for that matter exposing Uganda to become a nuisance in the East African Community. (Member timed out)

MR WILLIAM NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just want to echo three things. One is that I acknowledge the contributions from our colleagues from the other side but also, I want to share with them some simple experience. 

In 1980, we happened to send Dr Chrispus Kiyonga to Parliament and he was on the Opposition. He was in NRM and he happened to be on the Opposition -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it was UPM.

MR NZOGHU: My colleagues, hon. Majegere and hon. Katoto, are talking about numerical strength in their argument. We appreciate that numerical strength is important for consideration. However, what I want us to understand is that whereas today we are the Opposition, tomorrow those people could be sitting on this side. They should acknowledge that. 

Two, Mr Chairman, you recall on page 13 of the proposals made by the committee, it says that the Opposition nominates five people and then the other side eight people. You know, there is a problem when there are many nominees competing for a few slots. If we are to take it by the standard which the committee suggested, it would imply that because we are having five nominees and the other side is having eight, we are not doing justice to this side - (Interjections)- Yes! How then do we proceed, Mr Chairman?

We have already accepted that the Independents must also be considered. We are also forgetting that if we can have people who have independent opinions because they are independent of themselves and we are leaving out people who are fully constituted like DP, CP, JEEMA and FDC in a multiparty system as hon. Majegere was saying, then we are losing track.

Finally, I want to say that even on page 5, they are talking about gender, youth and persons with disability. Already, by definition, these are three positions. I would think that possibly we would start with a minimum of three positions and then we do away with that. But you cannot give us a minimum of two and a maximum of two when you are even talking about – (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I thank my colleague for giving way. What we are trying to emphasise is for all of us to operate in harmony. First, in the three decisions which have been elaborately discussed on this Floor, the word “numerical strength” caused problems. What we are trying to do here by maintaining the stance which I am seeing is to bring numerical strength unmentioned. We are simply avoiding mentioning the word. 

The danger is two-fold. The first danger is that we will be bringing numerical strength by infection and that will still be illegal. The second danger is that we already have judgments both in the Oulanyah and the Mbidde/DP cases and we are legislating to circumvent the effects of these two cases. That will be contrary to Article 92 of our Constitution.

I plead with my colleagues, and the information I want to give to my brother and to the House is that we cannot go to EALA and at the same time keep in the courts of law. There are issues which are determined by going the majority way and there are issues which must be determined by looking at the law. Let me ask this question; if it is proposed to give two slots to this side, the Opposition, and six slots to the ruling party, which I respect for being in government, what is the legal justification for doing that other than numerical strength? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please wind up.

MR NZOGHU: I just want to conclude by saying that it would be fair and in the interest of this House to have political parties which include FDC, UPC, DP, JEEMA, CP and NRM sharing six slots – (Interjections) - Yes! The rationale is provided for in the party platform and Article 50 of the Treaty. One slot should go to the Independents and then the remaining two slots should be shared by the ruling party and the official Opposition - (Interjections) - That is my view. I beg to move.          

MS ROSE NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. As we plan to elect members to EALA, we must ensure that as they go there, we give them sufficient time to do the work they are supposed to do instead of keeping them in court all the time. 

As we have all noted, the bone of contention was participation of all parties and not representation. We are in a democratic setting and you cannot talk about democracy and leave the issue of numbers out. (Applause) Whereas we are talking about considering the interest of the minority, we must not do so at the expense of the majority. It is irrational for us to get a party with over 260 members and give it only one EALA member and JEEMA also gets one; that is irrational rather than political. 

Mr Chairman, we are not going to reinvent the wheel; we are talking about East Africa where we have many countries. In Tanzania, they have already elected Members of EALA. Chama Cha Mapinduzi has sent seven members and there are other parties like CHADEMA and TLP. In Kenya, they are going to do the same; they have already put the rules in place and ODM is going to send the majority. So, as we talk about ensuring the interest of the minority, we must also make sure that we do not disenfranchise the majority in this Parliament. The political dynamics are very clear, that NRM is the majority. (Member timed out.)

MR DAVID BAHATI: Mr Chairman, it is not my habit to repeat what other people have said, but let me emphasise this point once again because we need to understand it. There are different parameters in the Article that guide us on how to elect Members of EALA. One is political parties and then shades of opinion, gender and special interest groups. However, the Treaty again and again tells us “as much as is feasible”.  

You know, there is greatness in every party in this House. We have great people in DP as well as great people in NRM. However, when these people of DP, UPC and NRM come together, they form a great shade of opinion. There is no parameter that I am attracted to in this Article other than “shades of opinion” because that is what is feasible at the moment in this House. So, Mr Chairman, as hon. Namayanja asked, is it feasible to give JEEMA a slot in this House and you give NRM one slot also? Is that feasible? Is it even right? (Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Chairman, I want to inform my colleague that the Assembly where we are taking these representatives is a political Assembly. To go there, you must be voted in. Let me ask you a question which you must answer; supposing we choose to vote, would you even take a single vote here? That is the level of accommodation NRM has given you - two for the Opposition and one for Independents. They are going to a political Assembly, and therefore, our presence must be felt as the majority. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, colleague. Mr Chairman, there has been another argument on your left side that we must represent various political parties in this House. More than one, in my definition, is various. (Laughter) If you elect two parties in this House, it is various. (Member timed out.)

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. With respect to the many views pertaining to the rules, there is an issue that I have been asking myself about, and that is to do with numbers and representation. I do not want us to forget that any government, even if a member is seated on the left, when they come to Government tomorrow they would not want to forget strategic positioning. There is no Government that would not consider it as a priority to strategically position itself. 

These are nine slots; you cannot tell me that we should share. We have five political parties in this Parliament plus the Independents. That means that strategically, the Government in power would end up with less numbers in terms of representation with regard to shades of opinion and that would be losing out. That is why I think what is mentioned as feasible would be infeasible if it so happens. 

I want us to be as feasible as possible. Indeed today you are not in Government but in case you were, would you accept that? Remember the East African Legislative Assembly is a political body. Making it go that way would mean that EALA is an Assembly of opposition members in the states. Can you imagine how they would relate to the ruling Government? Therefore, Mr Chairman, I support and propose that democracy means numbers. I am not shy to talk about numbers and gender - (Member timed out.)

MR MICHAEL MUKULA: Mr Chairman, this matter appears to be straightforward although vague in the interpretation of the words, “as much as is feasible” in Article 50. What is important for us to know is that we are in a multi-party dispensation where the winner in terms of majority dictates. That is the principle, but comrades are trying to interpret Article 50 in their way. 

I want to say that there is no way we can exclude certain positions that have been taken in the East African Court of Justice. There was the case of Anyang Nyong’o v. Attorney-General. We now have the latest case of Mr Mbidde v. the Attorney-General. The principle is one in terms of this Parliament that has been given the powers to determine the correct direction. We are not going to reinvent the wheel. The position is that compliance is going to be determined by us, Members of Parliament. I think the National Resistance Movement, which is the majority in this House, is being as fair as it can be. (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, please be reminded that you have two minutes. I want us to debate as much as we can because it is now coming to 7.00 p.m. 

DR SAM LYOMOKI: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have been following the debate but I will think that not to dig down, we need to make sure that we be as fair as possible. When you look at the provision of Article 50 of the Treaty, it talks of political parties and they do not say the ruling party or the Opposition. They also do not say other shades of opinion and other special interest groups. They actually almost make them equal shades of opinion - political parties and others. 

If we want to interpret this thing, we may even say let the workers who are here be represented, because we are here. If JEEMA is saying that they want a slot, workers can also say that they want a seat, women will want a seat, UPDF will want a seat, because they are all shades. So if we go that direction, if JEEMA pushes, then workers can also push because we are five, more than JEEMA. 

I thought that we should be able to consult each other and agree on how best we can sort – (Interjection) – No, not voting but we may have to agree and see how best to make sure that each shade is represented. When you look at the schedule, for instance, all other shades were put under the ruling party - gender, youth and persons with disabilities. The Opposition schedule did not have interest groups. All of us are lumped with the ruling party. 

I thought that we could debate but at one stage we may have to have a small composition of colleagues – (Member timed out)

MS ANITE: I thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to speak. As a matter of fact, in issues of law there are no short cuts. I know it for sure that we should respect the ruling as much as possible. 

I also want us to understand and take into consideration one fact that we are not talking about in sharing the nine positions. We are talking about elections and in this case, the Treaty is saying that all political parties must participate. It is saying that they should be given the opportunity to participate, including the ruling party. However, in the event that they do not get voted, they will not drag us to court to say that we did not give them the opportunity to participate. (Laughter) We would have given them the opportunity to participate but they would have failed on their inability to convince us. (Laughter)

My opinion is that let us give CP, DP, UPC, JEEMA – all those political parties – a chance to participate but then we vote. It is not about sharing positions but voting. We shall vote them out or in depending on the way they will convince us. I thank you. (Laughter)

MR JAMES MBAHIMBA: I thank you, Mr Chairman. We are all aware that what we are doing today has been done in other countries. Precedent has already been created in Tanzania where Chama Cha Mapinduzi has already elected seven. We are going to attend the same assembly with them and I do not know up to now why we are debating. What is wrong with NRM taking six, the Opposition two and then the Independents taking one? Maybe as the Opposition they should organise themselves and they share the two to know which party in the Opposition will take the two.

My submission is that – (Interjection)  

MR SABILA: I thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. If somebody came to this House, you could definitely judge where –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you giving information?

MR SABILA: Yes, information. (Laughter) The NRM taking six is not bad, but it is bad if they take everything. The law does not say “all parties” but “various”. So even if there are others that will not be represented, so long as there are various parties and not one party, it is okay. So if somebody participates and fails, I do not think that becomes a problem. I thank you, honourable colleagues.

MR MBAHIMBA: I thank you for your information. Mr Chairman, that was my submission. I see no case in this issue where the Opposition is fully represented by the slot that is already proposed here.

MR KENNETH LUBOGO: I thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I must say that I am worried because to start with, we are making some of these rules rather ambiguous. When you read from page 5 on 13 (b), it is stated that, “Two members shall come from the Opposition parties whose composition shall reflect…” The way we are providing for it now makes it possible that even the two members from the Opposition parties may actually come from one party. We are not being very strategic on the Opposition parties.

When we are talking about amending these rules to comply with the Treaty, we cannot say that we are making the amendment but we do not know whether we are complying with the Treaty. At least we should know that we are amending them and complying with the Treaty and probably be disproved later. 

The wording of the Treaty is very clear, Mr Chairman, and I do not think that they should interpret this rule specifically to favour a particular group of people. Why court did not pronounce itself on some issues was just because they were not contested. If it had been contested, surely court would have pronounced itself on the meaning of “as far as is feasible”. 

I am now worried that Uganda is setting a very bad example for the East African region. We are showing intolerance. The Article which he talks about says, “the members shall represent as much as is feasible...” They are not talking about participation. Of course, representation is at the East African Legislative Assembly. For that reason, I believe that we should not use the issue of numbers to ignore what is clearly expressed in Article 50 of the Treaty. 

Mr Chairman, it is my humble submission that it is very feasible, in our case here in the Parliament of Uganda, to have every party represented and still have the NRM take the big number. The NRM can still take three slots – (Member timed out).

MR JACOB OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I find the debate very interesting. The ruling that I have seen, a copy of which I have, just avoiding falling into the temptation of interpreting the ruling, I find that the ruling purely restated the obvious. I want to implore all of us; “as much as feasible”, who determines the feasibility? If there are two competing interests and you let them determine, if the other side has a little more, basically it will go their way. It is my humble opinion that this debate will take a little longer and the winner of the debate is known. 

I will agree with other members who said that numeric strength may not be mentioned, but like it or not, it is demonstrated in some way. So, just to be fair, probably we give it a test. Those who are not satisfied with this will definitely have leeway to challenge it so that we can see what the East African Court of Justice will say about the Ugandan Parliament and what “as much as feasible” would mean.  

MS AOL: Mr Chairman, we should avoid embarrassing our country and we should stick to the Treaty. It is important for us all to try and see how we can define “feasibility”. Maybe if there were up to 15 parties in Parliament, it would not be feasible to have all those shades represented in the East African Legislative Assembly. However, for our case, we do not even have up to nine parties. So, why don’t we actually implement the Treaty? 

We should not think that the numerical strength, which the NRM is emphasizing, should take precedence. If we decide like that, you can take all the nine positions and go and embarrass the country because you are 70 percent in Parliament. If we are to elect ordinarily, without putting some deliberate efforts, definitely you will take all the nine positions. 

However, I must tell you that I participated in one meeting in Nairobi where Uganda was embarrassed. When we talked about term limits, it was only Uganda with unlimited terms for the presidency. This one will also be there; it will be very embarrassing for Uganda. 

MR ABDU LATIF SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We may debate until the cows come back, and our contention is based on whether numerical strength is still an issue. That is it. 

I greatly sympathize with my colleagues in the NRM because this is the moment of truth; it is a bitter pill to swallow. What we are debating right now is about representation. If you bring in numerical strength, definitely they have that right because everybody is in agreement that the NRM numerically is stronger. However, the framers of this Treaty knew that in some countries there could be situations where some parties are greater than others in terms of numbers. So, the Treaty wanted to cater for all these interests - the small, the big, the short and the tall – so that they are on one kind of platform. 

Mr Chairman, I believe that our colleagues in the NRM would be a little bit more comfortable if we tried to say or if we agreed that yes, we have known that in terms of numerical strength, you are the champions. However, in terms of the law, when you look at the Treaty, the Treaty does not recognise your numerical strength. Therefore, what should be the way forward? 

I know that at the end of the day, when we pass these rules as they are - the NRM taking six and other parties taking the rest - definitely, after some time we will go to court. What should be done is to put all issues into consideration. Let us have the NRM take their two slots or one and then we take the other slots so that we can avoid the embarrassment. 

If we go the way you want us to go because you are numerically strong, definitely the East African Court of Justice will not recognise your numerical strength. Short of that, definitely we are going to lose out and it may even take long for members to be sworn in. We would not like to see a situation where Uganda is becoming a stumbling block in as far as ensuring that EALA members are sworn in. I request and beg that the NRM swallows the bitter pill and takes one slot or two so that we can move as a team. Thank you. 

DR LULUME BAYIGGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I will not speak about the embarrassment that may be caused to us because of our bad decisions because everybody has talked about it and we can avoid it. I will also not talk about the issue of numerical strength because it is clear that it has been expunged, and also I just want to convey my sympathies to those who still want to think that we can base our decisions on numerical strength.

Anyway, I want to make one point clear, and this is something that was alluded to by hon. Dr Baryomunsi, about quantitativeness within this Parliament. He needed to review the qualitativeness as well. When we talk about the NRM side, we are talking about a homogeneous group of individuals. When you talk about the Opposition, it is about a heterogeneous group. That is why the people who made this proposal wanted to express something quasi, - magnanimity of NRM - that they would give two positions to the Opposition yet they know that they have the numerical strength. It is on the basis of the respect of this heterogeneity that they wanted to give two positions. That respect, we are saying, is the qualitative analysis of this Parliament that we need to give very good consideration.

It is in that vein, Mr Chairman, that I urge my friends on the Government side not to treat numerical strength as a big consideration because it no longer works. We can proceed in this Parliament with each of the political parties on both divides sharing the slots. Consideration can then be given to the slots that remain on the basis of other reasons, for instance, political interests – (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you so much, Dr Bayigga. The information I would like to give is that the Treaty clearly says that there should be inclusiveness as much as feasible. We are now saying that the feasibility is determined by the national assembly. So, the proposal here is that the Opposition is looked at as being one. 

The reason there is a proposal that the Opposition brings five names is because there are five political parties in the Opposition. It is anticipated that each political party will bring a candidate and out of those five, Parliament will elect two. That means that the political parties in the House will have participated but that given the dynamics within Uganda, what is feasible is two members from the Opposition. That is the import of schedule one.

DR LULUME: Thank you for that information although it was not very helpful, my colleague. What you have failed to acknowledge is the heterogeneity of the Opposition and the homogeneity of NRM. (Member timed out)

MR GONZAGA SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. As a teacher when you realise that your students have failed to understand what you are teaching, you draw the gap closer to them. In Article 50, there are two words that I would like to pick out - represent and feasible. Each of us here at least has a dictionary. What is the meaning of the word feasible? It means, “Capable of being done with means at hand and circumstances as they are.” What are the circumstances in this Parliament? We have six political parties. The problem here is that Government thinks that NRM means times 260 Members of Parliament. They forget that NRM is just one political party in this Parliament – (Interruption)

MR AYENA-ODONG: Thank you very much, hon. Ssewungu, for giving way. The information I want to give you is that there is a saying that power corrupts and absolute power corrupts absolutely. In the same vein, majority corrupts and absolute majority corrupts absolutely. (Laughter) You see –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you stood on information; you do not have to argue. Just present that information.

MR AYENA-ODONG: The other information I want to give to the House is that their lordships have given an opportunity to this Parliament to be sensible about how they are going to couch the Rules of Procedure –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it being sensible or sensitive?

MR AYENA-ODONG: Both.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This Parliament is sensible, but sensitivity is the issue here.

MR AYENA-ODONG: Yes, that is it, and thank you very much for your guidance. That is why in their ruling they said, “We, therefore, do not consider that it is the Court’s duty, at this juncture…” I want to raise this for the attention of hon. Dr Baryomunsi because he said that it was left to this Parliament to make this decision. The ruling talks about a particular juncture. What this means is that at an opportune moment if you do not do it right, they will have the option to force the interpretation onto you. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. What I was saying is that participation and representation are different. The framers of this Treaty talked about representation. Secondly, when you talk about numerical strength, you can see that in Kenya the ruling party has the least number of MPs in Parliament but they are represented.

What is interesting is that I am learning one thing from the other side, that those who know what is right are not talking. So, I would like to inform the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that this is the right time to stop deceiving children that when you remove your tooth and keep it somewhere, the rat will give you money. It is not true. (Laughter) The truth of the matter is that it is you to remove. So, when you play with this law, Article 50, like it or not we shall come back. 

The Article talks about representation as much as is feasible, and it also talks about political parties in the national assembly. In Uganda we have political parties. If there were 15 political parties in this House, it would not be feasible, but now it is feasible. So, when you talk about law, and if you want to learn, please learn from what people are telling you. (Member timed out)

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In this Parliament we are people’s representatives and while in here we are all treated equally. I know of districts that have less than 100,000 people but have women Members of Parliament. I also know of districts that have more than 500,000 people but with women Members of Parliament. What I am saying is that whether a district has 100,000 or 500,000 people, they are treated equally. In line with the issue at hand, whether a political party has only one Member of Parliament or 10 or 300, as far as the law is concerned, we are the same before it. (Applause)

Mr Chairman, it has been said over and over that the Movement means numbers, but representation is not all about numbers. Whether you are few or many, you have to be represented. The other issue is that the law goes beyond numbers. When we are treating medical cases, for example, no matter whether the case has affected only ten people or 100 or 10,000 people, as long as it is a disease it is treated by this nation - (Member timed out)

MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think reality has set in. The truth about the matter is that when we are going to elect, democracy has to prevail. The ruling party, which has the most numbers, has said that we are not going to give you zero, take this, and take that. (Applause)

My humble appeal is to you, members of the ruling party; give the independents two slots and not one. (Laughter) That is my appeal to you as an Independent Member of Parliament. In other words, when reality sets in – (Interjections) - and we are even more than the Opposition! So, if it is about numbers, please also listen to us since we are more than the Opposition and give us two slots and not one. We have to make sure that democracy prevails.

DR OMONA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I want to reiterate and inform you that it is true absolute democracy becomes extreme and extreme democracy borders between democracy and anarchy. 

If we are to apply absolute democracy in this case, by virtue that NRM is the biggest party in this House, the other side may walk out without any representation in EALA. It happened in Tanzania; CHADEMA is the largest Opposition party in Tanzania but they walked out without a member in EALA. So, I think the point here is that we negotiate. It is very important that we negotiate, not just for the purposes of democracy but for the purposes of harmony and contribution towards a common cause. I think this is what we are after here. 

So the information I want to give the honourable member is that when we talk about participation, all the parties may participate but because of numerical strength and being in a democracy, other parties may walk out without representation. So I think it is important that for purposes of harmony, let us ring-fence some numbers for the other side of the House so that in the end, we do not have only participation but also representation of the Opposition parties in EALA. I thank you.

MR BARYAYANGA: Thank you very much. Mr Chairman, instead of going around the bush without getting to an end, let us make sure that we conclude this debate. I therefore move a motion – (Laughter) - that the question be put that Independents get two slots and we go by numerical strength.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, what is your motion?

MR BARYAYANGA: I am saying that let the question be put that numerical strength takes precedence. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there is a motion that the question be put on the matter that we have been discussing. At Committee Stage, to the best of my knowledge, motions are not seconded. There is no requirement for secondment at Committee Stage, so I am going to put the question.

However, honourable members, this debate has taken us a long time and we would have benefited from the views of the attorneys-general from both sides. I would urge the honourable member to reconsider his motion. 

MR BARYAYANGA: Mr Chairman, in the interest of the whole House, I am saying that let the question be put according to schedule 4, page 13 of 14.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, I need you to know that if we are to put the question, it will be in relation to the whole of appendix B. You cannot put the question in the debate because what we are debating now is appendix B, except that there is no controversy in all the other parts with the exception of paragraph 13 and schedule 4. That is where the area of discussion was. 

So, if I should put the question, I cannot put the question to the schedule. I will have to put the question to appendix B. That is the challenge we have now. So, you might want to reconsider your motion so that we can structure this debate properly. 

MR BARYAYANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for your guidance. Let the question be put according to appendix B.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, on the motion for the question to be put, there are no amendments. 

Honourable members, I have checked the structure of the House; we will not be able to take a decision by vote because we do not have the quorum to take that decision. I will use my discretion to allow the frontbench members from both sides to sum up the debate and we see how to move.  
 
THE SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Abdu Katuntu): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have said before that I had the opportunity in the Seventh Parliament to represent this House, and indeed this country, for three years in the Pan African Parliament. While serving in that Parliament, I never looked at myself as a member of the Uganda People’s Congress, the party I belonged to then, but I did look at myself as a Ugandan. I served as a Ugandan and was always mindful of my country Uganda and not my political party. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister would certainly agree with me that at that time we used to discuss so many things affecting this country and the position which the country should take.

We need to be very careful, colleagues. The people we are electing are not going to represent our parties; they are going to represent this country. I do not agree with any Member of Parliament who represents this country and goes partisan when he is out of the borders of this country. We should always put our national interests ahead of anything. (Applause) 

For those who are seated on the front bench, you will realise the gravity of the statement I am going to make; should a member go outside Uganda and put on his party colours, it will take the Minister of Foreign Affairs, and sometimes the entire country, to go into some public relations. That has happened before.
 
I know senior members of this Government have been cautioning us that when you leave this country, speak as Ugandans. This is the first time that I see people talking about parties when we are seeking representatives outside Uganda. Indeed, - I must say this, Mr Chairman - wait for the aspirants when they come to address this House, none will be talking about parties and yet we are saying, “It is a party; it is strategic”. These are things that do not relate at all to the purpose for which the East African Community was established. 

That is why you need to ask people who have been in that Assembly. They have done very well and they have no divide. You do not have the Government side or the Opposition side in EALA. Why? The reason is that the framers of this statute wanted all shades of political opinion to be represented so that we can plan for our community. That is why when you read Article 50 of the Treaty, it never talks about Government and it does not talk about Opposition. What does it say; I will read it for you: “The National Assembly of each Partner State shall elect, not from among its members, nine members of the Assembly, who shall represent as much as it is feasible… - and now I want to emphasise - …the various political parties represented in the National Assembly…” 

So, if you are talking about political party representation, it is the various political parties in the National Assembly. If the Treaty envisaged - Any reasonable lawyer will tell you if you are talking about the intention, if the Treaty intended to have representation of Government and Opposition, it should have specifically stated so but it did not. The Treaty instead said, “Various political parties represented in the National Assembly.”

Yes, who doubts that NRM is the majority? Nobody doubts that and nobody should, anyway. The NRM are the majority. However, in their bigness as NRM, they are one political shade. You are one political shade, however big you are. The UPC is distinctively different from Forum for Democratic Change. Why? It is because they are ideologically different. There is no way you will lump them. By the way, as I told you, I was a member of the Uganda People’s Congress and I quit because I did not agree at that time with what was going on. So, we are different as parties. You do not lump Opposition parties. I can even talk to my colleagues the other side. There a few colleagues facing me who I was with in UPC and we left – (Interjections) - I can take as many clarifications as you wish if the Chair can advise me.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, wind up.

MR KATUNTU: The Chair has advised. So, it is not correct, in my honest and well considered legal opinion, that you lump parties together. No, you do not! Each party is here in its own right and its right to be represented is not determined by our Rules of Procedure. I have heard this argument coming on the Floor over and over again that actually, it is Parliament to decide. What does Parliament decide? 

The criterion of representation of shades of opinions is not a creation of our Rules of Procedure but that of the Treaty. What Parliament is enjoined to do is to write procedure - how Article 50 can be implemented. I do not want anybody to say that as Parliament we can decide anything. No. Whatever we decide has to be within the parameters of Article 50 of the Treaty.

I would like to say, Mr Chairman, that Parliament is always given powers to do things; for example, even to write our rules is a creation of the Constitution. However, when we write the rules, we do not violate the Constitution because we shall be violating the powers given to us by the Constitution. When we are writing the rules to actualise Article 50, we do not do it beyond what is provided for in Article 50 because it will be in contradiction with Article 50. 

I will ask a question; if we can say that one person has a shade to be represented in EALA, what basis  will you have to have a political party represented in this House being denied a seat and yet there are more than enough seats for every political party?  The issue about “as far as feasible,” there are circumstances when it is certainly not possible, and what are these circumstances envisaged by Article 50? If we have got 20 parties in this House, which is possible - and I would like to talk to my brother, hon. Baryomunsi because he was trying to emphasise “as far as feasible” - there is no way each party will be represented in EALA. So it will not be feasible. So you come as far as feasible, you can make some sort of arrangement, maybe parties which ideologically believe in the same thing and so on, and create some sort of formula. You get it? But when there are enough seats, when there are more than enough for every party, there is no way you will deny a party representation.

Lastly, I have seen everybody talking about judgement. What does the judgement say? One, the issue about numerical strength, you are not the first to talk about it actually. The issue about numerical strength was started long before on the Floor of the House and do you know what happened? It has been adjudicated upon in the Jacob Oulanyah case. The word used is “anomalous”, and I thought the Attorney-General should be interpreting this to the House and to his colleagues. What did the Jacob Oulanyah case say about numerical strength because our colleagues are making the same mistake by repeating this thing yet it has already been adjudicated upon. If you are aware then there is no way it will be repeated over again.

Finally, let nobody think that to legislate and give seats to parties represented in this House is being magnanimous. No, please. Do not think it is a favour of the ruling party to give these seats. It is not, and I repeat, it is not! Nobody should lie himself that he is being magnanimous. No! These are rights created under the Treaty.  

I resume my seat by saying my own obligation is to talk at this Table professionally, and my advice to the people who gave me this office or to whom I am entitled to advise is, if there is a deliberate effort by this House to break the Treaty then let us not be party to it.

THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Peter Nyombi): I want to thank you, Mr Chairman, and I want to thank the members for debating this matter vigorously. The thrust of the Fred Mbidde’s reference to the East African Court of Justice was that elections to EALA were going to be conducted basing on rules that had been annulled in the Jacob Oulanyah case. One Jacob Oulanyah went to the Constitutional Court basically because he, as an Independent, was being denied the opportunity to participate in the elections to EALA. That is why he went to court and the Constitutional Court annulled the rules.

Now, Article 50 of the Treaty is very explicit and clear. In the case of Fred Mbidde, they spelt out the essential requirement for application of Article 50 of the Treaty, namely that the national assembly shall conduct the elections. So, this Parliament would have to conduct the elections. 

Two, that the seating members of the assembly are not eligible. So, none of us who are Members of Parliament are eligible. Three, elected members shall be nine. 

Four, the elected members shall represent as much as is feasible - one, the political parties in the national assembly; two, shades of opinion; three, gender; and four, other special interest groups. Lastly, the procedure for elections shall be determined by the national assembly. So, this Parliament would have to determine the rules upon which the elections would be based. In essence, this case held that the rules, if I were to summarise this case, that have to be applied in electing Members of Parliament to EALA must be determined by this Parliament. 

Article 50, over which there is a lot of argument, has been interpreted. Besides in the Jacob Oulanyah case, it has been commented upon in two other cases by the East African Court of Justice. All these three cases bring out three essential ingredients in order to conduct valid elections. One, there must be an election. Two, there must be participation. They do not say of all the parties, and I am sure they must have realised the impracticability of that. 

You see, when you look at shades of opinion, they are not even talking about Parliament but they are talking about the entire nation. It is not restricted; read the Article very carefully. Therefore, Mr Chairman, this House has the mandate to come out with rules upon which the elections are going to be based. 

When they talk about “as much as is feasible”, it means they take into account a number of factors. One of the factors, as has been spelt out, is that the ruling party has over 270 Members of Parliament. You cannot ignore that. There are parties with just one Member of Parliament and there are those with two Members of Parliament. As has been said, the shades of opinion can actually be grouped in one big group – that is the Opposition. Thank you, Mr Chairman.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Having listened to the legal advisor to Government, I can read his mind and the advice he has given already. If that is indeed the advice, then I am worried for this country as to the kind of legal advice we are getting. 

We have heard the whole debate and it is important that today we look at the law; you cannot substitute the law with strength. We agree that NRM has numbers but you cannot substitute the law with your numbers. You cannot therefore say that because you are very many, that is the law; no! The law is what we follow. It is unfortunate that when the President of Uganda was signing this Treaty he did not study this Article. He should have realised that it needed amendment, and I believe it is high time we amended it to take into consideration all these things that are coming up now.

Mr Chairman, I have not attended a session in EALA but I have not seen EALA having separate sides for the Opposition and the ruling party. If that separation does not exist, there is no reason for us here to say, “Because we are many, we need our members to go and sit on the ruling side.” There is no ruling side in EALA. That is why I am saying that I am worried because our Attorney-General, who has been attending EALA sessions and knows the laws, has not told us the true story.

It is very clear here that “various political parties represented in national assemblies” means parties represented in Parliament. I am very sure that in this Parliament we have women, youth, workers, people with disabilities, UPDF and the like but all of them have come through political parties. That is why on the issue of the aged, the youth and the like, it is very clear that these political parties have that representation. That is why when we are carrying out elections, what is important is to take into consideration factors like gender and special interest groups. So, Mr Chairman, the issue of political parties is very vital and we cannot neglect it because it is not number six but number one in the sequence.

Coming to the word “feasible”, I think those who studied statistics know what the word means. Is it feasible according to the political parties we have? Yes, it is feasible. Why do I say so? We are supposed to elect nine members of EALA and we have six political parties in Parliament - (Interjections) - Yes!

If we are talking of shades, Independents are independent of each other; they are actually discreet. Those who studied mathematics and statistics know that discreet means. Each of them has their manifestos. So, these 43 Independents have 43 different shades of thinking. That means if we went that way, then each Independent should have his or her own slot but that will not be feasible. That is why we are not going to pursue that. I am also sure that the Independents cannot pursue that line because hon. Fox Odoi is an NRM Independent while others belong elsewhere –(Laughter). We are now getting the one individual who should have a slot and for those who have more than one, we are saying we should share the available slots.

Mr Chairman, I think we are going to go further to change this Treaty to take into consideration the Commonwealth practices, which you must further think about. How do we fund parties? Of course, there are experiences of how political parties are funded. There is always a cut-off point, where if this party is to be funded, it should have a certain number of MPs. That is crucial. It would have even been possible if we had that in our rules a long time ago. However, since we do not have it now, we are in a Catch-22 situation. So, even if it is only a party with one member like JEEMA, there is no difference with the Independents who is one. 

In that regard, I would plead with my colleagues in the NRM to do some soul searching. It is no longer a situation of wanting the “big one”; it is about coming to the table to negotiate. I believe if we go by that attitude, we would go far. However, if you insist that it is numbers that matter, I can see us in a vicious circle and we shall not have members to join EALA. The law is very clear that EALA will not be constituted until we have elected our nine members. In Arusha, there will be no Assembly if you believe that you will send the eight, – (Interjections) - or whatever number you are asking for, and none of the other parties have sent a member. 

I can assure you that as the Opposition, we shall not accept to go against the law. That is why I am saying - (Interjection) – Prime Minister, do not try to intimidate me because I cannot be intimidated. The debate we are trying to bring is that our colleagues across are not seeing what we are putting across. Why are we not talking about political parties? In fact, it is good that there was no quorum. Maybe between now and tomorrow we should have a better position. (Interjection) Yes, you do not have it, unless you are going to be counted three times. 

Mr Chairman, these are our proposals as the Opposition:
1. 	That each political party gets a slot. You can only blame the people who made Article 50 of the Treaty, not anybody here.

2. 	That our colleagues, the Independents, should also have a slot because according to the Oulanyah case - (Interjection) - Well, you can have even five if you want but since you are discreet of each other, one would be good enough for you. When I say they are discreet, I mean each of them is one and separate from one another - there is no intersection, they are mutually exclusive. (Mr Tinkasiimire rose_) I can tell you, hon. Tinkasiimire, we can take your guidance when you are mining oil. Just relax because we shall guide you later. Resume your seat. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, I said I was not going to guide during this debate, on the substance of this debate. I said at the beginning that anything that will require me to make a ruling on what is going on now, I am not going to entertain. Honourable member, please wind up.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, thank you for the opportunity. I am happy with the way you are guiding us because it helps- (Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I have a point of procedure.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Mafabi, please conclude. Procedure will still require me to rule. I have just said that I am not going to rule. Please proceed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would be very glad if you took us back for an induction course so that we learn our rules and so that we do not abuse them.

What we are saying is that all parties get one, the Independents get one, - (Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Chairman, I want to thank you so much for giving me this opportunity. I am wondering whether this is a scramble for East Africa or we are going to the East African Legislative Assembly by vote. I am hearing members talking of slots; do we go to the East African Legislative Assembly by allocation or by vote? 

Is it in order for members of the Opposition to keep referring to slots when it is very clear that Members of the East African Legislation Assembly will be voted for? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Mafabi, you have heard the opinion of the honourable member. Please proceed - (Laughter) - and please close.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if my brother had read paragraph 13, he would have seen that it is talking about the allocations. So, if you had not read it, kindly read it. Do not argue for the sake of arguing. Read paragraph 13 of the proposals which are here. Those are the ones which I am talking about. 

Mr Chairman, we are saying that the remaining - of course we are aware there is the ruling party and the official Opposition - should be shared. The reason why we are putting this here is because EALA is going to represent Uganda and not parties. It is in this country where we are using parties to send people to Parliament. I can tell you that unless we all agree, then the constitution of these members of the Assembly in Uganda will not take place. I want to put colleagues on notice that we cannot be party to a violation of the Treaty. That one, we cannot. 

Two, we cannot make rules which are in violation of the Treaty. We can tell you, if that is what you want, in the end if you agree on the wrong premises we shall not participate in the election. If that is done, then I can tell you that the issue of EALA will take us years to resolve unless we come together. 

I am calling on you that let us think, and when we think it is for Uganda. We went for elections in 2011 and we could have had it bloody, but that is now in the past. In this case, we are looking for members, not in a bloody form, to go to EALA. In that regard, we need sense in ourselves. I want to thank you for the opportunity. (Applause)

THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Chairman, I speak with the benefit of experience and particularly having participated in the formulation of this Treaty. I agree with what hon. Katuntu presented here and the presentation of Article 50, and I would like to go a step further than he did and give logical conclusions to the arguments he presented. 

It is true that in this Article, representation is given as the function of those who will be sent to the East African Legislation Assembly. Their job will be to represent. The people to be represented are listed in that Article and these are: 
1. 	The various political parties represented in the national assembly; 
2. 	Shades of opinion; and
3. 	Gender and other social interest groups in the Partner States, Uganda in this case. 

That is clear; no doubt about it. That is point No.1

Point No.2, in the case of Peter Anyang Nyong’o and Others v. the Attorney-General of Kenya and Others, at page 29 the East African Court of Justice addressed this Article 50 and it says, in part: “In other words, Article 50 constitutes the National Assembly of each Partner State into an ‘electoral college’ for electing the Partner State’s nine representatives to the Assembly. We think…” - this is the court now thinking - “…that there can be no other purpose of naming the National Assembly in this regard other than to constitute it into an electoral college.” 

So, our job here, the Parliament of Uganda, is to act as an electoral college to elect representatives of Uganda representing those I have just listed out of Article 50 from Ugandans who qualify. The rest of the provisions of Article 50 do not add to or subtract from that assignment. They only serve to leave two matters in the national assembly’s discretion. This is the discretion we have here. 

First, while the Article provides that the nine elected members shall, as much as is feasible, be representative of the specified groupings as I have indicated, by implication it appears that the extent of the feasibility of such representation is left to be determined at the discretion of the national assembly. So, it is this Parliament to determine.

Secondly, the national assembly has the discretion to determine the procedure to follow in carrying out that election. Therefore, it is up to us to determine whether representation can be achieved without party affiliation. We could elect only FDCs if we think they can perform - (Interjections) - That is the argument there. We could elect only the FDCs as long as we believe they can effectively perform the function of representation. We could elect non-partisan people - people who have no political affiliation - as long as we believe they can effectively perform this function of representing us. That would be in conformity with Article 50 of the Treaty. 

I am not only talking as a lawyer. Hon. Otto was asking me if I am not only talking as a lawyer; I am talking as a senior one and one who formulated this Treaty. I was party to the enactment and promulgation of this Treaty. I, therefore, know what I am talking about.

I think what we are doing now, what is being proposed here, is first of all within our powers under Article 50 as the court clearly pronounced itself. What I was reading are not my opinions. Actually, I happen to hold those opinions but these are the pronouncements of court. It is up to us to determine how we think this representation can be most effective. 

The proposal being made here is that in the case of Uganda, to take account of political parties represented in this Parliament, to be sure that the shades of opinion are adequately represented, we should have a mix. That mix should reflect the feasibility. What does feasible mean? Feasible means capable of being done. That is what feasibility means. 

Therefore, what is being proposed here is that in order to ensure that the representation effectively performs its functions, represents the shades of opinion in this country - not only in Parliament - we should go by what the people in the elections last year pronounced themselves on. The shades of political opinion were determined in an election. How else do you determine shades of opinion in a country other than through an election? There are many ways but in this case, we had an election and we know what Ugandans think generally and what their opinions are around. We think the feasibility lies in choosing laws which are linked to those shades of opinion. (Interruption) 

MR KATUNTU: I would like to thank the Prime Minister for giving way. Yes, the Prime Minister is a senior lawyer of course because he went to school first -(Laughter) - but that is beside the point. I have immense respect for the Prime Minister and he knows it, and he gives way, everybody knows that, and actually, I do give way.

The point I would like to make is, if it is about the people who voted for this government, let us look at the percentages of Ugandans who voted for this government. At what level are we looking at; at the presidential level or at the parliamentary level? I am seeking this clarification because we have members in this House who have 12, 13 per cent of the population’s vote. They have harnessed 13 per cent and they are here. So, if you are talking about people, the mathematics about the number of people who voted for Members of Parliament who are now saying they are the majority could be far less than the percentage of the Members of Parliament here. That is the clarification I am seeking.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: My brother, hon. Katuntu, I have no intention of talking about mathematical presentation because the Treaty is deliberately using the word “feasible”. Once it is feasible, as I said, it is capable of being done but not necessarily being mathematical. 

The proposal being made is that the nearest approximate we can make of what the people of Uganda currently hold by way of opinion and things like that is through what we have gone through, the representation which we have here in Parliament. Therefore, we are saying that the proposal is that the political parties which are here should come out with proposals and we assume they will be representing a set of shades of opinion, obviously. Of course, it may be different. 

By the way, FDC, as could easily be the case, may choose to present an NRM person as the most effective representative of Uganda in the East African Legislative Assembly and that would be legitimate. Of course, I have a bit of a problem because hon. Nandala did not make his point well – (Laughter) – but I hope between now and tomorrow, since we are not going to decide, we can use this time to try to achieve better formulation. Maybe we can do this between now and tomorrow when we come back in the afternoon. The problem is that we have Cabinet in the morning. 

Now, when you add our Independents – of course, Independents are independent and therefore, they are always one. I thought that is what hon. Nandala-Mafabi was trying to say. But when you add them up, they are 43 – (Interjections) – No, I do not want to compare them with a party. I am just talking about their number in this House. They are 43, so they cannot be ignored. 

My only problem is when we formulate these rules - You remember that at the beginning of this Parliament, the Chief Justice gave us his interpretation to the effect that Rules of Procedure are for Parliament and are not only for one term. But of course Parliament has power to change its own rules. 

Once we adopt these rules, we assume we are adopting them for posterity. So, when we are doing this, I know that there will always be a Government side and an Opposition side. There may be Independents or they may not be there. They are here in this Parliament but in future they may not be here. So we need to look at this formulation and take care of that very well. I know our Independents in this Parliament as it is constituted now must also be taken into account, but in terms of posterity I think we will have to look at that much more closely. 

Therefore, in my very well considered opinion, Parliament has powers to make procedure as an electoral college to achieve that representation. It is up to Parliament to determine how that representation will be more effective. 

I do not see anything wrong with the idea to take into account the representation of the political opinions in Uganda as they are represented in Parliament. In choosing whoever is to represent us, it would be a good idea to have a reflection in the East African Legislative Assembly of those opinions in this House. Otherwise, we may be misunderstood if we are to send FDC alone to represent all these opinions, effective as they may be.

I agree with hon. Abdu Katuntu and I commend him. I think I have done it before in the previous Parliament, but let me do it again because it is relevant now. When he represented us in the Pan African Parliament, I did not pick – and as you know, I always pick – any incident, real or imagined, where Katuntu did not represent Uganda patriotically (Applause). Of course Katuntu was articulate and a good representative, but his only problem was that he was in a wrong party. But the fact that he was in a wrong party here in Uganda did not blur his capacity to represent Uganda. 

I am always amazed when in the present political class you find people take our arguments that are domestic beyond Uganda. When you go outside Uganda, you find war between Ugandans yet they are supposed to be representatives of Uganda. That is a mistake and I hope we can fight it and Katunturise all representatives of Uganda outside Uganda to be patriotic and represent Uganda.

Mr Chairman, it is therefore our considered opinion that what we are doing is in conformity with the Treaty. I agree with your interpretation that this is not a matter we can resolve technically or by vote. If we carry out this formulation as we see it, should anyone want to challenge it they are free to do so. 

Finally, I would like to call on my brother, my very dear brother, the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi - You are now the Leader of the Opposition, you are a member of this Parliament, and you are actually a member of the leadership of this country; so, at all times I propose that you exhibit qualities and standards of leadership (Applause). 

When we are debating here, I should listen to you and you listen to me. That is what democracy means; isn’t it? That is what civilized management of public affairs means. You engage in a debate in a democratic process, and you determine an issue by vote. How can you, even before we go to vote, say, “If my position is not taken, I will not accept yours”? That is not leadership. 

So, I would like to invite my brother and dear colleague, hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, please, when you come to debate – (Interjections) – That is why I am asking because I thought hon. Nandala-Mafabi was one above the crowd. So let us come here free to debate with our Opposition, to be listened to and to listen to other people. Let democracy take its course. Once it has taken its course, a democrat accepts the outcome.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, on what point do you rise?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The Prime Minister is saying –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But what is the point?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: He has mentioned my name.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: On what point do you rise?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Give me a chance and I will make the point when you allow me.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No. You need to interrupt debate by procedure. On what point do you rise?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I had wanted to give my brother information.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, that is it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to thank my brother, hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi, for giving me way. The information I want to give is that for me, I am not a dictator like him. (Applause) I must make it clear that my job is to lead. Having said that, if the Opposition has said that this is our position, then it is what I communicate. Are you getting it? It would be wrong for me to come and say this is my position. I will be very wrong. I must always be a leader and not a dictator. 

Having said that, my brother, hon. John Amama Mbabazi, it is very important that if you are saying that you disagree with me on that point, you put up another case. But do not come and demean and attack me personally and yet you know very well I have gone to school. If I tell you what I have studied, you can agree that I have gone to school.

So, in that regard, kindly let us have some respect for one another. I have been respecting you but if you start attacking me, it is very bad. I thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I had no intention of attacking hon. Nandala-Mafabi. If by saying, please offer leadership, it sounded like an attack, I did not mean that. 

Mr Chairman, the position we hold, which we believe is consistent with the provision of Article 50 of the Treaty, is that the formulation we have before us is a formulation that will truly reflect the themes that are envisaged under Article 50. (Applause) I would like to urge you, including hon. Nandala-Mafabi and the Opposition he leads, to support it so that we have a unanimous voice on this matter. I thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

8.37 
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.38
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Speaker, the Committee of the whole House has considered the Rules of Procedure for the election of members of the East African Legislative Assembly, Appendix B, and deferred its decision on the same. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House adopts the report of the Committee of the whole House. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question for the motion of adoption.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reason we have not been able to deal with this matter is because of the issue of the time and also the presence in the Chambers at the moment. We have other items that we should have handled but given the time we have gone to now, this House - Before I say that, I urge the leadership of both sides of the House and the Independents to organise good attendance tomorrow so that we can deal with this issue with finality. 

As we said, the East African Court of Justice slammed an injunction stopping us from doing anything except doing the rules. So, we will not be able to do anything else with these EALA elections and the only thing we can do is to pass the rules. Once we pass the rules, then we will be free to do the elections and we would have complied with the judgment of the court in this particular matter. 

So, this House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock. Kindly, let us make it 2.00 O’clock so that we can finish this. As I said earlier, this House will be prorogued on Friday. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 8.40 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 16 May 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
