Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.




Thursday, 16 May 2019

Parliament met at 2.10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We have some work to finish - the Roads Bill. We should be able to finish it quickly; I do not think it should take long. We also have the Committee of Supply. This Committee of Supply that we will be dealing with is on the supplementary schedules that had been brought to Parliament. Next week, we shall deal with the Committee of Supply on the Budget. I want to make that clarification because we might get there and you are expecting the Committee of Supply for the Budget and yet this is the Committee of Supply for Supplementary Schedules No. 1 and 2. 

That is the only communication from the Chair today. Since we did not have time to get any urgent matters, let us go to business. 

LAYING OF PAPERS 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT  TO BORROW UP TO $456.37 FROM CHINA EXIM BANK TO FINANCE THE UPGRADE AND CONSTRUCTION OF THE NATIONAL OIL ROADS UNDER PACKAGES 1, 2 AND 3

2.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the proposal to borrow up to $456.37 million from China Export and Import Bank (EXIM) Bank to finance the upgrade and construction of the national oil roads under packages 1, 2 and 3.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to our Committee on National Economy to handle and advise us how to proceed.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION FROM RESIDENTS OF KAGARAMA TOWN COUNCIL, NTUNGAMO DISTRICT, ON THE COMPENSATION OF THE PROJECT AFFECTED PERSONS OF THE NTUNGAMO–KAGAMBA ROAD

2.14
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Mr Speaker, in accordance with rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament, I wish to present a humble petition of residents of Kagarama Town Council, Ntungamo District. The subject matter of the petition regards the compensation of the residents of Kagarama Town Council, who are the persons affected by the Ntungamo-Kagamba Road construction project, which was done between 2001 and 2005. 

Your humble petitioners state that prior to the construction of the Ntungamo-Kagamba Road, Government carried out an evaluation of the properties belonging to the residents of Kagarama Town Council, Ntungamo District, who would be directly affected by the roadworks. Despite the fact that evaluation of properties was carried out, no compensation has been made to the residents affected by the construction of the said road to date.

On 4 September 2002, the Director, Road Agency Formation Unit, wrote to the Chairman LC V and Chief Administrative Officer of Ntungamo District, reassuring the owners of land or properties who had and would be directly affected by the roadworks that their cases would be reviewed once the Ntungamo-Kagamba Road was constructed. However, this reassurance has never produced any fruits. 

Your humble petitioners have sought intervention from the Resident District Commissioner, Ntungamo District; the Chairman LC V, Ntungamo District; the Chief Administration Officer, Ntungamo District; Road Agency Formation Unit; and the Ministry of Works and Transport, to no avail. 

Your humble petitioners contend that the current situation in Kagarama Town Council, Ntungamo District, requires urgent intervention because the affected residents of Kagarama Town Council, Ntungamo District, having lost their properties to the roadworks, are disgruntled and still see no hope of compensation.

Now, therefore, your humble petitioners pray that Parliament intervenes and carries out an investigation into the compulsory acquisition of their land by the Road Agency Formation Unit for purposes of constructing the Ntungamo-Kagamba Road without compensating them. 

Your humble petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.

Allow me to lay on the Table the detailed petition from the residents of Kagarama Town Council, where they even appended their signatures, including the letters they wrote to the Ministry of Works and Transport and the letters they received from the concerned offices. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, given the nature of this petition, should we send it to a committee? I think it is a specific matter that people should be paid. What will the committee do about something that is obvious – a debt is owed and should be paid? Is there any investigation required for people who have been assessed for payment but have not been paid? Should we send it to committee?

2.19
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I actually thought that Government would help this Parliament not waste a lot of time on this matter. If Government acknowledges that there are people it has not paid, then the issue is payment. 

For this matter not to be lost, I think I will request you, Mr Speaker, to ask Government to come and explain why these people have not been paid. If they recognise that they are genuine claimants, they can give us a timeframe within which they plan to pay them, so that we do not bog down a committee with a matter that should be straight, as you have guided.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The matter is very straight. We are now debating a petition.

2.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, compensation by Government is normally handled through the office of the Attorney-General. If there is any requirement, for example if the Government Chief Valuer has done their work, we then budget for these compensations and pay them. It is my first time to hear about this but I undertake to follow it up tomorrow and see where the compensation is – (Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, honourable minister. The explanation sounds good. However, honourable minister, this is a specific request but it is not only the people of Ishaka who have been affected by the Ishaka-Kagamba Road. Almost all Ugandans all over the country, where there have been roadworks, have been affected. Some people have been compensated, others have not. 

Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give the minister is that there are many people who have been equally affected but have not been compensated. Therefore, Government should be interested in finding out all these cases and compensating them since the minister has admitted that it is Government’s responsibility to compensate. We have so many cases, including those affected by construction on the Ishaka-Mitooma Road. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we will follow up this matter and also other cases of other people who have been affected or those whose land has been valued by Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) for road construction but they have not yet been paid. We will follow up and inform the affected people accordingly. Tomorrow, I undertake to inform you on how far this compensation has gone. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we do not want any excuse for tomorrow because it will be Friday. In my opinion, under rule 30(6), I find that this petition would better be handled by the minister responsible for the sector. 

I accordingly direct that this petition be extracted and forwarded to the Minister of Works and Transport, who shall study it and report to the House on Wednesday next week about this delayed payment. This is a petition that should not take much time. Up to Wednesday next week is sufficient time for the Ministry of Works and Transport to come back to Parliament and talk about this petition. Thank you.

RESPONSE TO A QUESTION RAISED BY HON. FRANCA AKELLO ON THE SURVEY OF LAND AND PLANTING OF MARKSTONES BY STAFF OF AMITA PRISON IN ABIM DISTRICT, EXTENDING UP TO TWO KILOMETRES INTO AGAGO DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this item might now have to go to business to follow, because each time it comes up both the Member who raised the question and the minister who should answer are not here. Honourable member for Amuru, have you been delegated to ask the supplementary question? The minister is not here; we can handle it on Tuesday.

MR NIRINGIYIMANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am raising a procedural matter regarding the ruling of the Speaker on 5 March in this august House, directing the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to go to Kanungu, specifically to Kihihi Sub-county where about 27 people had been evicted from land purported to be gazetted land for wildlife. The directive was that he goes there with the Members of Parliament, specifically hon. Kaberuka and hon. Elizabeth Karungi.

Mr Speaker, while the minister promised that he would go there in March, he has never allocated time to go there to resolve that conflict. Those people have been chased from their gardens and nothing has taken place. Would it not be procedurally right for the Leader of Government Business to at least give hope to the people of Kanungu, especially the people of Kameme who are being fought left and right by the rangers? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You want the Prime Minister to tell you why the minister has not gone there? I am asking this because the procedural matter you are raising is that you raised this matter and the Speaker ruled that the minister should go there. Now, you are asking the Prime Minister to say something about the minister going there. 

MR NIRINGIYIMANA: Mr Speaker, with your guidance, the Prime Minister is the head of the -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you had raised the matter of procedure when the responsible minster was here, it would have been properly addressed. The Prime Minister was not the one directed to go there. 

MR NIRINGIYIMANA: Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister is the Leader of Government Business. At least, he can give assurance to the people of Kanungu about when the minister will go there because the minister can also be assigned duties by the Prime Minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is no longer a procedural mater. Your procedural point was that you raised this matter and the Speaker directed the responsible minister goes to the ground to find out what is going on. Your complaint is that the minister is not proceeding well because up to now the minister has not gone there. How do you then shift and ask the Prime Minister to say something about this matter? Prime Minister, would you like to give it a good attempt? 

2.22
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I sympathise with my honourable colleague. However, I advise him to come to my office tomorrow and we discuss on how I can help him. Thank you. (Laughter)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ROADS BILL, 2018

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us start with the schedule. There was a proposed new schedule. Are we ready with this today? Where is the chairperson of the committee? We have just one schedule and one clause to finish this Bill. Where is the committee chairperson? Any member of the committee present?

Honourable members, a new schedule had been proposed to appear immediately after schedule 2 and the proposal was put to the House in this form. When we adjourned, they were supposed to have gone to negotiate the different aspects of it, come back and we adopt it as a schedule. However, if they are not here, we will just ignore it. How else can we do it? There is a proposal for insertion of a new schedule but there is nobody to move it; therefore, there is no new schedule.

Honourable members, there is no proposal for a new schedule; so we propose that we move to clause 2.

Clause 2

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, we did amend clause 4 of the Bill by substituting the words “private person” with “private entity”. I had thought that we would include the definition of private entity under clause 2 for purposes of clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Have you drafted it?

MR NIWAGABA: Unfortunately, I have not drafted it but we could jointly draft it because you are better draftsman Mr-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: A private entity is a private entity; does it need definition?

MR NIWAGABA: That is what I thought it would -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Does it require definition?

MR NIWAGABA: In the earlier Bill, we referred to a private person and the committee recommended the substitution of “private person” with “private entity”. 

A private person would in law include an artificial person. So, since the House passed a recommendation on a private entity, which seemed to be separate from a private person, I do not know whether we can interpret it or leave it for a normal appreciation and understanding using the ejusdem generis rule.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think we should leave it. If the matter arises, the court will give it an interpretation. 

MR NIWAGABA: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2 stands part of this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to

Title, agreed to

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

2.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House resumes and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House to report. I put the question to that motion?

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE 

2.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “the Roads Bills, 2018” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

2.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of the Whole House. I put the question to that motion?

(Question put at agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE ROADS BILL, 2018

2.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “the Roads Bill, 2018” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled “the Roads Bill, 2018” be read for the third time and do pass.  I put the question to that motion?

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE ROADS ACT, 2019”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Congratulations, honourable minister and chairman; both of you came after the event.

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE HARMONISED FIGURES FOR SUPPLY TO VOTES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had amended this motion to deal with the supplementary appropriation because of the information I gave you. The supplementary appropriation report is ready but the one for the budget still has to be completed.

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULES NO.1 AND 2 OF FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

2.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider supplementary schedules No. 1 and 2 for the financial year 2018/2019.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? But it does not have to be seconded. It is seconded by hon. Ouma, hon. Mbwatemwa, hon. Dulu. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, Parliament passed the budget for financial year 2018/2019 and during the implementation, we have faced a few challenges in the different sectors, which required supplementary funding. We have been able to submit the pressures that we received from different sectors for which they needed financing, and these include: One, shortage in salaries; two, there are some donor funds that we received during the implementation of the budget in the financial year, which require Parliament to pass of necessity and according to the law. That is the reason that we submitted schedules No.1 and No.2. 

Schedule No.1 mainly considers the supplementary budget that was passed under the three per cent limit, which requires the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to authorise and then report to Parliament within four months. Schedule No.2 has part of the three per cent but also includes supplementaries that require prior approval by Parliament. 

We have explained this to the Committee on Budget. They were spent according to the Rules of Procedure of this House, including those that require prior approval. We have also given the justification; it is because of the pressures that we received during implementation and yet we could do nothing. That is the reason we come back to this House to seek supplementary expenditure approval by this House. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to continue with the supplementary schedules No.1 and No.2 and therefore eventually supply when we agree with that. That is the motion for your debate. However, to start the debate, the Committee on Budget looked at this and we would like to take advice from them on what to do with this.

2.22
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Mr Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Budget Committee on the Supplementary Expenditure Schedules No.1 and No.2 for Financial Year 2018/19. 

On 6 March 2019, Government laid before Parliament supplementary expenditure estimates under schedule No.1 amounting to Shs 462.84 billion and an addendum to Supplementary Schedule No.1 amounting to Shs 3.547 billion. This brought the total supplementary expenditure under schedule No.1 to Shs 468.388 billion, which is 1.4 per cent of the approved budget. The approved budget is Shs 32.7 trillion for the financial year 2018/19. 

Furthermore, on 20 February 2019, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development laid before this House supplementary expenditure estimates under schedule No.2, amounting to Shs 1,173.816 billion, which is 3.6 per cent of the approved budget. Shs 403.576 billion under schedule No.2 has already been authorised as expenditure within the three per cent legal provision under the Public Finance Management Act while Shs 770.239 billion requires prior parliamentary approval before expenditure can be authorised.

In addition, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development further laid on the Table an addendum to schedule No.2 for the financial year 2018/19, amounting to Shs 45,627,556,125. Tables A and B show a summary of the supplementary expenditure for financial year 2018/2019 and the sources of financing this supplementary expenditure respectively. We received adequate information concerning the sources of this financing.

The House will be reminded that owing to some expenditure pressure from Government, Parliament considered and approved as a special case Shs 280,046,776,933 development expenditure under vote 016, Ministry of Works and Transport, for procurement of aircraft under Uganda National Airline Company Limited; and Shs 12 billion, which was ground rent arrears to Kampala Archdiocese under vote 156, Uganda Land Commission. This would have the effect of reducing the funds now required for prior approval to Shs 478.192 billion.

Mr Speaker, the Budget Committee now wishes to present the committee report to the august House in three parts as follows: 

In part A, we shall present the methodology, the legal framework within which we operate, the status of compliance, and some preliminary observations.

In part B, I will present the proposed supplementary estimates under schedule No.1 for the financial year 2018/2019, observations and recommendations.

In part C, I will present the proposed supplementary estimates under schedule No.2 for the financial year 2018/19, observations and recommendations.

On page 4, we have the methodology, the legal framework - a common legal framework we have always been presenting - so I will not go through the details. However, I will take you to item No.4 on page 5, which are the preliminary general committee observations: 

1. 	The committee observed that the supplementary expenditure schedules were laid in accordance with section 25 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. The dates of the submissions were within the four months stipulated by law. 

2. 	The committee noted that the total budget for the financial year 2018/2019 is Shs 32,702.815 billion, of which Shs 22,535.301 billion was appropriated by Parliament while Shs 10,167.513 billion was approved as statutory expenditure. This is the basis upon which the three per cent of the budget is determined. The budget has witnessed significant growth in volume over the years thus providing more fiscal space for supplementary expenditure. 

3. 	The committee is concerned about the growing number and frequency of supplementary requests as evidenced above. This worsening trend undermines the credibility of annual planning and budgeting as entities appear to be avoiding detailed scrutiny during the normal budget process in favour of supplementary budgeting, whose expenditure can be allowed to take effect prior to approval of Parliament.

Most of this expenditure should have been foreseen and is too big to have been missed during normal budgeting. For instance, a request of Shs 280 billion for buying aircraft or a request of Shs 380 billion for defence spending could not have been an afterthought. These uncontrolled supplementary requests cause major distortions to the budget. 

4. 	The committee noted that using the Single Treasury Account, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development sometimes arbitrarily suppresses budgets of Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) without securing any reallocation approvals from the affected accounting officers. This seriously undermines the role of Parliament as the authority responsible for appropriating resources and should not go unchecked by the House.

Recommendation

The committee shall, subject to Article 156 of the Constitution and section 25 of the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA), develop a checklist to guide the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and MDAs on the consideration and approval of supplementary expenditure requests by the committee. We are proposing to prepare a checklist, which the ministry has to consider before authorising any supplementary expenditure.

Mr Speaker, I now turn to part B – Supplementary Expenditure Estimates under Schedule 1 for Financial Year 2018/2019.  

We have provided, on page 7, the justification for all the expenditure under this schedule. I will first move through pages 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, which are all about the justifications that were given. I thought I should present the one on page 16 on vote 015, Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. 

Mr Speaker, Shs 5,000,000,000 was provided for the compensation of Bugisu Cooperative Union. The committee seeks to establish outstanding compensation claims for the Bugisu Cooperative Union and all other cooperatives with war debts and other claims. The committee is asking the House to defer consideration of this matter until all necessary information has been obtained and a recommendation by the committee made thereof. Therefore, we are standing over this matter.

Committee Observations and Recommendations

As we went through those justifications for the expenditure, we made the following observations and recommendations:

1. Poor Planning by MDAs 

The committee notes that a majority of the requests above should not have been entertained by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in the first place. The committee noticed a continuous conspiracy of uniform justification of expenditure between different votes, a matter that should have been resolved by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development by advising the respective accounting officers to wait for the following financial year. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should be warned about these deficiencies and in future, the ministry and officers concerned should be held liable for the loss and misuse of funds.

2. 	Suspected Misuse of Funds by Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) The committee was informed that Shs 17,356,870,159 was released to URA to cater for the procurement of Electronic Fiscal Device to enhance revenue collection. The committee, however, noted that from this allocation, Shs 5,710,515,159 was instead used for welfare and entertainment under different sub programs within URA contrary to the purpose for which the supplementary request I have just mentioned was made. This matter requires further investigation by the committee and shall, for the time being, be excluded from supply.

3. 	Worsening Trend of Under Projection of Appropriation in Aid The committee observes that several votes, especially the districts and municipal councils, received additional funding due to under projection of appropriation in aid and non-submission at the time of appropriation by Parliament. 

The committee notes that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should never have entertained such gross negligence by the respective accounting officers. It recommends that in future, the ministry should guide these entities on proper rules of planning and budgeting.

In other words, Mr Speaker, we received justification saying, “Because we under budgeted and we are not getting more revenue, we are requesting for a supplementary”, without indicating what the supplementary is going to be used for. The committee is therefore constrained to recommend supply of these figures for the time being. We would like to study it further. These figures are summarised in Table 1 for details.

4. Justification on Account of Budget Shortfalls 

Every supplementary expenditure request arises because of a budget shortfall in any vote. The committee observes that several votes, especially missions abroad, received supplementary funding and the only justification given for all of them by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is “budget shortfall”. 

The committee is still constrained to recommend supply of these figures until sufficient justification is provided by the ministry. The affected votes will for the time being be removed from the supply schedule (Refer to Table 1 for details).

Recurrent Supplementary Estimates Recommended for Deferment of Approval- Schedule 1, Financial Year 2018/2019

As above, we have recommended those items that we should defer until further scrutiny. They are all listed in table 1 - it is a long one that runs from page 18 to 20.

Recurrent Supplementary Estimates Recommended for Approval -Schedule 1, FY 2018/19.

The votes that we are recommending for approval are in table 2 under recurrent estimates recommended for approval - Schedule 1, Financial Year 2018/2019. They go on from page 20 to 21.

This brings me to part C, which is the final part of this report - Proposed Supplementary Estimates Under Schedule No. 2 for the Financial Year 2018/2019.

Mr Speaker, Supplementary Schedule No.2 comprises of Shs 1,173.82 billion, of which expenditure of Shs 403.576 billion has already been authorised within the three per cent legal provision as indicated in Appendix 2 for details. That appendix contains a list of all the items under this schedule. Shs 770.239 billion are the requests that require prior parliamentary approval. All those are summarised in Appendix 3 for details. 

In addition, the minister also presented addenda to Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.2, worth Shs 45.627 billon. All that is summarised in Appendix 4 for details. 

As earlier mentioned, Parliament already considered and approved Shs 280 billion development expenditure under vote 016, Ministry of Works and Transport, and Shs 12,000,000,000 ground rent arrears to Kampala Archdiocese. This has the effect of reducing the funds under Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.2 that requires prior approval to Shs 478.192 billion. 

Under item 6.1 on page 22, we give the justification of the expenditure by votes already authorized within the three per cent provision. It goes on through page 22, 23 and 24. On page 24, we have a comment on vote 109, Ministry of Water and Environment: A total of Shs 7,627 billion, of which Shs 3.627 billon has been provided to cater for implementation of Kalagala offset sustainable management plan as per the indemnity agreement for Bujagali Hydropower Project between the World Bank and Government of Uganda. Shs 4 billion is to cater for construction of water supply systems for Kibaale Town and Kyebando-Kasimbi, in order to address the water shortages in these areas. 

However, the committee did not receive submission from the Ministry of Water and Environment on this request. The committee therefore, is constrained to recommend supply of this amount until sufficient justification is obtained.

I would also like to comment on item xiv, vote 116, National Medical Stores: Shs 20 billion was provided to cater for outstanding obligations for medicines supplied on credit by CIPLA Quality Chemical Industries to avert stock-outs in financial year 2018/l9. 

The committee noted chronic frequency of supplementary requests by the National Medical Stores. The committee recommends that Government should determine the annual cost of medicines required and budget for them in the normal budgeting process. Here, we are complaining about the frequency of requests for drugs under National Medical Stores. It is as if the budget for National Medical Stores is not known.

Vote 120, National Citizenship and Immigration Control: Shs 60.212 billion was provided to cater for implementation of e-passports. At the time, Uganda was the only country in the East African Community (EAC) that had not yet implemented the international e-passports. There was, therefore, a need to provide for the supply of the e-passport system and related hardware, personalization centre, 600,000 blank e-passport booklets, service and maintenance of e-passport system, to enable Ugandans to start having international e-passports.

The committee was informed about the ruling by the Speaker requiring Government to consider the need for necessary legislation providing for the issuance and operationalisation of the EAC electronic passports as a replacement for the Ugandan passports. The committee opted to stand over this matter as more information is obtained about the steps being taken to comply with the Speaker's ruling.

On page 26, at the bottom, we look at the committee recommendation on item xxiii. The committee is constrained to supply Shs 11.1485 billion (refer to table 4 for details). The committee noted that the justification provided for the supplementary expenditure request is inadequate and not consistent with law. 

The justification provided for this request was, “additional local revenue due to under projection during budgeting and non-submission at the time of appropriation.” In addition, there was no justification provided for the expenditure of the additional external funds. Therefore, that one has been excluded.

We do not have a problem on pages 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. On page 33, we discuss the numerous addenda that we attached to schedule No. 2 that were brought after the laying of the original schedule No. 2. The recipients were: 

    a) Vote 002, State House - 1.5 billion to enable Uganda host Africa Now Conference at Kyankwanzi.
    b) Uganda Investment Authority - Shs 2.423 billon to cater for outstanding activities to enable operationalisation of the One Stop Centre.
    c) Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA) - Shs 25.8 billion to meet the pending certificates on existing road contracts.
    d) Ministry of Defence - We are providing an amount of about 5 billion for the wages for the newly recruited Local Defence Units (LDUs). Whereas we are making this provision for the LDUs, we do not have it in the main budget.

We do not have a problem on page 36. On page 37, we have summarised all those items and votes where we are requesting the House to allow us to further consider these votes. In other words, we are requesting for a deferment of approval. That table goes on to page 38. On page 39, we have recurrent supplementary estimates that we are recommending for approval. All the votes are in there. The table continues to page 40. 

On the same page, we have recurrent estimates recommended for supply under schedule No. 2 that require prior approval of Parliament. That table continues to page 41 and 42. On page 42 still, we have table 8 which shows recurrent estimates recommended for supply under schedule No.2 for financial year 2018/2019. They were presented on this table in form of addenda to schedule No. 2 and they continue up to page 43.

Mr Speaker, I wish to conclude by saying that the committee requests the House as follows:

    1. That Shs 378,304,967,341 as recurrent supplementary expenditure be supplied by vote as reflected in tables 2, 6, 7 and 8;
    2. That a sum of Shs 867,l47,578,218 as development supplementary expenditure, be supplied by vote as reflected in tables 2, 6, 7 and 8; 
    3. That the House adopts the report of the committee.

The table, which appears on page 45, provides a summary of the sums to be supplied. We proposed that under the first schedule, Shs 136,511,481,101, as recurrent expenditure and Shs 260,676,952,589 as development expenditure, totaling Shs 397,188,433,690, be supplied.

Under the second schedule, the authorised expenditure within the 3 per cent legal limit – we recommend that Shs 179,730,352,105 as recurrent expenditure and Shs 145,535,303,226 as development expenditure, totaling Shs 325,265,655,331, be supplied. 

Further under the same schedule, we have what is categorized as expenditure requiring prior approval of Parliament and we recommend for approval of Shs 42,278,142,500 as recurrent expenditure and Shs 435,092,757,913 as development expenditure, totaling Shs 477,370,900,413, to be supplied.

We also propose that under the second schedule, for the various addenda laid on Table, Shs 19,784,991,635 as recurrent expenditure and Shs 25,842,564,490 as development expenditure, giving a total of Shs 45,627,556,125, be supplied.

Mr Speaker, the overall recurrent and development expenditures under the two schedules being proposed for approval are Shs 378,304,967,341 and Shs 867,147,578,218 respectively, giving a grand total of Shs 1,245,452,545,559, covering the authorised, prior and addenda.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. Thank you so much for listening to me. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have any minority report? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Well, I was served with a minority report a few minutes before I came to Parliament and so, it is available. It will be presented by the “usual” hon. Muwanga Kivumbi and hon. Cecilia Ogwal. (Laughter) They are the usual presenters; they cannot deny that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are they members of Parliament?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes, they are members of Parliament, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then, they cannot be the “usual” ones. (Laughter) 

MR LUGOLOOBI: I beg to lay the minutes of the committee meetings, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Yes, point of procedure?

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the chairperson for the report presented. However, as he presented it, we heard issues about some departments not turning up to justify and that the committee is still studying some issues.  

I would have expected the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to appear before the committee for them to present a harmonised position because even if we were to adopt this report, we would still have some outstanding issues. 

Secondly, the chairperson said that he received the minority report a few minutes before he came to the House. Is it procedurally right that the report be presented when the chairperson has just received it? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: (Power interruption) - I think supernatural powers did not want me to deal with that procedural matter - (Laughter) - Let us proceed. 

3.19
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. The Chairman of the Committee on Budget is always the “usual” Amos Lugoloobi. I do not know whether the appointing authority has never found value in someone else for so many years so he is the “usual” person as well.

I will go straight to the dissenting views. I will not go through the introduction because of time.

The first is illegal reallocation. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development indicated that Shs 275.89 billion will be sourced through reallocations or suppression of releases to partially finance supplementary expenditure. However, the suppressed votes were not indicated. 

Section l2(3) of the Budget Act requires that prior to any reallocation of funds, consultation with the affected ministries, departments, institutions or organisations should be undertaken. However, the ministry, on all occasions, has failed to provide the committee with evidence of consultations and consent from the ministries, departments, institutions or organisations that are affected by the reallocation. This, therefore, contravenes section l2(3) of the Budget Act and it is unlawful. 

It has also been asserted by Government that Cabinet decisions were undertaken to permit the reallocations. However, these decisions are taken at sectoral level, where no evidence is adduced as to being informed by authorisations from accounting officers of the affected ministries, departments, institutions or organisations as required by the law. Section 45(l)(b) of the Public Finance Management Act demands that any accounting officer should be held responsible for authorising any commitment made by the vote. 

Therefore, it is essential that written consent is obtained from accounting officers of every ministry, department, institution or organisation that is forfeiting funds for a given reallocation.

Furthermore, section 20 of the Public Finance Management Act stipulates that for any reallocation to be permissible, there must be a transfer of funds from one vote to another vote. However, by the time of reporting, the committee was not able to determine whether there were transfers of functions from one vote to another.

Recommendations

As required under section 45(b) of the Public Finance Management Act and Section 12(3) of the Budget Act, authorisations from accounting officers of votes affected by reallocations should be obtained and tabled in Parliament before approval of any supplementary expenditure for Financial Year 20l8/2019.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should table evidence that there has been transfer of functions from one vote to another vote as required under section 20 of the Public Finance Management Act, so as to approve the suppressions or reallocations.

Supplementary criteria 

Mr Speaker, the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Regulations 2018, stipulates that supplementary expenditures are expected to be and this is noted in the main report:

    a) Unavoidable (unavoidable expenditure that cannot be postponed to the next financial year); and 
    b) Unforeseeable (an expenditure that was foreseeable by the vote at the time of preparation of the budget of the vote or on expenditure that should be included in the budget of the vote.)

On most occasions, the supplementary schedules submitted to Parliament fail the test for most items are clearly foreseeable and unavoidable as shall be highlighted shortly.

This is an indication that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development does not undertake sufficient or comprehensive due diligence of supplementary expenditure requests as required under Regulation 18(2),(5) and (6) of the Public Finance Management Regulations.

Recommendation

Before the House makes a decision on the report, the minister responsible for finance should, under section 78(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, provide an explanation to Parliament why the requirements of the Public Finance Management Act, particularly regulation 18 could not be met.

Unspent balances

It is not justifiable to have failed to absorb funds and instead request for a supplementary to spend on items that are not even related to the initial purpose. For instance, under development expenditure, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - at this point, I can leave out this because it was well covered in the main report. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has requested for Shs 27.7 billion being external financing unspent balances under FINMAP 3 for Financial Year 2017/2018 to be spent on the construction of the new office block and rent for Afri-Exim Bank offices. The bulk of expenditure is towards non-residential buildings Shs 16.4 billion and consultancy services (Shs 9.1 billion). These expenditures do not satisfy to be unforeseeable and unavoidable. Besides, it is difficult to ascertain how the expenditures will contribute to the achievement of FINMAP 3 objective of strengthening public financial management at all levels of Government and ensuring efficient, effective and accountable use of public resources as a basis for improved service delivery.

Therefore, under various votes particularly municipalities, supplementary requests amounting to Shs 98.3 billion pertain to unspent balances for the Financial Year 20l7/2018 under Uganda Support to Municipal Development Project (USMID). However, it has been established that the approved budget in the financial year 20l7/2018 for USMID was only Shs 33.4 billion, of which only Shs ll.l8 billion was spent, which translates absorption rate of 33 per cent. Hence, unspent funds amounted to Shs 22.31 billion. It is, therefore, surprising that the supplementary request of Shs 98.3 billion far exceeds Shs 22.31 billion that was not spent in Financial Year 20l7/2018. 

Besides, there is no justification in spending just because there are unspent balances and the items being spent on can be budgeted for in the next financial year.

Recommendation

The expenditures for which unspent balances have been sought should not be approved for, they are foreseeable and avoidable. Hence, they should be treated as public loss as provided for under regulation 18(7) of the Public Finance Management Regulations.

Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development (PIBID)

Shs 3.547 billion was spent as a supplementary expenditure by PIBID under the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. It is critical to note that in the past, Parliament has raised a number of issues regarding this project that remains outstanding to date. These included expiry of the executive order, failure to transfer patent rights to Government of Uganda and lack of legal operational framework among others. Recently, the report of the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation on the Ministerial Policy Statement for the next financial year confirmed that the same issues are still outstanding.

It is, therefore, erroneous and amounts to undermining Parliament for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to authorise supplementary funds without addressing pending issues or implementing parliamentary resolutions. This has now become the norm for when Parliament does not appropriate funds for this project, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development authorises funding through a supplementary that does not require prior approval by Parliament. 

In the Financial Years 2017/2018 and 2018/2019, this project  received supplementary funding and reallocations amounting to Shs 9.03 billion and Shs 4.74 billion, respectively.
Mr Speaker, it is apparent that most of the expenditures we are rejecting, even in the main report, were spent on monies that do not require prior approval. The finance ministry, by using that avenue, is taking over powers of Parliament to appropriate. We think it is fundamentally illegal.

Recommendations

Parliament should not approve Shs 3.547 billion being supplementary funding to this.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should never submit any further supplementary requests for PIBID until all issues raised by Parliament are satisfactorily addressed.

Under rule 221 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda 2017, the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline should inquire into the actions of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that tantamount to contempt of Parliament.

3.5 Classified Expenditures

The Office of the President, State House and the Ministry of Defence requested for supplementary funding for classified expenditure as indicated in the table below. 

It is critical to note that State House requested in Schedule l, 2 and 5 for a total of Shs 219.72 billion. This is an increment of 238 per cent over and above the initial approved budget of Shs 50 billion.

When you look at the table I have put down, in the Budget, we approved Shs 22 billion. This was not changed. We approved Shs 60 billion for State House. In Schedule 1, they came for a supplementary of Shs 79 billion. In Schedule 2, they came for a supplementary of Shs 64 billion. In Schedule 5, they came for a supplementary of Shs 15 billion and I am aware that in the coming Schedule, they are coming for more. This amounts to Shs 219.7 billion. This is a 264 per cent increment. Therefore, much as it is classified, Parliament must take keen interest and since we cannot scrutinise it, this creates a small window for abuse. 

Although classified expenditures are scrutinised in a closed session by classified expenditure committee (as provided under section 24 of the Public Finance Management Act), it is important to emphasise that supplementary classified expenditure ought to satisfy the prescribed criteria, i.e., unavoidable and unforeseeable (as provided under Section 24(5) of the Public Finance Management Act and the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Regulations, 2018). 

The Committee on Budget did not receive a duly signed report on the single-line item for classified expenditure as required under section 24 of the Public Finance Management Act.

Suffice to note the fact that the Office of the President requested for Shs 6 billion being settlement for classified domestic arrears. However, this is misleading for it has been noted that classified expenditures output 11101 - collection of information intelligence, item 2240031 amounts to only Shs 1 billion while the remaining Shs 5 billion is domestic arrears under output 1199 item as indicated. "Domestic arrears" has never been a classified item in the charter of accounts.

Based on this, Shs 5 billion should not be approved as classified expenditure.

It was further noted with concern that under Schedule 1, State House sourced the Shs 6 billion from donations out of the spent item for funding towards classified expenditure of Shs 79.1 billion. 

Such a transfer amounts to a virement that requires prior approval from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as stipulated under section 22 of the Public Finance Management Act. However, no such approval was obtained.

Aware that it is at the discretion of the Speaker to appoint a Member to the Committee on Classified Expenditure other than the committee chairpersons of budget as well as defence and internal affairs as required under Section 24 of the Public Finance Management Act, there is need for that Member to be from the Opposition. This will not compromise national security given the fact that Members undertake the oath of secrecy. Rather, it will strengthen the role of the Opposition in Parliament, of keeping the Government in check.

Mr Speaker, we would like to inform Members that the classified committee of three has hon. Lugoloobi as the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget, hon. Doreen Amule as the Chairperson of Defence and Internal Affairs Committee and of all people, hon. Fred Mwesigye.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is he a Member of this House?

MR KIVUMBI: I am saying, “Of all people” because he is very critical. He is a historical member of the UPDF. He is among the first 27. He is very special in Parliament because he is among the few that fought for the peace and stability we enjoy. (Laughter)

However, the problem we have with Col. Fred Mwesigye being on the committee with others is that it is always very difficult to scrutinise this committee and come up with recommendations. I do not mean to undermine Col. Fred Mwesigye in any way. I am aware of his historical contribution.

Atiak Sugar Project
When I am done with this section, I will leave this matter to hon. Cecilia Ogwal to speak to it because matters should be left to those who know them best.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did she sign the minority report?

MR KIVUMBI: Yes, she is part of the people that signed the minority report. With due consideration, she is more aware of those matters than I am. I leave it to her to handle. 

Supplementary Funding for Petroleum Authority of Uganda
Mr Speaker, some of these agencies are so critical to the development of the country that it should not be misconstrued that we are being unpatriotic when we question some procedures that are followed. We mean well because we want them to do what they do following the correct procedures. 

The Petroleum Authority of Uganda (PAU) received supplementary funding of Shs 34.34 billion of which Shs 16.72 billion was released as supplementary funding under Schedule 1 for capital expenditure. However, it was established that all the expenditure items contravene the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Regulations, 2018, for they were avoidable or foreseeable as indicated in the table below.

Mr Speaker, the table shows how the money was pest on these activities -  

    a) Recruitment of staff – Shs 4.68 billion
    b) Staff training – Shs 400 million
    c) Development of 24 guidelines and process manuals – Shs 1.76 billion
    d) Monitoring activities of the licensed oil companies – Shs 2.38 billion
    e) Maintenance of computer hardware and software – Shs 880 million
    f) General insurance and insurance of motor vehicles – Shs 400 million
    g) Development of new strategic plan for Petroleum Authority of Uganda (PAU) – Shs 350 million
    h) Attachment of Petroleum Authority of Uganda (PAU) staff to the work being done outside Uganda – Shs 1.2 billion
    i) Top-up for office rent – Shs 50 million
    j) Top-up for running expenses – Shs 700 million
    k) Stakeholder engagement through workshops and public hearing for Tilenga and Kingfisher development projects – Shs 3.62 billion
    l) Technical committee meetings for approval of work programme and budget for licensed oil companies – Shs 200 million.

Mr Speaker, a total of Shs 16.72 billion was spent in this manner. Our view is that if these were to come through normal budget procedures, such expenditures would not have been approved.

Shs 17.62 billion was released from the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development (Vote 017) to Petroleum Authority of Uganda (Vote 312) to cater for capital expenditures. This is a reallocation that requires, under Section 20 of the Public Finance Management Act, a resolution of Parliament that authorises the minister responsible for finance to reallocate funds from one Vote to another. 

However, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development failed to satisfy that some functions of the Vote had been transferred to the Petroleum Authority of Uganda, hence the reallocation requirements were not satisfied, hence a contravention of the Public Finance Management Act. 

Mr Speaker, Table 3 shows how money was spent.

    a) Procurement of 16 vehicles – Shs 4.42 billion
    b) Procurement of furniture and fittings – Shs 500 million
    c) Setting up a data centre (Phase 1) – Shs 8.32 billion
    d) Procurement of specialised computer software – Shs 4.38 billion

Mr Speaker, a total of Shs 17.62 billion was spent and this also came through a supplementary request.

Recommendations

The supplementary expenditures of the Petroleum Authority of Uganda should not be approved, for they were avoidable and foreseeable. Hence, they should be treated as public loss as provided for under Regulation l8 (7) of the Public Finance Management Act. The minister responsible for finance should under Section 78(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, provide an explanation to Parliament on why the requirements of Public Finance Management Act could not be met before a reallocation was effected.

Vaccines for foot and mouth disease

Supplementary schedule 2 indicates that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries requested for Shs 3 billion being vaccines for foot and mouth disease. However, the committee established during the interaction with hon. Joy Kabatsi, the Minister of State in charge of Animal Industry, that:
    a) The ministry has adequate supply of vaccines and required no further purchase of vaccines. Hence, the authorisation for a supplementary should never have been made and submitted to Parliament by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
    b) The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries requested for Shs 1.26 billion as indicated in table below. However, the expenditures were not authorised by minister responsible for finance.

Mr Speaker, the law on supplementary request requires that these expenditures should be authorised by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This is how the ministry intends to spend the Shs 3 billion.

    a) Travel, selection and sensitisation of the study districts – Shs 114 million
    b) Procurement of equipment – Shs 100 million
    c) Vaccination – Shs 118 million
    d) Monthly monitoring (sample collection, processing and analyses) – Shs 840 million

It is a total of Shs 1.26 billion. Our considered opinion, Mr Speaker, is that this is unwarranted and should go to the next budget so that it is streamlined.

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries also presented to the committee a request of Shs 1.8 billion being funds for Tsetse flies and Trypanosomiasis control around Lake Mburo and Murchison Falls National Park. Proceeding with the consideration of this request without authorisation by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is erroneous, for, it is not reflected in the supplementary requests laid in the House. This would contravene section 25 of the Public Finance Management Act.

Therefore, the request of Shs 3 billion by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should not be considered.

Unauthorised supplementary requests 

The committee received an unauthorised supplementary request from the Independent Electoral Commission, in breach of the procedure stipulated in the Constitution and the Public Finance Management Act – [MR LUGOLOOBI: “Where is it?”]- If it is not there, I rest my case. (Laughter)

What I know is that the committee chairperson could have removed it after having read this minority report. This was out rightly illegal. Any expenditure at supplementary level should be tabled in Parliament by the minister but not smuggle it to the Committee on Budget. If the committee chairperson saw it fit and deleted it, so be it.

Steel and Tube Industries

Under the Ministry of Works and Transport, Shs 1.5 billion is being sought for preparing land for setting up a Steel and Tube factory in Namanve Industrial Park. 

Mr Speaker, on this issue we made a report based on a draft report of the committee. In the final report that was presented to Parliament, the majority opinion agreed with our position. Therefore, I rest my case. However, by the time we made this report, the majority report was reading differently.

Mr Speaker, an addendum – you know we were racing against time. My considered view is that this addendum is not yet before Parliament. I would, therefore, like to decline to comment on it because the committee has not yet considered it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which addendum?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: The way this report was made – we are aware that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has another Schedule before Parliament -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you started anticipating?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: No. It is not in anticipation, Mr Speaker. The Committee on Budget considered those requests and the discussion ensued. However, it indicated that this report be submitted before we consider it and we thought it was illegal. If they were to be considered in the main report, we were going to object but since they were not considered in the final report, we rest our case.

I beg to submit our minority report and differ with the majority report, in cases where it is constrained. It was the ruling of your Chair, Mr Speaker, that the word “constrained” used in the majority report does not speak well of the intention of the committee. The committee should have the courage and the boldness to say they declined. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Before hon. Cecilia Ogwal speaks on the subject she wanted to speak, let me recognise in the public gallery this afternoon, students from Bundibugyo Primary school, represented by hon. Richard gafabusa and hon. Josephine Babungi, Woman Member of Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Immediately after hon. Cecilia Ogwal makes that submission, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development says he wants to add something to this. I will give him two minutes to reconsider. While he will be doing that, hon. Mbwatekamwa has an urgent matter and the Minister of Health has to leave but he has to respond to that issue. I will give that slot such that we can deal with it.

3.51
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that the minority report is made in an attempt to do what we call damage control. It is important that the image of Parliament should not be damaged because of the failure of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to implement the laws, which are known.

All the issues we have raised are issues we have dealt with every year. I remember you worked very hard last year to ensure that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development made a statement on the Floor of Parliament to the effect that in the future – which future included this current situation -  they would ensure that any supplementary budget would be based on unavoidability, unforeseeability and also to ensure that the resources are available and suppression of the resources from one sector to another would not be done without that evidence.

Mr Speaker, this document shows – although, the ministry apologised and pledged not to repeat, this is evidence that they have continued to repeat the same. However, as hon. Muwanga Kivumbi said, the chairperson of the committee had a meeting to reconcile the figures up to midnight of last night and we struggled through thick and thin to come up with the minority report for which, I would like to thank my colleague for the hard job done.

The issue of Atiak should not have appeared here because I was tasked to do a thorough investigation. If you go through the report, you will find that –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is Atiak?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Atiak Sugar Project in Amuru. I conducted thorough investigation and talked to a few persons who know about this project. However, what we discovered was that although the share capital has all been paid as far as the Government is concerned, we are concerned that Government is continuing to make investment. 

This particular investment is to ensure that the ploughing for this season is done and that farmers whose plots have been hired out for this project are assisted as the President pledged. Therefore, I request the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the relevant ministries to ensure that these farmers whose plots are being used by Atiak Sugar Project are given shares for that particular plot that they are donating to the project. Otherwise, after the four or five years of harvest, what will happen to these farmers and what will be the fate of the plot, which is being used now?

I would like to therefore, put it on record that farmers who are right now working together with the proprietors of Atiak Sugar Project should be given shares based on the size and valuation of their plots as a contribution for this particular project.

The last point I would like to make is that it is our duty as Parliament to defend the image of the President who is the Fountain of Honour. It is outrageous to present the Office of the President and State House as overstating its budget by 267 per cent. This is not right. It is wrong year in and year out that State House has become a bottomless pit as far as the resources of this country are concerned. I feel that is our duty as Parliament, to defend the image of the President. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we will pause here. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has something do to and I want him to organise himself. Let the honourable member for Kasambya raise his matter and then the minister can respond.

3.57
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity. I have a matter of urgent national importance.

Last year, Government allocated money to upgrade health centres II to health centres III. I was very lucky that in Mubende, we managed to get two health centres that were supposed to be upgraded to health centres III; one was Butawata and the other is Butorogo.

The matter, which is very urgent is that each health centre was allocated Shs 500 million, countrywide and they were supposed to construct a maternity ward, renovate the Outpatient Department (OPD), put up a placenta pit, a waste management pit and a latrine.

In Mubende, what has happened - because the procurement was done centrally, the contractor, using the same amount of money, is only going to construct only a maternity ward. They actually forced the Chief Accounting Officer (CAO) to sign the contract.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, my prayer is now that the honourable Minister of Health is here, let her tell this country how some mafias are defrauding Ugandans. Since we are looking into supplementary here, you might find that they are trying to get a supplementary for –(Interjections) Thank you very much. (Laughter)

4.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable member is raising a matter that is very serious and requires a little more investigation, especially when he says that the CAO was forced to sign a contract by the Ministry of Health. I need to investigate this matter.

Otherwise, I would like to inform the House that it is true that this financial year, we are working on about 125 health centres II, which are being upgraded to health centres III and Butawata Health Centre II is amongst those.

However, the information that I have is that when we came up with the figure of Shs 500 million, that was an ideal after going through and trying to ensure that we eliminate what has been happening before. If we simply left these renovations to individual health centres, you get exaggerated bills of quantities. So, we had to sit with an independent team and we realised that with Shs 500 million, we could work on the OPD, maternity ward, a placenta pit and the latrine.

Mr Speaker, it is true adverts were placed. However, for this Mubende lot, the information I have is that Nicole Associates Limited were the lowest bidders. They said with this Shs 500 million, if Value Added Tax (VAT) is left on, they could not provide all these facilities. So, we had two options, either to terminate and re-advertise or to re-negotiate. 

We have written to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requesting for a waiver of the VAT component before we can proceed to engage the contractor to work on these other facilities. (Interruption)

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. The clarification I am seeking from the minister is that the ministry sent out lots. For example, in Kigezi, there are about five areas where the district authorities were not supposed to look for other contractors, other than those that had been selected by you in those lots.

The clarification I am seeking from you is: in case you send one contractor from the ministry for - for example, lot 5 for Kigezi, which covers Kabale, Kanungu, Rukungiri and Kisoro, how will the CAO go for another contractor, other than that? This is important to clarify on because even in Mubende you restricted that bidding to only one person? Is that quality assurance? Thank you.

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, we did not restrict. We actually advertised, different bidders responded and there was an evaluation. It is not that we restricted. Otherwise, that would be selective bidding, which we did not opt for. It was open bidding and there were various bidders. For this particular lot, it was Nicole Associates Limited, which was the cheapest but we are still following up the matter. 
Mr Speaker, allow us to conclude with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development before I can come back here to give a more elaborate answer. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - 

4.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, thank you very much, for this opportunity. I want to make one clarification regarding Addendum No. 5, Supplementary Schedule 2 for 2018/2019, which some Members said I did not lay on Table. This was laid last week. 

For emphasis, I would like to seek your permission to lay it again. It is to do with the request to finance operations of State House and supplementary to cater for external financing for local Governments; they are straightforward supplementaries.

The other one – with the recommendation of this House during the debate and what the Committee on Health found out at Mulago Hospital and what we also know - we have made a decision that it is urgent that we complete construction at Mulago Hospital. That is why we have come to this House to seek the approval of Shs 15 billion to complete Mulago Hospital. 

I would like to also beg that I lay Addendum No. 6 Supplementary Schedule No.2 for 2018/2019 and Schedule 5. (Laughter) I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Mr Chairman, before I make a reference, are you able to do this?

4.07
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Mr Speaker, I do not think we can do this on the Floor because it will require substantial amendments to be made. Secondly, we have not looked at the justification and sources to fund this supplementary. So, we cannot commit ourselves on these at this stage. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. With that clarification, we will still refer this Addendum 5 to the Committee on Budget for whatever they can do with it and come to advise the House at an appropriate time. Thank you.

Honourable members, that is the motion and both the majority and minority reports have been presented. Debate starts now, each Member will take two minutes. Let us start. Since there are only three.

4.08
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. They identified a number of issues that are critical, especially on their concern on why we are always talking about supplementaries. I would also like to ask why we talk about supplementary all the time, yet, we always run through the budget process.

Second, according to their concern, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development seems to be the alpha and omega when it comes to matters to do with finances. That means they are obstructing and undermining other Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs), which becomes a big challenge. 
If the ministry, for example, is doing this, it becomes a big problem. That means tomorrow, do not be shocked when they even affect the operations of Parliament.

The other issue is that we are talking about Shs 3 billion for Foot and Mouth Disease. If you look at the merit of this; it must be unavoidable and unforeseeable. Foot and Mouth Disease is a planning matter because we know we have the animals. Therefore, this Shs 3 billion to buy medicine should be thrown out. (Laughter) Because- (Member timed out.)

4.09
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, the most critical mandate this House has is appropriation. That is why we have the Committee on Budget, which engages in the budget process for a long time to do exhaustive scrutiny of the requests by different sectors. We should not joke with our appropriation mandate. 

I see now that all the requests being made are being considered by the Committee on Budget. Why? Because it is thought in the law that at the time of making the budget, there would be issues that would be unforeseeable and unavoidable. They are the only ones that can come through a supplementary budget process and nothing else.

I see the chairperson of the Committee on Budget saying they want to sit as a committee and come up with guidelines to govern supplementary budgets. You do not need to that because the rules are already there under the Public Finance and Management Act, 2015. (Applause) What we are seeing today is, there is a deliberate act of undermining the rules themselves and therefore, undermining the mandate of this House. Most of the issues that are being raised right now are foreseeable and avoidable. What I expected, first of all, is for the minister to respond to the minority report. (Member timed out.)

4.12
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I thank the committee for a very comprehensive report. In my own assessment, 50 per cent of the requests have been approved. This reminds me of how serious Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is when preparing to come to the committees. The committee indicated clearly that most of the MDAs did not provide adequate justification and yet, these are supplementary budgets, meaning you have not prioritised them. 

Secondly, we need to review the performance of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. (Applause) We are now seen as a rubberstamp Parliament because the recommendations we make at the committees and present in the House remain lamentations. Even when we go to the Committee on Budget, you move with a lot of energy to explain yourself and yet, the report has been approved by Parliament.

We all need to look at our mandates and respect each other for this House to be respected.

I support the Shs 29 billion under local Government because of the component for training the LC1 Chairpersons. In my district, I have covered – (Interjections) – It is Shs 29 billion – (Member timed out.)

4.14
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by bringing the attention of this House to the word, “impunity”. Impunity means exemption from punishment or freedom from the injurious consequence of an action that breaches the law. The reason I am bringing this is that we have been informed that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, in bringing this supplementary, has breached the law. We all swore here that we would protect the law.  This is not the first time the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is doing this. We must make feel the pain of trying to undermine this Parliament and appearing to be above the law.

Section 12, sub-section (3) of the Budget Act, 2001 has been cited. Section 20 and Section 45 (1) of the Public Finance and Management Act, 2015 has been cited. Laws are made to be enforced. Once you cannot enforce a law, it ceases to have the purpose for which it was made. This Parliament should not accept this.

I know that within the supplementary, there are key and important budgets that we must supply. I implore that we pass those ones. We should reject the ones with question marks like Atiak Sugar Works, where now we are giving them free capital over and beyond the shareholding. The one of the Presidential Initiative on Banana, which we discussed here about two weeks ago and the Ministry of ICT, Science and Technology told us here that it does not have any other legal instrument – (Member timed out.)

4.16
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Mr Speaker, there are two issues for me. The first one was mentioned by the honourable member who has spoken before me about the banana project. It is true that this country is one of world’s leading banana producers after India. So, it is right that we should take steps to add value to this important project. However, year after year, this House has been supporting that project. (Applause) When will that supplementary end? We have not seen any single product of that project in the market. 

Lastly, this House every year appropriates money to MDAs after they have presented their policy statements and estimates. We approve whatever money they ask for. Halfway down the line, disbursements are not made to these MDAs, hence these supplementaries. Where does the money appropriated by this House go?

Therefore, I would like to agree with hon. Ababiku that it is time we called the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to order to tell us the mismatch between appropriation and this supplementary. We cannot continue like. Thank you.

4.18
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am at pain especially because of the conduct of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. They like to hold this House at ransom. They wait at a time when we are engaging with the budget – some of these issues they have raised can be catered for in the next budget. I do not see any reason there should be a rush to stampede the House.

Even then, if there are very critical issues that we have to look at; the time we are going to release this money, I do not know whether we shall be able to spend all this pressures in time. Therefore, this is a calculated move to get this money and misappropriate it at the time of the day because there will be no time for accountability.

Therefore, I would like to implore the House, Mr Speaker, for the first time, let us stand firm and reject some of these issues that are not going to benefit the country. We are crying because of the many gaps in service delivery and this is where we could appropriate some of these resources and benefit Ugandans.

However, if we are going to continue, we are going to set a very bad precedent and as a House, let us stand firm and make sure that we do not succumb to the pressures from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development yet, these are the custodians of this Act.

As House, let us be firm not to accept to be pushed to the level where this House cannot operate anymore. I do not want to be part of the history tomorrow to be blamed as a House. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.20
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here with pain -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This pain is not showing on your faces.

Mr WALUSWAKA: Mr Speaker, the pain I have, there are burning issues - you remember one time Parliament had to exert pressure - other Members and I went to the issue of the Nodding Disease. It is urgent that to-date people are dying and they are not - it is urgent but they have not come here.  

Mr Speaker, some of us who went to Kyankwanzi - I even cried in Kyankwanzi because of Shs 6 billion for Busolwe Hospital. The contractor is there; they want counterpart funding but Government is just adamant. I would like to request Members, in the spirit of togetherness and governance, for the first time on record that we reject this request by Government and it will know that this House is not just to rubber stamp and stampede; people are suffering. 

For example, in Atiak, the Member of Parliament, a senior Member and a Commissioner talked about Atiak - Shs 6 billion they want to give people in Atiak, Shs 6 billion is needed in Busolwe. Therefore, why can’t you prioritise? Right now, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not here. Whatever we are discussing there is no Minister of Finance. Where are they? 

Mr Speaker, I would like to request that we reject it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The person who is not here is hon. Bahati but the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is somewhere represented.

Mr WALUSWAKA: Yes, Mr Speaker, since it is like that, nevertheless, I would like to request that we reject this proposal.

4.21
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi West County, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to commend the Committee on Budget and also the two Members from the committee with the minority report.

I think they have articulated a lot of issues. Both committees have alluded to the fact that the ministry of finance has not followed its regulations. These regulations are a brainchild of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; so they ought to have followed them.

Mr Speaker, why these supplementary keep on coming, they do not give us the real figures that we expect in our local revenues - expecting to put those things in their supplementaries. That is why these MDAs are suffocated.

If we pass this, we shall be handing over our mandate to the minister - hon. Bahati because he has already hijacked our mandate of appropriation yet that is the preserve of Parliament. If you look at the percentage of these supplementaries brought on the Table here, they are almost becoming half of the Budget that we pass. Now that means that we are suppressing our own department, including the Parliament. 

As we talk, we are now empty because of the suppression. They have taken the monies to where they want like Atiak where they follow the money. We should prevail over the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to behave and follow the regulations that they put here; because I remember on the budget committee - (Member timed out.)

4.24
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Mr Speaker, allow me to appreciate the good work done by the committee and the minority report members. It is unfortunate that I am disagreeing with my colleagues from this side because if you are talking about Atiak; the information they are using is wrong.

The money which is there in the supplementary budget is not for the factory. When we were on the Floor here, we came with a concern- Members you will remember -about the girls who were in captivity; they gave birth from there. Then an arrangement was made - the bush clearing is already done with Shs 10 billion. The planting in such a way that there is an agreement for five years and eight months; to use that land for these vulnerable women who gave birth when they were in captivity. 

They will be given five acres each; after five years and eight months, the land goes back to the owner. For them, they will have gained strength to start their lives again. I really respect Mama - if she had used this opportunity to call me, as we always talk on phone, I would have given appropriate explanation to be understood.

We are still coming back here on the Floor of Parliament - I wish the ministry should budget for it and not in supplementary because we are left with about Shs 10 billion to finish that programme and help and resettle these women -(Interruption)

MR KASULE: Thank you, hon. Akol, for accepting information. This very issue, Mr Speaker, came to the committee and we interrogated it. It is true that the Shs 2 billion is not for Atiak as a factory; but it is for the out-growers for which programme has already taken some spending.

Therefore, it will be detrimental for us to stop in the middle of a process that must end with farmers planting cane. Mr Speaker, I agree with this information.

MR AKOL: Thank you, hon. Kasule, for the information. However, the fact is, I am not against what you are saying. I was with the chairpersons of the budget committee and Committee on Finance in the UK for the benchmarking. We realised that while in the UK, this issue called supplementary budget is not even there. 

Now, that shows to you that there is a planning problem and somebody cannot run away from this fact that if we are here on the Floor of Parliament, we should not relinquish our role as Members of Parliament -
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your time was up already.

MR AKOL: Thank you.

4.27
MR JACK WAMANGA WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank both the chairperson of the Committee on Budget and hon. Muwanga Kivumbi for their reports. I do not know whether the chairman intentionally avoided bringing up most of these issues which hon. Kivumbi brought to the attention of the House.

Mr Speaker, I do not know whether accounting officers these days do not understand what budgeting is. You budget for one year how much you are going to spend within a year. Even before that period ends, you come to ask for a supplementary; supplementary should come in when there is an unavoidable, unforeseen; that is when you come and ask for supplementary. However, I see most of the expenditures now are being done through supplementary, which is very unfortunate. 

Mr Speaker, all these monies that the chairman has read to us is through supplementary, which means there is no meaning now for the Budget. As a House, Ugandans are looking at us. Appropriation is one of the major roles of this House and it is your important role, honourable members, to save Ugandans not to just come and spend money like that when our people are suffering in poverty; when there is no medicine in the hospitals but we come here and appropriate.

What shocked me was that even State House gets Shs 6 billion from donations which means that our -(Member timed out.)

4.29
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We had passed a very good law, the Public Finance Management Act and in that law, particularly sections 25 and 26, we had conditioned supplementary expenditures to the contingency fund but toward elections in 2016, an amendment was brought when most of us were not there and those conditions were repealed and that is why we are seeing total financial indiscipline.

I will request that one of us comes up with a private member’s Bill to reinstate the position as it was then; short of that we will continue to bleed by the ministry taking over our powers.

When you look through the entire supplementary expenditure which they are talking about, none of them meets the criteria. How do you go for a supplementary expenditure in respect of items like welfare and entertainment? And then you invite members of Parliament to come and pass it?

If we do pass expenditures of this nature under a supplementary budgeting process; tomorrow even your own allowances will be reallocated by an official in the Ministry of Finance and you will have nothing to talk about because they have misused their powers of reallocation, they have misused their powers of virement, they have –(Member timed out.)

4.31
MS ROBINAH SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to add my voice to thank the chairperson for the majority report which was deliberately brief; leaving out the real issues so that we can deliberate on the superficiality of issues and thank the minority report presenters for the detail which has given us more light.

Mr Speaker, Finance is not doing us good; when we expect them during planning to fully synthesise the issues that are necessary to budget for.

For Financial Year 2018/2019, we had unfunded priorities, an issue you said you did not want to hear on the Floor. I would have loved at least to hear those issues being brought in the supplementary budget.

Even in this financial year, we are having the same unfunded priorities and I know that the supplementary budget will come and will not consider them.

We need to be cautious about the people that we serve and usually budget for their needs; if a supplementary - if we had unfunded priorities where is the money coming from that is going to conduct the activities in the supplementary budget? Thank you.

4.40
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for this report and I have also observed that in this supplementary there is a provision for Ministry of Lands and Urban Development for land compensation. 

I have a very big problem in my district whereby the tittle holders of Mpeefu, Kyateretera and Ndaiga sub counties were not provided for in this budget. The Executive came in and gave an order to the Ministry of Lands to cater for this; I would like to know exactly why it is not catered for at this juncture?

My prayer is that for this supplementary budget to be considered the absentee landlords of Mpeefu, Kyaterekera and Ndaiga be catered for. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members; I will try to balance the regions.

4.34
MS JUDITH NABAKOOBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report and also the one who presented the minority report. 

The chairperson presented recommendations; for example, on the poor planning by the MDAs, they conspire to provide uniform justifications wherever they are putting a case.

They talked about URA diverting Shs 5 billion which was meant for buying of physical equipment. It was Shs 29 billion and out of that Shs 5 billion was removed for entertainment and welfare and one wonders how that happened.

I would request this House to investigate those two issues seriously because if we continue like this we are going to face serious challenges.

I support the Shs 29 billion for training of LC counsellors and also for buying of motorcycles for LC3 chairpersons. Thank you.

MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the person who presented the minority report. If we do not understand the budgeting process and why a country should have a budget, we shall continue being guided by the chairperson of the Budget committee of the ministry.

This morning some of us had an engagement with ACCORD where we were told that a lot of money is still at the centre and yet it was supposed to be transferred.  

I think these people are covering themselves in that one; to use that money which they intended to remain with at the centre without transferring it to the local Governments, and to disguise by requesting for supplementary budgets from this House.

I would like the minister to inform the House why he is not talking about the money that was not transferred but he only comes here to ask for loans and supplementary budgets. We are soon ending the year; why don’t you wait we have those activities which you want to work on using the supplementary budgets during the next financial year? Why are you running for this one?

Honourable members, I request that we do not pass this supplementary budget.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Defence, are you the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for now?

4.38
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I only did the job of taking notes for the Minister of Finance; I cannot competently address the issues the members have raised. I will wait for the minister, hand over the notes and I assume that he will answer.

4.39
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to support the minority report because – Yes, I wanted them to allow us debate. That is why I supported this one first.

We have been having things that have been pending; the unfunded priorities. For example, when we look into Health, we only need 200 billion to make sure that the Heart Institute can function. It has been pending. How I wish I had in the new supplementary things like Health; we only need 80 billion to make sure we have functional CT Scan and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scans. 

Mr Speaker, the issue of the Presidential Initiative on Banana – this project has been a liability to Ugandans because we are spending money and I –(Member timed out)

4.40
MS RUTH KATUSHABE (NRM, Bukomansimbi County North, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I have listened to the two lawyers; hon. Katuntu and the Shadow Attorney General who said that we have a gap in the Financial Management Act that we have to address.

I would request this House that we pass this supplementary as we address the gaps in the Act - (Interjections). By the time they bring those issues of the supplementary budget, it means there is an urgent issue. 

Therefore, for the issues that have been approved by the Committee on Budget, I request that we pass them and then we can leave those that have not been approved by the budget to the committee. Thank you.

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I need clarification from the minister who is not here but there is another minister. Usually, they have brought us supplementary budgets whose money they have already spent. I do not know whether we are deliberating on a post-mortem or it is a real supplementary.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what the Constitution allows. It allows for expenditure of a certain percentage and come to Parliament.

4.43
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the first place, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should have been here because we are addressing something that is very crucial.

Unfortunately, we are letting down our people. How can we talk of even a supplementary for training of LC1s when we know that these were elected sometime back? Why can’t we do proper appropriation for them instead of bringing it in the supplementary?

To me, this supplementary is supposed to be something, which is unavoidable and unforeseeable. However, if you bring these, are we doing the right thing? Let us make supplementary to be a supplementary. If there are gaps in the law then we should address them very quickly. Otherwise, this supplementary should not be passed because they have a lot of issues in it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not in this debate out of discomfort. That is the only reason I can assign to it. He must have been very uncomfortable sitting here and listening to the enumeration of the mistakes they are making, which statement we make every year that we are not following the law.

The law says that appropriation is by Parliament. The principal of financial initiative says that the President proposes the budget and this Parliament approves. However, now the President proposes the budget, we approve and then the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development goes and starts spending other monies, which you have not approved. 

I think it was just out of – because they say, “Shame is a revolutionary sentiment” - a bad feeling that the minister left. Maybe it was for the good because the mood would have been a little not good. 

Honourable members, this is what has happened this year. All these other years, we have not rejected any supplementary request. However, this year, our own committee has proposed a rejection of approximately 26 per cent of the request, which I think is a good start. If we give this notice that we have done 26 per cent this year - and we do not want to jeopardise activities of other institutions - but if you do it again, the total 100 per cent of your request will be rejected.

Can we start with rejection of the 26 per cent and use that as a basis for showing our dissent to the way the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been operating? Can we do that?

4.46
MR MUHAMMAD KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, we may need to find a compromise for Government to function because some of the expenditure items could be justifiable. Those that are justifiable, there is no reason why Parliament does not approve them. 

I think that there should be the standard; whether it is 100 per cent and all are justifiable, we are under obligation to approve. However, those that are not justifiable, even if they are 80 per cent, we reject.

Therefore, the task before us is to go through these budget items. The Committee on Budget has done its part; a discussion has ensued in this Chamber. There are still items we feel, like in a minority report, that should be further included on the lists of those we should reject. Even the minority report does not reject more than 50 per cent. If we are to pick items there that are critical and we send a message, it would literary raise like to 40 per cent and the 60 per cent will be passed. 

In my humble view, the middle ground position is that we look critically at these expenditure items either today or to look at it a little further, we come on Tuesday and we go for those items that we require to pass. Then we reject those we do not require with a serious warning to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that impunity will not be permitted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I pleaded with the finance ministry last year; this time I am not pleading for them. However, let us do this - why don’t you help - because instead of saying we move it to next week, the main budget is coming, we will be crowded. Why don’t you point out those issues, we consult with the chair what the situation is and see if we can move with what we do not want to approve? No, can you list out those you think are too critical and we see how we can proceed instead of pushing it again to next week?

Please can we do this? The two of you who presented, can you just go and say this one and that so that we see what we can do?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Can we be given two or three minutes to sit and identify those, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had guests who have just left. They are members of staff and students from the Royal College of Defence Studies, United Kingdom. They are here visiting Uganda, being hosted by the Uganda People’s Defence Forces on a study tour and were here to observe the proceedings. They have just left. You saw a group of people who came in but they have just walked out.

Can we do this? While that is being done, can we move to another item as we wait for that? We could finish and that is why I was suggesting that we make a compromise and send this signal to the Government that we are not going to take it anymore.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I thought we had agreed on the compromise and how to do it is what is remaining. When I see Members this side, and I see hon. Cecilia Ogwal asking for five minutes, I ask myself: “who is we?” Are we just leaving it to the people who handled it or us who are not members of the Budget Committee can also have a way of participating in this process?

What the majority report short changed us on is that they did not include the details. The details have just come up in the minority report. So, what we want to do -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the details are there; they were read.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, sorry, it is not that I am disputing what you are saying. The details of what we think are not priorities came out in the minority report to the extent what the Budget Committee did was the 26 percent he is talking about.

Therefore, what we want to get are the details from the minority and the majority report - (Interruption)

MR LUGOLOOBI: I want to believe that probably you do not have a copy of the report because if you had it, just use Table 1 as an example on page 18, which goes on to page 19, we listed numerous votes for which we are not recommending approval. The Votes are: 15, 141, 212, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207; they are so many. I can go on and on.

This is not the only schedule that we are saying should not be approved. There are more schedules depending on the general schedule that we are analysing; the information on what we have rejected is there.

MR KATUNTU: I think we are talking about the same thing but differently. One, the minority report goes further than what you have and we what we are saying is: can we have reconciliation? We are not saying that the majority report has not rejected some items, indeed, it has but the minority has recommended more.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, what we want is a reconciliation to see those, which we also think, should be included on that list.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You, know my memory tells me that that is exactly what I said. I said, “Which areas do you suggest should be added to the 26 per cent and we see as the House how to handle it?” That is what I said.

MR KATUNTU: Are we going to do it here, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us pause this matter here, reconcile and come back next week so we can see how to conclude it.

Honourable members, we need to receive a report that is coming but I have an engagement at six and I need to prepare for it. It is something that will cover so many things. We will be on a radio talk show to speak about certain things at six. We need to go and prepare with the Prime Minister and other people so that we can inform the country about certain things.

I hoped that we would handle the South Sudan matter but it looks that if we start now - I do not know how much time the chair would like to use to report. Otherwise, we can receive the report. Should we stay it to next week?

Okay, honourable members, in the circumstance then, we will receive that report next week but otherwise the report is here; I have a copy, so that we are clear about what we want to achieve. In the circumstance therefore, we will not be able to proceed beyond this point to enable me go and do what I have just explained to you. House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 4.55 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 21 May 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

