Wednesday, 11 May 2016

Parliament met at 1.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting, which might be the last sitting of the Ninth Parliament. I would like to begin by amending the Order Paper. The Prime Minister would like to make a closing statement during the course of today; we shall, therefore, allow him to make that statement when he comes.

Secondly, honourable members, there has been a lot of misconception in the public that Members of Parliament do not pay taxes. I would like to explain to the country and I hope that the press will be able to carry this; Members of Parliament pay tax on their salaries. Each Member pays Shs 40 million a year in form of taxes on salary. In total, this House pays Shs 15,628,368,000 in tax on salary every year. That is the total paid by the Members of Parliament. 

Secondly, each MP is paid a gratuity once a year and it is taxed, and each Member pays Shs 16,990,200. The total paid by Members is Shs 6,214,291,200 annually. Thirdly, Members are also paid a sitting allowance of Shs 50,000 per sitting and they pay 40 per cent of that in form of taxes. Fourthly, for honoraria paid to committee chairpersons and vice-chairpersons, again, Members pay 40 per cent of that to the Uganda Revenue Authority.

The payments of mileage, town running, constituency facilitation and purchase of motor vehicle contributions were not being taxed until the recent court ruling in January 2016. Those monies are meant to facilitate Members of Parliament to perform their legislative duties and are deemed to be duty facilitation, which is protected under Section 19(2)(d) of the Income Tax Act. However, the matter is still in court. So, we shall be told later whether we are liable to pay or not. 

I would also like to again inform the country that various Attorneys-General have written opinions to Parliament, stating that the facilitation allowances are exempt. It is not that we are greedy or we do not want to pay taxes, but that is the advice we got from the Attorney-General of Uganda in three different letters. If the press is interested in them, they will be able to access them. That is the position; we do pay taxes – very serious and heavy taxes, by the way. (Applause)

Honourable members, the term of this Parliament ends on the 18 May 2016. However, taking into account tomorrow’s swearing-in of the President and the swearing-in of new Members next week, it will not be possible to hold further sittings. That is why I said that this may be our last sitting.

I would like to thank you, Members, for entrusting me and my deputy, hon. Oulanyah, to lead this Parliament. A lot has happened during the five years. We would like to commend His Excellency the President and the Government for restoring stability and democracy in Uganda. We have been able to hold regular elections, which is a sign that democracy is in the offing. 

I would like to commend my predecessors for the building blocks on which we stand. They set a good foundation for parliamentary democracy. In particular, I would like to commend His Excellency Yoweri K. Museveni, the first Speaker and Chairman of the National Resistance Council; the honourable Al Hajj Moses Kigongo, who chaired most of the NRC; Rt Hon. James Wapakhabulo - may his soul rest in peace; Rt Hon. Francis Ayume - may his soul also rest in peace; and the Vice-President, His Excellency Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi; and their deputies, hon. Joseph Ekemu; George Cosmas Adyebo, who also is no longer with us; hon. Betty Okwir, who is also not with us; and of course myself, for the stewardship of this Parliament.

I would like to thank Members for the good working relationship that the ruling party and the Opposition have enjoyed. It has been a learning process as we practice multi-party democracy. However, I think that all of us have learnt and benefitted from this interaction. As you know, multi-party democracy was revived only recently but I am sure we shall improve with time. 

During these five years, a number of our colleagues passed on - they did not complete their terms - and we recognise the role they played, representing their constituencies. We pray that they rest in eternal peace.

A lot has been done by the Ninth Parliament. I would like to thank the two Prime Ministers and Leaders of Government Business, the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, the Chief Whip, the Opposition Chief Whip and all the other whips for a job well done.

I would like to thank the members of the Parliamentary Commission who have served in the Ninth Parliament. I would like to thank all the chairpersons and the deputy chairpersons of the committees who have just served this Parliament. I would like to really commend you for the work you have done in generating work for the plenary, so that we are able to serve the country.

I would also like to thank the Clerk and her staff for the administrative and technical support rendered to the Parliament. I am delighted to announce that in this tenure, we have enacted 102 laws - far beyond any other Parliament. We have passed 207 resolutions based on motions; 261 reports were considered and adopted; 29 petitions were considered; 161 ministerial statements and 43 other statements were also considered. We have not done well on questions for oral answer; they were only 34. However, we have done well on Prime Minister’s Question Time; there were 432 responses to Member’s questions. 

We would like also to thank the Government ministries, the accounting officers, departments and agencies, civil society, Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) and the press for the work done. We would not have been able to do much without the collaboration of all of these.

Among the successes of the Ninth Parliament has been parliamentary outreach. We have engaged with the leadership at the district level, we have understood the concerns of the population and brought them to the attention of the Executive and to the House.

We have a modern multilevel car park, as you know. We have been able to construct the three final floors of this building. The final floor of this building was planned for 1963 and we have been able to complete it. We, therefore, have three more facilities and more space for Parliament.

We have also acquired Development House and modern ICT equipment. Members were able to acquire iPads and we were able to save a lot on paper. We were spending a lot of money on paper. We, therefore, would like to state that, that has been an achievement. We have a breastfeeding facility, the first in a Government institution in this country. 

I would like to thank Members for the field visits they have conducted throughout the country. I would also like to thank the support staff for making it possible for them to go to all these places.

In the region, our Institute of Parliamentary Studies has been able not only to train Members, but also to assist local governments and parliaments in the region. The Parliament of Somalia has benefited quite a lot from the Institute of Parliamentary Studies.

We have established regional networks at different levels. We have also supported the work of the East African Community, the African Union and the Pan African Parliament. I know that the work we have done is building Pan-Africanism.

We have done well on the international scene. We have been well represented at the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, the Inter-Parliamentary Union, the European Union and African Caribbean Pacific Joint Assembly. We have also attended other meetings where Ugandans have performed very well and been given positions because of their competence and expertise. Indeed, if Ugandans are not in many meetings, their absence is felt. Therefore, I would like to thank the honourable members for the work done. Of course, we cannot forget that we hosted the Inter-Parliamentary Union in 2012 - the first time we had over 1,000 participants. This has helped us to market the country. 

On parliamentary games, I would like to thank the Members for participating in the games and keeping our teams alive in sports. I know that we have got a number of awards and we would like to see this continue in the Tenth Parliament.

We have also supported the religious faiths here. Members are active participants in the chaplaincies, and also in the Imamat. I would like to thank Members for that and ask them to continue.

There have been some challenges. Up to today, a Member of Parliament is construed as a development institution from who constituents expect various handouts and services. In some places, people think that a Member of Parliament is the Government. I think it is necessary for us to work together with the Government to sensitise the population on what the actual role of a Member of Parliament is and should be. However, Members should not give promises, which are beyond their capacity, because these also mislead the population.

We have also sometimes had problems with poor attendance and lack of quorum. I do hope that in the Tenth Parliament, we can do better so that we do our work quickly and efficiently.

Honourable members, of course there are colleagues who will not be in the Tenth Parliament. We expect that by 18 May 2016, the offices and other assets of the Parliament which were entrusted to you will be handed over to the Sergeant-At-Arms. This can be done between now and 18 May 2016. We procured iPads to facilitate the work of Members; although they have depreciated, you will be informed on how they will be disposed of.

We would like to welcome the Members of the Tenth Parliament. To the colleagues who were not able to make it, we would like to wish them good luck and good fortune in whatever they are doing. 

I will issue the proclamation at the end of this sitting so that it is printed in the Gazette. However, for now, I would like to thank you very much and God bless you all in your endeavours. Thank you very much. (Applause)

I also would like to inform you, honourable members, that the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2016 was returned by the President. However, taking into account that this is our last sitting, it will not be possible to hand it to any committee now and they will not be able to report to any plenary thereafter. We shall, therefore, consign it to the Tenth Parliament so that they can handle and complete it.

Tomorrow, there will be transport available to take Members to the swearing-in and inauguration of the President at Kololo. Members of Parliament are expected to be seated by 8.30 a.m. Buses will shuttle between the South Wing and the ceremonial grounds from 7.30 a.m. in the morning. Please, ensure that you carry your invitation cards as security will be on high alert. We are not allowing anyone to access the venue without an invitation card or accreditation tag. However, I would like to alert our protocol team to be very handy to assist the Members of Parliament, so that they can be properly seated to attend the swearing-in ceremony.

As I said, the proclamation will be issued at the end. Thank you very much.

2.06
MS ROSEMARY NAJJEMBA (NRM, Gomba County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to make my last remarks in this Parliament where I have served for 10 years as Member of Parliament for Gomba Constituency. 

When I came here, Gomba had just one constituency and it was not a district, but it is now a district. In this Parliament, we have had two Members and we were both women. In the next Parliament, we shall have three Members of Parliament - two women and a gentleman - and I am very proud of that. We took affirmative action very seriously. I am happy that I leave at a time when there are two more Members of Parliament, especially two women, coming in. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, because you are one of those women leaders who has inspired us very much, and we feel the women movement should continue even without some of us in Parliament.

I should have started by thanking God for enabling me become a Member of Parliament from among more than 30 million Ugandans. I would like to take this opportunity, on the last day of the Ninth Parliament, to thank the Almighty God for giving me this rare opportunity to be in this House for 10 years.

I also would like to take this opportunity to thank my voters in Gomba for entrusting me with the constituency. I am the first female Member of Parliament to represent a constituency in Gomba. It was not easy that time; people would ask, “How shall we tell the Ssabasajja of Buganda that we are sending a woman as a Member of Parliament?” I got the courage and said, “Yes, I am a woman but a rare one because I am a very daring woman.” Therefore, I would like to thank the people of Gomba who stood by me and supported me twice to stay in Parliament for 10 years. 

I would like to thank Parliament, first under the leadership of hon. Ssekandi and you, Madam Speaker, and then under your Speakership and that of the Deputy Speaker, hon. Jacob Oulanyah, for your support to us as Members of Parliament. From the capacity I have got in this Parliament, there is no way I can fail in this world because I have the capacity to mobilise, people and resources, and also the capacity to do so many other things. I do not take it for granted. 

Exposure

At the time some of us came here, we were not very exposed. I cannot take lightly the exposure and confidence I have gathered. I know it will take me to so many places. 

Maturity in doing work

I would like to thank Parliament for enabling us develop confidence, maturity in doing work, exposure and capacity. I have gained experience in governance and leadership; I cannot also take it lightly. I know it is going to help me a lot. Even though I am not elected as a leader, we are all leaders in our different capacities. We are leaders at home, in our communities and in the religious institutions where we belong. The experience I have gained here will help me.

I would like to thank the NRM party for giving me all the support. I will continue supporting my party because it is the one that I trust to take Uganda to greater heights. I thank the President of Uganda for all the guidance, and I thank my colleagues in Cabinet for the moral support. Who am I to be a minister? I would like to thank God for all that and I cannot take it lightly.

I will miss this Parliament so much. I was a backbencher for just one year but during that time, I was able to chair the HIV/AIDS committee, which was full of doctors and yet I am not a doctor. Dr Bitekyerezo and all those doctors were in my committee but I really managed those people and in one year, we were able to produce a report on this Floor, which I am also very proud of. 

For the past four years I have been minister, I have missed the comradeship of Members of Parliament, sitting with them in the committees and going to the field. I can state here that I enjoyed being a backbencher more than being a minister because of the interaction. Nevertheless, I do not take anything for granted and I would like to thank God.

I would also like to thank the Opposition. They have always been supportive as they gave positive criticism. In this Parliament, I was the first to move a motion on the State-of-the -Nation Address though hon. Cecilia Ogwal disturbed me a bit.  She tried to let me know that I have to speak to the motion and not read it, and when we went out she guided me so well. I thank you; I cannot take that for granted. I would like to thank you for the guidance. You have been here longer and the experience you have gained has helped some of us who have been here for a shorter time. I have been here for 10 years and I think it is a short time for one to get to know everything, especially the rules and procedures.

To my friends who lost the election, I wish you a good time out there. There is life after Parliament; there is life after politics. You can make it. You do not have to be elected; to do something for yourself, for your family and for your community. For those who will be in the next Parliament, we wish you all the best. 

We shall not miss the media’s bashing and the stress in the constituencies, but we shall perhaps miss the good things. We sympathise with you because you are going to be stressed but that is life; just move on and be strong and God will guide you. Put Uganda first and yourselves last. For God and my country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.14
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank you for this very special opportunity. First, I congratulate you because you will be our Speaker again in the Tenth Parliament. Congratulations, Madam Speaker. (Applause) We wish you God’s guidance as you execute your duties in the next Parliament. I am certainly proud of the achievements that you have listed and it has been a joy to be part of this team.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the commitment you made towards ensuring that the business before the committees is saved. Particularly, as the Public Accounts Committee, we have reports that are ready on the pension scam, adoption procedures in this country - things that are very touchy - and we are happy that from that commitment, these reports will be processed in the next Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, together with our working group, we also leave behind a private Member’s Bill, the Law Revision Miscellaneous (Amendment) Bill, towards the progressive abolition of the death penalty in this country. I know that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has already done extensive work on it. We hope that Parliament will consider it so that we begin to see the progressive abolition of the death penalty in our country.

Madam Speaker, some of us are going on a sabbatical; perhaps it will be a short one. We look forward, God willing, to re-joining you. However, while we are away, I would like to pray that this Parliament pays attention to the tension that is in this country. I think that the political questions in this country need to be dealt with politically. All of us know how on all the streets we have soldiers, the police, and yet we are supposed to coexist and share this one Uganda. I hope that this Parliament will put in place a mechanism for dialogue in this country which will lead to reconciling our different interests and enable us to coexist in a truly multi-party dispensation.

Last season, we began the review of electoral rules very late. I hope that the Tenth Parliament will pay attention to this matter, so that we ease the tension that comes when we review these rules in piecemeal or we do not review them at all and then later breed post-election tension as we can all see.

Madam Speaker, I would like also to encourage the Tenth Parliament; yes, we have our partisan interests and our individual interests, but I would like to pray that each individual and each one of us leaders in this country will put God first. It is important that we honour God as we serve this country. It is also important that we put this nation first. If only Uganda comes first every other time you make decisions about health, education, etcetera, our partisan interests would take second place.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the leadership and the guidance you have given me, particularly as an individual. To the rest of my colleagues, it has been such a joy working with you and I wish you God’s blessings. Thank you.

2.18
MR TIM LWANGA (NRM, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to make a few comments at this very hard moment.

I came to Parliament unopposed in 1996 in the Sixth Parliament and I came unopposed in the Seventh Parliament. I missed out on the Eighth Parliament but God brought me back in the Ninth Parliament. I am very grateful that as a Ugandan, out of the over 35 million, God chose me to come to Parliament and represent that small number of people from Ssese Islands. It could have been somebody else but it is I that was chosen to come.

In those many years, I have seen a lot and I am proud that we, who started off as very young boys at university in 1971, managed to change the direction that we were being driven to, to be what we are today. I am very grateful to God that because He loves this country so much, we got out of the ditch and now we can start running.

I pray that in future, the people who are coming in after us - I am one of those who are not going to ever come back as an elected Member of Parliament because I think I have done my bit. Those who are going to remain behind should remember one thing: Uganda belongs to all of us and when you are making decisions, you are not making them for your personal benefit; you are making decisions that are going to affect lives of all other Ugandans. That is very important.

God-willing, I will be able to write a book about my experience in Parliament - the good, the bad and the ugly. We have a lot of good, we have a lot of what can be bad but we also have the ugly. I think somebody has got to bring it out one day, so that we look at it and reflect, just like you look at your reflection in the mirror. Let us always reflect on ourselves. 

In the many years that I have been here, we managed to start the National Prayer Breakfast of Parliament. I am the founder chairperson and it has brought us a long way. It has brought unity because it is for everybody; you do not have to be Christian or Muslim. In there, we unite and make decisions which affect all of us.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the guidance that you have given this Parliament. I would like to thank you for always standing firm when you think you are right; for always doing what is right as opposed to what is politically correct. Thank you very much and Members of Parliament must learn a lot from you. May God bless you. We will meet in Kampala as I will still be around. Friends, if you think that you trust my brain especially with figures, allow me to come and advise you. May God bless you. 

2.22
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the chance to speak the truth and for standing with us when we were in trouble. You know what I am talking about. You have given us the chance to present our reports from the Committee of Health, which reports have led to Bills that have later on become Acts of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I first saw you very many years ago when I was a minister for finance in Mbarara University of Science and Technology in the students guild and you were the chairperson of the council. The person I saw is the person I have left. The only difference is that age changes people slightly, but the person I saw is the same I have left in this Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I got the opportunity to come to your house when you lost your father. I am glad you came to my home in Mbarara. I will continue coming to Mbulamuti and when you are passing Mbarara, please check on me. 

To my colleagues, the health sector of this country needs a lot and I want to urge all my colleagues who have remained and those who are coming here. None of us knows when he or she will die; nobody has a calendar. It is only God with it. However, we must prepare places where we shall see our Lord from. To go to a hospital and find no gloves or that the doctor is there but without drugs to use, and you see civil servants building houses or “eating” loans, you see workshops everywhere, I would like you to be slight Magufulis of this country –(Interruption)  

Go into that budget, remove money for travel abroad or workshops and put it in at least one hospital. Go to Kamuli and build one hospital, go to Arua and build one, Kabale and build one; if you do that, in five years we shall have over 10 hospitals, fully equipped, and Ugandans will not die. To spend money in a hotel eating sausages when people are dying in the villages - I have left that but it has become a problem to me. Honestly, I wish you good luck.

To my colleagues, love this lady as you love yourselves –(Applause)– I pity some of you who de-campaigned her. What exactly had you eaten for heaven’s sake! (Laughter) I believed in the status quo because this one and the other one are equally good. Who is this person that ate something and he or she started speaking in tongues? (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I would like to leave you with honesty, love and a heart of thanking those who have done good things for you. If any of us were put in this Chair, we would realise that it is the hottest in this country, plus that of the presidency –(Member timed out.)

2.27
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much and the Members of the Ninth Parliament. This has been my first term as a Member of Parliament and I would like to appreciate the support and guidance that the leadership of Parliament gave to the new Members. 

One thing I would like to say to the colleagues who did not make it is that there is life outside Parliament. However, as you step out there, you have to raise your shoulders high because you were a leader, and we thank God for the time He gave you to lead your people. 

I would also like to appreciate the cooperation of Members within Parliament, especially with the team from the Opposition; having come here as an independent Member of Parliament and having been close to my party, the NRM, this gave me an idea of how to work for the people. 

My people also gave me another mandate to come and serve in the Tenth Parliament. I would like to thank the leadership of the party and I believe I am graduating to another level. One good thing that has led me to speak today is that I am happy because in my constituency, from 1962 when Uganda got independence, they had never re-elected a Member of Parliament. This has been the first time. I have also entered in the history books of Samia Bugwe County South for having come here twice like my neighbour here, hon. Oboth Oboth, from West Budama South. 

We would like to appreciate the leadership of our Speaker and pray that while we are still here with you, the Almighty God will lead you in steering this House, and at least we will be counted as people who supported all the developmental ideas and policies that can steer this country to development. Thank you very much.

2.29
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to congratulate you.You always asked me about this rosary; I was praying for you with all the actions. 

Secondly, I would like to thank hon. Najjemba. I remember she is one of the ladies I first talked to when I had just come to Parliament. She told me that she was not standing again and she has maintained her statement.

During my first years here, I worked with hon. Bitekyerezo on the Committee on Social Services. I remember one time we refused to pass the budget for social services and we were invited to the Prime Minister’s office. Indeed, we introduced ourselves to the Prime Minister then, and I said “I am a life Member of Parliament. The Prime minister said, “You can never be one.” Hon. Alaso also asked, “Ssewungu, don’t you fear these big people?” Today, here we are, at the end of the elections, I was matching with him on the other side of politics and hon. Kakooza, my great friend and brother, was on the other side. 

We have a lot of friends in this Parliament, and it is very rare to find a Parliament where the return rate is almost less than 10 per cent. I was speaking to some members up at the canteen and on estimate, we realised that from the Opposition we are about 40 and from the NRM about 60, who have returned to the Tenth Parliament. The total number of the members of the Ninth Parliament who returned to the Tenth Parliament is only 90 out of 375 members. This is not because those who did not make it were non-performers, but there is something else hiding somewhere. 

We must discover that kind of hidden energy, power and authority that weakens friends who have been working together. Any person in this country would enjoy seeing a Member of Parliament in his or her constituency running throughout because continuity and institutional memory deliver the best performance in the world.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you; we have been very stubborn here, making a lot of noise, but you would bear with us. I am happy that you are coming back to the Tenth Parliament to bear with noise from us in the same system. (Laughter)

My prayer is that those in Government accommodate – by the way, I enjoy her laughter in the microphone. When the Speaker laughs, I feel very happy. (Laughter) That is why we had to move in tandem - both the NRM and the Opposition – and say that the sixth floor is under the command of Ms Rebecca Kadaga. You are not just the Speaker of Parliament but you are also commander of sixth floor, because since independence, you are the only one who has managed to complete that building. Bravo!

Hon. Bitekyerezo, my friend, and other Members who are leaving Parliament, we shall remain friends. If there is any Member of Parliament here who is not called “honourable”, it is Joseph Ssewungu. Most of the Members here call me Omusomesa Omutendeke. Honourable members, from the way you refer to me, let us remain brothers and sisters. In case of a function or agony, inform us; we shall be with you because we are now brothers and sisters. The only difference is that we are returning to the House. May God bless you.

2.33
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Madam Speaker, it so happens that I will be back in the Tenth Parliament but I am standing in for the Leader of the Opposition, who will not be back to the Tenth Parliament.

Allow me to congratulate you and the Ninth Parliament for what we have done. In politics, it is not the good things you do but the bad things you do which people talk about. The good things you do are always hidden under the carpet. I think that we have to keep in mind that this is what life is all about; we should continue to encourage one another and remain true to the promise we made to our people.

I would like to congratulate the NRM party, –(Applause)- made up of Ugandans, who reached a consensus that the lady who has been steering this House is the right candidate to steer the Tenth Parliament. I would like to assure you that as the Opposition, we will also try our best to reach a consensus so that the lady that you have chosen is the candidate that we may also adopt as our candidate. I pray that the Lord may bless our new leader. 

Madam Speaker, we wanted stability and that is why on our part, I insisted on maintaining the status quo, and it is like the NRM read my mind. I would like to thank God for making me a true prophet in the Ninth Parliament. (Laughter)

I have observed one or two things; we have made progress in as far as democracy is concerned. I preach about one gospel and if we were to rewrite the Bible, I would ask God to allow another Bible to be called the Eleventh book and this would be based on the experiences that we have had.

Democracy is a very complicated thing; there are many people who like talking about democracy but they do not like practising it, and they do not even want to hear about the practice of democracy. That is why today I am speaking when I am not supposed to be speaking; I am speaking on behalf of the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Philip Wafula Oguttu, who will not be back in the Tenth Parliament. He has been ring-fenced by the police and he cannot leave his house to come and make his final statement. He has been locked up for the last three days together with hon. Ssemujju and many other leaders of the Opposition.

Madam Speaker, the democracy that I have studied over the years has convinced me beyond doubt that, the measure of democracy is the amount of freedom that you give to the minority; it is the way you respect the role and the part played by the minority. I would like to plead with this Government; it does not matter how many you are, recognise the few that have different views, and that is the Opposition. I plead that as we move forward with democracy, let us learn the culture of tolerance. Brothers and sisters, whether you are in the Movement, FDC or UPC, we are all Ugandans; these political parties are artificial borders drawn by men. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to make this statement because hon. Wafula Oguttu is not in position to do that. First, our observation is that the women on both sides of the House have suffered serious causalities in the last election. This is something that we need to work on as women. We must pull up our socks, collaborate and work hard. 

I have also observed that the NRM historicals have also suffered serious causalities. On that, I have no statement to make –(Laughter)– but only to say that the Tenth Parliament will certainly miss the contribution of a few of these Members. Allow me to mention the few members whose contribution we will miss and these include Alice Alaso, Paul Mwiru, Kassiano Wadri, Tim Lwanga, Kwizera and Bitekyerezo. I wish hon. Bitekyerezo had lived for one more term; at least he would have rehabilitated the mortuary, which is the departure lounge for all of us. Unfortunately, he has gone before he rehabilitated the mortuary in Mulago Hospital. 

Madam Speaker, it would be extremely unfair if this Parliament leaves and we do not take care of hon. Matte’s demands. Hon. Matte has been unwell and he is demanding for his money from the Government. If anything happens and God takes his life and you bring his body here, we will all be speechless – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, Leader of the Opposition, take one more minute. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, as a mother, I am pleading that this Parliament – as much as we are going away – makes sure that hon. Matte’s demand is taken care of. It is a very important matter and we are all responsible to make sure that where we can help somebody to live an extra day, we must do that.

Madam Speaker, it would be very unfair for me to end my speech without acknowledging the fact that this Parliament has been able to pass very fundamental laws for this country. Although they could have been done earlier, maybe Parliament – although I was part of it – was not bold enough to do so. 

The law that we passed on homosexuality is fundamental and I have no apologies to make. Although there are some people who come to this Floor and say that there must be a budget to go and clean the image of Uganda, I would want the budget to instead be used to tell the world that homosexuality is bad for them and for us. (Applause) Madam Speaker, even for the law we have passed on pornography, women must be at the forefront of promoting it. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, there are facilities that you have created for this Parliament; let us not forget them, Members. This Parliament, under the leadership of Rebecca Kadaga, has created a day-care facility for women who are breastfeeding. I think this is something we cannot leave without recognising. 

The Opposition is, of course, very proud that for the first time we have been able to bring minority reports here on the supplementary budget, the oil investigation and on several matters and they have been passed. Thank you very much, Parliament, for being objective.

I also want to thank the Ninth Parliament for having supported the leadership of Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga and Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. I believe that as we go to the Tenth Parliament, we will all do that.

Hon. Frank Tumwebaze, the Minister for the Presidency - I am still left with some of you to deal with. (Laughter) I hope that the Tenth Parliament will definitely tone you down and make you more mature so that when you leave, you will appreciate that Parliament can transform a person. May God bless all of you. I love you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition. As I indicated earlier, the Prime Minister will be coming to make his concluding remarks. Let us hear from hon. Akol for the next three minutes.

Honourable members, I will also be interested in hearing what hon. Matte is requesting for from Government, so that we can help him. (Mr Bahati rose_) Do you know what he is asking for from the Government? Are you going to do it? Commit yourself there on the Hansard.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, on that issue, I would like to confirm that Government owes money to hon. Matte and hon. Matte has a condition that needs urgent attention. 
Currently, we are in the process of paying him half of the money that we owe him and hopefully in July, we shall clear the balance. 

We passed a supplementary budget here, where we captured Shs 2.5 billion. It is unfortunate that the Office of the Attorney-General has taken three weeks without giving us instructions to complete the transactions. However, I spoke to the Attorney-General the other day and the letter is on its way to finance. As soon as we do it, on Friday we will be able to sort this issue out. Thank you.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I want the Minister of Finance and the Attorney-General to listen to me. The heart of a human being is one of the most selfish organs of the body; it first gives blood to itself before it gives to other parts of the body, for purposes of making sure that it gets energy to pump to all parts. 

Hon. Matte has got issues with the blood vessels of his heart. If anybody makes him uncomfortable and he becomes stressed, there is a possibility for release of adrenaline, which is a vessel constrictor. Once this happens and there is too much pressure and the heart is working against that pressure, there is a possibility for hon. Matte to get either a stroke or a myocardial infarction. 

I would like us to help each other. Forget all these things of yours – the law or the Attorney-General; the Attorney-General does not know how a person dies. I want to tell him now on the Hansard that if hon. Matte dies before he is given his money just because of these delays, I do not think that the President of this country can just accept that you let someone die. I have been seeing the President crying whenever people die; you see him almost finished. He does not want people to die here. 

Why don’t we get some little money and we save hon. Matte so that you do not bring him here and you start giving serious speeches here. When you die, you are finished; you cannot come back. We are lucky that this man is still alive. Yesterday, we passed “The Uganda Heart Institute Bill” to make sure that operations of the heart can be done. I have shared with hon. Matte and he wants money specifically to go to India for a heart operation, not to go and take wine. Can we save this man, please, before we leave this Parliament? Let us give him the money and he goes.

Madam Speaker, I was trying to make sure that I show you the magnitude of Matte’s problem, so that Government can take it as a serious matter of national importance. Thank you.

COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, as a member of the Committee on Budget and Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs, I have been following this matter with keen interest. 

Yesterday, I talked to hon. Matte and he told me that the instructions to pay him left the Ministry of Finance yesterday, but the problem is with the Solicitor-General. That is what he told me yesterday. So, honourable Minister of Finance and the Leader of Government Business, can you ask the Solicitor-General to release hon. Matte’s money? That is what he confirmed to me yesterday. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we are listening to the debate and where it is heading. We want to confirm that whether the letter comes from the office of the Attorney-General or not, we know about this issue and we are going to pay hon. Matte from the source and finish this matter instead of moving up and down. Thank you. (Applause)

2.50
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I thank the people of Bukedea for giving me the opportunity to serve in this Parliament for almost 10 years. I came in through a by-election and I joined Parliament around September, 2006. However, I want to say that I have made history in Bukedea because I am the first MP to serve two terms. (Applause)

I am also proud that as I leave the position of Member of Parliament for Bukedea, my people now have electricity in every sub-county. There is also hope, because funding has already been given - Bukedea district will have piped water in the next one year. They have good roads and they have also got another constituency, which means that the Tenth Parliament will be represented by three Members from my area.

Madam Speaker, I also want to thank colleagues for the cooperation and good working relationship that we have had, sometimes with a lot of humour. I remember when I served as the chairperson for the Committee on Budget, I never had a Minority Report despite the challenging situations, even when we had to pass money to buy teargas for the police and other vehicles.

Madam Speaker, as the Chairperson of the Board of Trustees of the Parliamentary Pension Scheme, I want to say that I am proud that as I leave, we have been able to make amendments to the law. So, as a Member of Parliament retires or when his or her people chose to retire him or her, he or she has a good pension scheme as a fallback position. Every Member of Parliament who is entitled to a pension will have at least Shs 1 million per month.

Madam Speaker, as a commissioner in this Parliament, I want to say that I am also proud to have worked with you and other members of Parliament here, in improving the welfare of members and staff of the Commission. I would like to appreciate you for the leadership that you have given to this Parliament. In the Ninth Parliament, we have been able to achieve a lot. We have the only parking facility in the country that has five levels. We have the only baby care centre in the country. I have no doubt that in the Tenth Parliament you will be able to accomplish the project of building a new Chamber that will be able to accommodate all the incoming members of Parliament.
 
I also want to thank my party, the NRM, for grooming me. Today, when I leave this Parliament, I am leaving as a Member who has served up to the level of a Cabinet minister.

Finally, I thank God for the opportunity to serve His people in this capacity as a Member of Parliament. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, the honourable member on the Floor right now is also the Minister of Internal Affairs. During the statement made by the acting Leader of the Opposition, she mentioned two leaders from the Opposition who are being held in their homes, some being Members of this House. 

It is so sad that Parliament is going to close without our Leader of the Opposition here with us. One of those people whose houses have been surrounded by the police is hon. Ssemujju, who is supposed to be sworn in as a new Member of Parliament for Kira Municipality. I also went to see the Lord Mayor and his family this morning.

The most unfortunate thing is that the Minister of Internal Affairs has turned their homes into prisons and not even given them food. 

Would it not be procedurally right for the minister to use this same time to address the country about the plight of these leaders? I am interested in knowing about the welfare of these detainees and their families and whether police is also arranging to facilitate them with food. Would it not be procedurally right for her to find time now and tell the whole nation about the plight of these people?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether she is ready but she asked for an opportunity to say goodbye. I do not know what she has in mind.

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker, I want to say that at the next sitting of Parliament, the Minister of Internal Affairs will be able to bring a statement to this House regarding the issue that the honourable member has raised on the Floor.

MR BIREKERAAWO: Madam Speaker, as we close Parliament, the Minister of Internal Affairs is in charge, making a keynote address to this House; she cannot just say whatever she has said and does not answer any of these questions. The Leader of the Opposition was supposed to be here and now we are closing Parliament without him. 

Madam Speaker, in the 1960s, the Democratic Party, my party, suffered the same plight when in 1969 all the leaders of the party were put in Luzira without any charge. Don’t you think that if the minister is in charge, she should make a statement to the country and say that these people will be released tomorrow or any other day? She cannot just sit down when she is the Minister of Internal Affairs.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can we know the fate of our colleagues in this House?

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker, I want to state again that it is true that some of our colleagues are under close scrutiny and their homes are under surveillance by the police. That is true. We are aware, and the Member raising the issue is aware, that there is a defiance campaign going on and that some of our colleagues, also Members of this House, have made statements regarding the swearing-in ceremony that we shall be having tomorrow - the swearing-in of His Excellency the President. 

Based on intelligence information that the police received, some of these Members are under surveillance for reasons that are best known to the police. However, that does not mean that they will be denied their rights to associate indefinitely. I know that once the police are satisfied, they will be released. 

For a detailed statement, the Minister of Internal Affairs will make a statement, and I want to commit myself that this will be done by the next sitting of this House. For now, that is the information I have, Madam Speaker.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Internal Affairs has been talking to me for the last two days since the Leader of the Opposition was surrounded. I have been pleading for Members of Parliament that are to be sworn-in, including the Leader of the Opposition who is supposed to attend the swearing-in ceremony of H.E the President. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I have been pleading with the Minister of Internal Affairs and I assured her that I will make sure that the Leader of the Opposition attends tomorrow’s ceremony. She assured me that today, hon. Wafula Oguttu – the LOP – hon. Ssemujju and the Lord Mayor may be released. I would like that “may be” to be clarified to the House. This is because I am concerned that they have to be sworn in next week when they are due to be sworn-in. 

I would also want to be assured that the LOP will be able to attend the ceremony tomorrow to represent the Opposition. I want the Minister of Internal Affairs to put it on record that she lied to me when she said that she was doing something about it. Can the minister, please, clarify to the House what the clear position is? Thank you.

3.04
THE SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Abdu Katuntu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I get perturbed that, now, the freedom and rights of some citizens have to be negotiated between the Opposition Chief Whip and the minister. Where is the rule of law in this country?

If anybody is in breach of the law, the law naturally takes its course. If somebody has committed an offence, arraign that person before a court of law. Now, it is the discretion of the Minister of Internal Affairs! Somebody has to plead with her to release citizens of this country! This is very unfortunate. 

I would like to speak as the Shadow Attorney-General of this House that one thing, which the National Resistance Movement has been priding in is the restoration of the rule of law. This particular subject we are talking about is a complete negation of what you have been telling the entire country. All of us should be equal before the law, such that if you have committed an offence, it is not about the Minister of Internal Affairs, but the court of law. 

Families are asking for food, even the soldiers that are guarding them are eating. Kids are not going to school because you have barricaded the gates. Where do you expect these citizens, whom you have denied their rights, to get the food from? How do you turn people’s homes into prisons? It is illegal; it is unlawful! 

For heaven’s sake, if these gentlemen and ladies have committed an offence, nobody would be complaining here if they had been arraigned in court and remanded to Luzira because that is the law. However, you have turned people’s homes into prisons. It is the first time in the history of this country –(Interjection)- Yes, it used to happen one time during Amin’s time. Those who are familiar with that regime know it. (Laughter)

I would like the learned Attorney-General – if he were here – to clarify. We are missing our leader. We would like to give the Government the benefit of the doubt that the Leader of the Opposition has committed a crime. What we are demanding is, why doesn’t the law take its own course and have him arraigned in the court of law? We would not be complaining. Instead, you have decided to hold these people in their homes – non-gazetted places, reminiscent of Amin’s regime. 

This Government should be very annoyed with itself to be compared with an Amin regime.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister, do you have anything to say in response to what they are saying –(Mr Kaps Fungaroo rises)- No, you have just come in; sit down.

3.06
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Rose Akol): Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to put the record straight that matters of freedom for any citizen of Uganda are not matters of negotiations between anybody and I; they are matters of law. I would also like to say that hon. Cecilia called me to inquire as to whether the Leader of the Opposition and our other colleagues, she talked about, could be released.

I consulted with the Police who are in charge of law and order in this country. From that consultation, the information I have given here is what I was told.

As for the food, I will have to call back and find out whether what is being said here is true. Definitely, action will be taken to ensure that the families have access to their rights, especially the right to food, if that is the situation.

3.09
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative): Madam Speaker, in your communication, you mentioned the Bills handled by this Parliament. I would like to remind you that one of the very important Bills, the People with Disabilities (Amendment) Bill, was presented in this Parliament but not passed. Therefore, I request you to make an official pronouncement deferring this Bill to the Tenth Parliament, so that when the Tenth Parliament commences, we do not have to go through the hassle of having to re-table the Bill.

Madam Speaker, before you pronounce yourself on my request, I would like to say that there are usually two important days in the life of any Parliament: the first sitting and the last sitting. This is the last sitting of the Ninth Parliament. We should remember that there are more than 35 million people in this country; and we are just 300.

During the process of voting, very many people wanted to come to this Parliament, but they never did. Therefore, we need to remember that God loves us. Remember, my colleagues, that at the beginning of this Parliament we had a certain number, but some of our colleagues are not with us. Therefore, we should give thanks to God. In addition, for some of us who have returned to Parliament, we should continue to seek guidance from the Almighty God. For those who are not coming back, we know God will guide you.

Madam Speaker, a lot has been mentioned about the leadership of the next Parliament. I want to say that we are eagerly waiting for 19th May and we have already said that, we have someone who has been the best Speaker of this Parliament since the time of independence of Uganda. You are our Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga; we are sure you will return. 

Madam Speaker, we have enjoyed a very good and friendly working relationship with you since the beginning of this Parliament. I put on record my humble appreciation for the support you have given everybody.

Madam Speaker, once again, I request that you reflect on record that the Bill for the people with disabilities is referred to the Tenth Parliament.
Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: I just would like to reassure hon. Ndeezi and the other Members that in my proclamation, I will be talking about the Bill. He should not worry; the Bill will be saved for the next parliament.

3.12
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

In 1996, when I was first elected to this House, I was the fourth Member of Parliament for Bunyole County –(Interjections)- I am the fourth and neither have I been the first since Independence – and there will be another after me. I expected to leave, but I did not know it would be so soon. (Laughter) However, it has come and we must leave, but the business of the House must continue.

For the 20 years I have been here, I have had an opportunity to serve as a backbencher where I rose to the level of the dean of the backbench, silent though, but enjoying and doing my work. 

I have also had an opportunity to serve as ex-committee Chairperson, member of the commission and recently, my political party invited me to go to Kyankwanzi to talk to the new members of Parliament, especially, about the dynamics of the backbench.

Hopefully, I interested many of them who may not have the opportunity to get the frontbench to know that, after all, much of the business is conducted through the backbench. This is the hope I would like to give everybody and thank honourable members for the opportunity we have had to serve this country together.

Every opportunity you get is a continuous contribution; there is nobody who will be the ultimate or the alpha and omega. Whatever opportunity you get, you must build on the foundation of what others have already made a contribution to. I would like to thank you.

However, as I conclude, Madam Speaker, there are a few things I would like to raise to your leadership, especially, in the Tenth Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, you know that the public during your tenure enjoyed live broadcast of the proceedings of the plenary. I do not know whether this is still continuing. If it is not, what is the best way Parliament is going to use to ensure that the people of Uganda continue following and enjoying the vibrancy within this august House. This is a request I’m making on behalf of outsiders who do not have the opportunity to come here to listen to proceedings, but through the media, they can have an opportunity to participate.

Madam Speaker, I also know that towards the end of last year, this House amended the Parliamentary Pension Act. If you look outside Parliament, you can see the whole front is littered by banks –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You can conclude in one minute.

MR DOMBO: If those banks knew that members of Parliament were that risky, they would not be offering security free loans. Somebody offered me Shs 450 million at six per cent interest rate. I do not know what the managers of the Pension Fund are doing to ensure that Members can partake of this to ensure they get better returns of their money.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like to congratulate you to have been nominated as candidate for the leadership of the next Parliament. This is a recognition that we have, after all, been doing a good job, which everybody appreciates.

As I sit down, I would like to pay tribute to my family without which, I would not have been this successful to serve for the last 20 years. May God bless you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I have seen those who would like to speak. Let us do other subjects. I will give you an opportunity to use half a minute to say goodbye so that we are able to do both.

Now, concerning the pension - when the Prime Minister comes, you will start and then he will speak; he is coming to say goodbye as well.

Honourable members, concerning the Pension Fund, the regulations are almost completed. We are mindful of the invasion by the banks here, but the regulations to govern the process have been designed and soon, they will be completed.

About the FM radio and television; as you are aware, we have been working on that. By November this year, we shall have our own FM radio here transmitting the proceedings here and a TV will follow. 

Let me give the Deputy Prime Minister a chance to speak and we commiserate with you about the loss of your son. We informed the House, but we would like to welcome you back.

3.18
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank everybody who has sent condolences to me for the loss of our son. I would request that I am excused from explaining what happened because it will hurt me more. I hope I can be allowed not to talk about what happened, but I accept and recognise all your prayers and condolences.

After that, Madam Speaker, I beg my Prime Minister to allow me say something. In my capacity as the Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business in Parliament, I have studied and experienced so many things in this House for the last five years.

One of the things is: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and your Deputy for your leadership, and I congratulate you both for retaining your positions which is the right decision that has caused this stability. This status quo is heading in the right direction to further stability in this country. 

Therefore, I am very happy that you and your Deputy retained your positions. Those of you who still would like to stand for the Deputy Speaker, I pray that you also stand down for the sake of the country and let the status quo –(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, protect me from some of these situations.

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would like to again from my study, thank some colleagues from both sides. For the last five years, they contributed and you can see from their contribution that they have spent nights making research on the subjects they are talking about. 

Therefore, I would like to appeal to most of us who are debating motions to study subjects brought to the Floor of this House so that we build this country. There are some of us who have become so good at making points of orders, making it difficult for others to contribute to the debate in this House. However, I must also say that I am grateful, Madam Speaker, you have prevailed over those several points of orders- (Interruption) 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I know that when we stand here to speak, we follow the Rules of Procedure, which are the guiding principle of participation in this House. Is it in order for the Leader of Government Business to stand here and insinuate that we are behaving like kindergarten children? He is implying that we just stand up and shout order, yet we actually call order in accordance with the Rules of Procedure? 

Is it, therefore, in order for the Leader of Government Business, a senior citizen in this country, who also happens to be my relative to shame me today?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Prime Minister was only saying that he receives many of those things. That is his worry; please conclude. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am also happy that at least the last point of order came from my relative. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I also want to thank the whole of the Ninth Parliament for their contribution towards the development of this country in the last five years. Several Bills have been passed, which shows that we have been doing a very good job. I want to thank all of them for that. All this is due to your able leadership as well as your deputy. 

I heard some complaints about our leaders of the opposition; the Prime Minister has now come and he will talk about it. However, I would like to make a few comments on what the Prime Minister may probably not know that I was going to say. This is so that he is free to exclude it and also I am held responsible for what I say. 

There is an English proverb that says, “A stitch in time saves nine.” That is what is happening. Prevention is better than cure. This country is under threat – defiance, and we do not know what is going to happen.  We do not know who is a threat and who is not. Therefore, the police are acting on intelligence basis. That is why some people are being used as a stitch in time to save nine; that is if we all understand that saying. We should not worry a lot about what is happening. 

Finally, those colleagues who did not make it to the Tenth Parliament, I wish them a safe journey home. (Laughter) I also pray for them that they find their level at home - I will sincerely miss some particular colleagues like my honourable member from Serere. If I knew she was in trouble, I would have gone to save her, at least for the Tenth Parliament. (Laughter) However, she did not inform me. Let us pray that we shall be alive; next election, please keep in touch, we shall work together. Thank you, colleagues.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Deputy Prime Minister. Since the Prime Minister has come, I think we might as well finish this and then go to other work. 

3.28
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to say a few words and reinforce what my brother Gen. Moses Ali has just said. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to salute you and your colleague, the Deputy Speaker, for guiding the Ninth Parliament very well. (Applause) You know when one is scanning the media from time to time, you see some parliaments where they exchange blows, throw chairs and do all sorts of things. However, the Parliament of Uganda has been more civil than many of those heavily violent parliaments. We have had our own small scuffles, but those have been containable and have not left significant injuries. The Speaker has led us to even be able to sort out those situations. 

We, on the Government side, are particularly happy. Even when we have come in at some awkward times, sometimes late, you have been able to understand some of our hardships and have accommodated us. I also believe that this has happened on the Opposition side as well. You have, therefore, provided solid leadership and it is no surprise that both sides of the House have indeed decided to endorse you for future leadership. 

Let me also take this opportunity to salute Gen. Moses Ali, the Second Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business. He has actually shouldered most of the responsibilities in the House for this Parliament, and does so very well. You know, I am not very surprised because this man has enormous experience, both as a political leader and as a military general. By the way, in case Parliament was not informed, he only recently graduated with a Master’s Degree in Intelligence.

Therefore, when we are talking about intelligence work and “defiance” being followed closely, this man is talking from an authoritative source. I am glad that you shared your expertise with us in the House.

As you heard, it is unfortunate that only several days ago, our comrade, Gen. Moses Ali and his family, lost a 30 year-old son. My brother, the House and all of us condole with you.

The Government Chief Whip is not here but let me also deeply appreciate her work and also the work and solidarity of my Cabinet colleagues on the frontbench who have stood with the Leader of Government Business to ensure that the work of the House and that of Government is heard very well. I salute the Government Chief Whip and the frontbench.

I see the person holding the chair of the Leader of the Opposition but let me also personally pay tribute and deeply appreciate my brother, hon. Wafula Oguttu, the substantive Leader of the Opposition, in the Ninth Parliament. In my view, I think he has courageously and ably handled difficult issues. He and I and some of our colleagues have had to have meetings, even outside these Chambers, in order to address certain political and legislative hurdles. In my view, that type of cooperation has enabled the work of the House to go on as smoothly as possible.

Therefore, cooperation between the two sides of the House becomes a critical factor and has been a critical factor in the success of the Ninth Parliament.

I would also like to pay tribute to my colleagues on both sides of the House: Members of Parliament, without you Parliament would not be there; we would be paralysed. However, the cooperation, even sometimes the unanimity that has developed from certain issues, has enabled the work of the House to move as fast as possible.

I salute colleagues for that maturity and for putting Uganda’s interests first in many of the issues that we have discussed. Occasionally, there have been hot exchanges but I suppose, when you want something good, you have to shake it hard and make sure that you scrutinise every angle. I think those exchanges have been part of the parliamentary scrutiny to ensure that our legislative outputs are indeed in the interest of the people of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, let me also salute the Clerk to Parliament and her team. (Applause) We appreciate what you have done in giving us and the Speaker of Parliament support. You have facilitated our work and as a result, we have been more effective parliamentarians. This would not have happened if we did not have that facilitation from you. 

The incomplete work will continue to be done by the next Parliament. We could not have done everything but I think that this Parliament has, in my view, done a lot of legislative work. It has done a lot of investigations in many areas and I think that the committees of Parliament have endeavoured to do their work. I imagine that the Tenth Parliament will be able to learn from the example of this very Parliament.

We have also had some bad and difficult moments and these have included the loss of our comrades, Members of Parliament. Several of our comrades have passed on and let me request you, Madam Speaker, to give us the authority to stand for a moment of silence to remember our comrades of the Ninth Parliament who have not been able to complete it because the Almighty God has called them.  

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

DR RUGUNDA: May the Almighty God rest their souls in eternal peace.

The last two comments that I would like to make is to thank the Parliamentary Commission, which brings together Parliament and the Executive. The Parliamentary Commission has done its work well and given general direction, guidance and support to this House.

In my concluding remarks, I would like to thank His Excellency, the President of Uganda, who has given full support to this House in its performance of all legislative duties and ensured that the people of Uganda get what they deserve from this Parliament. I wish everybody the best as we leave the Ninth Parliament. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. Honourable members, as you will appreciate, this is not a usual day; it only happens once every five years. As such, we could not strictly follow the time table and the Order Paper.

Let us now go back to item three and invite the Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development, if he is ready, to make his statement very quickly. We shall only use 30 minutes for that because we have other work to handle.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.38
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Government acknowledges that labour markets abroad have continued to provide employment opportunities for Ugandans in the short run, as the country develops its capacity to generate sufficient jobs for its labour force.

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is mandated to promote decent employment opportunities and labour productivity. The National Employment Policy for Uganda, 2011 provides for externalisation of labour as a key priority area for Government.

In a bid to manage unemployment and maximise the gains of labour migration, Government initiated the Externalisation of Labour Programme and this programme is regulated by Statutory Instrument No. 62 of 2005 and the Employment, Recruitment of Ugandan Migrant Workers Abroad Regulations, 2005.

Under the regulations, private companies are licensed to source and formally place Ugandans to work abroad and indeed as of 10th December, 53 companies had been licensed and as we talk, about 59 have been licensed. The number of Ugandans that have gone through this arrangement as at 31 July 2015, were 47,451. These had secured jobs through the programme of licensed companies. 

Madam Speaker, Government has all along put emphasis on the protection of the rights and promotion of welfare of migrant workers going to work especially in the Middle East where some have been mistreated. 

Ugandans have been migrating for employment abroad through three channels: through licensed recruitment companies, individuals sourcing jobs for themselves, and through unlicensed companies and individuals.

The biggest challenge has been that a big number of Ugandans have either been going out on their own in search of employment opportunities or have fallen victim of exploitation to individuals/unlicensed agencies both here and abroad.

In order to minimise this, Government, on 7 July 2015, signed a bi-lateral labour agreement with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the key provisions of this agreement include -

    1. A mutually acceptable recruitment and deployment system; 
    2. Recruitment being done through approved recruitment agencies;
    3. Prohibition of charges or deductions from the salaries of employees;
    4. Rights of recourse to competent authorities in case of contractual disputes; 
    5. Legal measures against recruitment agencies, which violate the applicable laws. 

The two countries agreed on a Standard Employment Contract, which shall govern employment in Saudi Arabia of Ugandan workers and which shall be followed by all employers and Ugandan household workers in Saudi Arabia. 

The employers shall provide the employees with the following: 

    1. Return air ticket;
    2. Identity cards on arrival;
    3. Decent accommodation;
    4. Health insurance package;
    5. Transport to and from work;
    6. Eight working hours a day beyond which the employee shall be paid overtime; 
    7. A minimum wage of $ 200; and 
    8. Facilitate the issuance of exit visas to employees upon contract completion or in emergency as the situation may require.

As per the agreement with Saudi Arabia, the term “domestic workers” or “household workers” refers to workers employed by the household. It includes all occupations ranging from professionals, doctors, pilots, accountants, firm managers, nurses, therapy specialists, among others to the lowest occupation like gardeners, houseboys and housemaids.

In the implementation of the programme, a Joint Technical Committee was formed composed of the representatives of the following institutions:

    1. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Affairs;
    2. The Ministry of Internal Affairs;
    3. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs;
    4. The External Security Organisation;
    5. The Internal Security Organisation;
    6. The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

The technical committee performs the following:

    1. To coordinate between the two parties in the implementation of this agreement and take the necessary measures in this regard; 
    2. Periodically review, assess and monitor the implementation of the agreement;
    3. Conduct consultative meetings in the Republic of Uganda and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia alternately on a date and place mutually agreed by both parties;
    4. Make the necessary recommendations to resolve disputes arising from the implementation and interpretation of the provisions of the agreement or amendments to this agreement as may be necessary; 
    5. Periodically review and amend the Standard Employment Contract as and when necessary.

Madam Speaker, bearing in mind the inadequate capacity existing within the Government to monitor migrant workers in countries of employment, for the case of Saudi Arabia, Government signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with SAMAOC Trading Services Establishment in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to complement the efforts of the ministry and the Embassy of Uganda in Riyadh. 

The purpose of the MoU is to -

    1. provide for a one-stop intervention mechanism to address labour matters in Uganda and potential export markets in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. At the centre is a regulatory platform that will generate information for decision making as well as mechanisms for guiding the countries’ labour policy, law and regulations;
    2. help the Government of Uganda provide high quality labour opportunities with all attendant benefits to households and the entire economy;
    3. provide for mechanisms to ensure transparency and accountability with special focus on the protection of the rights of Ugandan migrant labour while on duty overseas; and
    4. conduct periodic monitoring and supervision missions with a view to ensuring compliance with the bilateral agreement signed.

Madam Speaker, bilateral agreements are an important mechanism for interstate cooperation to protect migrant workers, match labour demand and supply, manage migration and regulate recruitment.

There are discussions underway with other countries to make sure that we sign similar agreements with them such as Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain, Oman, Kuwait and recently, Jordan.

Madam Speaker, despite of the bilateral, there was a big outcry about abuses of some of our workers, particularly in Saudi Arabia. As a result of this big outcry, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development slapped a ban, particularly on household workers going to Saudi Arabia. We have put in place a committee to look into the nature of these abuses, find out the causes and give recommendations as to the best way forward.

The committee that was put in place, an inter-sectoral committee, did its work and produced a report. As a result of this report, we have recently started re-engaging the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia with discussions to make sure that some of the gaps that have led to some of these abuses, which appeared in the press are closed. Thereafter, we can continue implementing the bilateral.

Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table a copy of the bilateral agreement. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us have a few comments. Since the agreement is here, we shall send it to our committee of the Tenth Parliament to study. I do not know whether we can alter it because they have already signed it.

3.48
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for bringing the agreement. I am aware that we are not yet acquainted with what is in the agreement. 

However, I would like to understand from the minister: are the people taken out there on contract? Is that part of the agreement so that we can know whether when our people go there, they can come back?

Madam Speaker, whereas I recognise that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is part of the group, when these people die abroad, the Government does not commit herself in the transportation of the dead bodies. I would like to know from the agreement what the status of our people is because we are aware that there was someone who died many years ago and up to now, the family has not been able to transport the body back. Could the minister clarify? Thank you.

3.49
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise on a point of clarification. I would like to know from the minister if, at the signing of the agreement, our ambassadors were aware of this. Are the ambassadors going to get detailed information about the places where our people are going to be sent, so that they can make follow up? 

This is because when these people reach their destinations, they are mistreated and as a result, they run away.  At the missions, they are not offered help because the missions deny knowledge of them. 

Therefore, honourable minister, are the embassies aware of those places where our Ugandans are going? Can they be able to follow up so that they are kept abreast with what is going on? Thank you.

3.51
MR KEZEKIA MBOGO (Independent, Budaka County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we speak, an advert is already running on Bukedde about recruitment to Saudi Arabia and United Arab Emirates. I am saddened to hear from the minister that the Government is yet to have an agreement with the United Arab Emirates, Jordan and other countries.

Madam Speaker, the minister has clearly stated that they are paid $200 but the adverts indicate that they are going to be paid Shs 3 million. Many Ugandans are running to give bribes to go but when they reach there, they are not paid, their passports are confiscated and they suffer.

I think we need a comprehensive policy that will address the issue of unemployment in our country which is making these young men and women go for greener pastures and eventually end up in slavery. 

Honourable minister, we need a pro-active policy that will address this issue and ensure that our people are employed within the country instead of being taken out and ending up as slaves. Thank you very much.

3.52
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this statement and for signing the agreement. However, I am wondering whether they only dealt with Saudi Arabia and yet there are many other countries who have been taking our people to suffer. The newest one, China, has many of our people rotting in their prisons. I am wondering whether you are thinking of handling other countries other than Saudi Arabia.

Madam Speaker, permit me to seek for some guidance. Much as I appreciate that there is a lot of business that has to be handled, today is the last day of the Ninth Parliament and when I look around, those of us who are not coming back are not so many. Can you give us some time to speak our last words because we are not sure whether - some might bounce back like in my experience, I have been coming and going but some might never have a chance to come back.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, many Members who are not coming back have already spoken. I think you came in a bit late but I did say that those who I know are leaving will get a chance to say something and say goodbye at the same time because there is work, which we have to do. We shall organise the party later, do not worry.

MS KABASHARIRA: No, I am actually not talking about the party. Can I now use two more minutes?

THE SPEAKER: That is what I said; that I will give you an opportunity. 

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to appreciate the people of Ntungamo who gave me the chance to serve them. Actually I was the first woman Member of Parliament since Ntungamo was created; it was the 39th district in this country.

I thank them for giving me the mandate and I also appreciate that it has been a habit that they give you then they say, “Now, rest a bit.” We are only two people playing that game. 

I would also like to appreciate my colleagues and you, Madam Speaker, for steering this Parliament very well and your deputy as well. I am happy that the NRM is maintaining the status quo and I hope that it will remain like that. We appreciate all this.

I thank the Lord that has kept you there for us, more so the women. You have given us that name and we are so proud and happy about it. 

Madam Speaker, in my maiden speech I thanked the Eighth Parliament for creating many districts and therefore creating many representatives. However, I also said that I think it is high time we thought of revisiting the way we create districts. It is unfortunate that even in the Ninth Parliament, we have created more and we are going to have about 426 Members in a Chamber that was built for 80 people.

Madam Speaker, you are giving us two minutes to speak but you realise that in two minutes, one cannot express oneself and talk for the constituency. My humble request is that in Tenth Parliament, you revisit that. Women represent districts. I represent a district, which has 250,000 voters but I represent them very well and equally to the person who represents Ruhaama, Kajara and the municipality.

Why can’t we allow two people to represent a district rather than having the constituency - because I am sorry to tell you that we do much more work or equal work to these men and yet we represent a bigger area. With that experience, it is just representation. Why don’t we change and have two people to represent a district? 

I know people want the services. We can leave the districts to remain as districts in the local government but in Parliament, we have only two representatives because the money paid for Members of Parliament is too much for the Government. No wonder the public is quarrelling out there.

Therefore, I beg that the Tenth Parliament thinks about this because I know that the urge for increasing the districts will not stop because people think that when they get districts, they get services. However, representation is representation. No wonder that is why they demand that you work like a local government chairperson when you are actually a Member who is supposed to speak for them.

I will leave it for you, Madam Speaker. After all, you will be chairing and you also represent a district and you do it even better than men. Why can’t we have just one man and one woman and we represent them? I leave it for the Tenth Parliament –(Member timed out.)

3.58
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the paper that he has presented and also for signing the agreement. 

However, since the minister is the head of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, does he have track of the employees who are outside Uganda? Do we have a databank? 

Now that we have the national identity card, do you keep track of people who are going out; the housemaids or different categories of people so that the country knows where their people are, particularly those who go for low employment opportunities and especially those who are tortured? Do you work with the Ministry of Internal Affairs? Do you work separately? How do you ensure that our people are protected? 

You talked about Saudi Arabia. We have Ugandans who are abroad in many countries but it looks like your interest was focused on Saudi Arabia because that is where the problem was magnified. What do you have in place to ensure that even in those other countries where our people are suffering, like Malaysia, they are protected, especially the women who are sexually harassed?

I remember that before we entered into politics, there was a case that I was following in Libya. A girl was being sexually abused using a dog but I lost track because I got involved in politics. Those are the people who are deceived and when they reach their destination, they are abused sexually using various objects. 

Do we know the age of –(Member timed out.)

4.01
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Madam Speaker, I would like to know from the minister how he defines this relationship of a person recruiting another and taking him or her to another country for sale to an employer. I define this as modern day slavery. I do not know if he has the same opinion with me. 

These agents, the 54 so-called companies that you have now licensed are trading in people. They take them, set them up, raise a market and sell them to employers.

Secondly, under what policy was this agreement made? Do we have a policy on labour export as a country? I would also like to know the arrangements that the ministry is making to assist these people in case of imprisonment in those foreign countries as we have had so many similar cases. 

Lastly, some of the returnees have committed suicide. I do not know if the ministry has taken note of this. If so, what do they intend to do to address this problem?

4.02
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I listened very carefully to the minister’s statement and I was shocked that this country could sign an agreement for $ 200 for Ugandans to go and suffer in those countries.

I spent about 25 years working abroad and I have seen how people suffer. How could this country allow to export its people to go and be treated like slaves for $200? This ministry should have tried to find out how much they pay the Bangladesh, the Sri-Lankans, the Egyptians and the Filipinos who work in Saudi Arabia. 

They could have also contacted the International Migration of Workers Organisation (IMO) of the UN to get the rate of how much one is paid per hour. However, it is shocking that Ugandans are suffering and are being treated as slaves in most of these Arab countries.

Madam Speaker, I spoke on this Floor last time about 28 Ugandans who had been incarcerated in Abu Dhabi and one had died in prison. What did the Government do? And you still want to sign agreements with Jordan and so on? 

I was in the US recently and when they pass the amount payable per hour, it is across the board for everybody. I keep wondering whether you know that Africans are treated in a different category in most of these Arab countries. This is a true story.

In the Scandinavian countries, where I spent a number of years, the stipulated amount is for everybody to be paid per hour. However in the Arab world, Ugandans are paid differently. Even Kenyans are paid better than Ugandans and you accept that? It is very disappointing that you have gone to the extent - (Member timed out.)

4.05
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Listening to the honourable minister, the amiable hon. Muruli, I was thinking that this particular subject raises issues of wider consideration of the domestic workers’ industry, not only abroad but here. 

The majority of domestic workers are actually within this country and what is the policy regarding their integrity, dignity and remuneration? Many young girls are suffering in our homes. We pay them peanuts, we sexually abuse them - especially those looking at me. It was a joke, Madam Speaker.

Therefore, before you go to a country and start demanding for a minimum wage, do we have a minimum wage for domestic workers in this country? Actually, it is our policy that we do not have a minimum wage yet we are busy going to those countries saying we need a minimum wage. You do not bargain on equal basis. They just see our people as desperate and, therefore, vulnerable to abuse and underpayment. 

Therefore, before hon. Muruli Mukasa goes around to these countries, you need to sort out the problem right here. Just look at the numbers, how many are you taking out anyway? They are very few. These companies that you are licensing are profit-making companies. Who is paying them? Is it Saudi Arabia paying them? Eventually the cost comes to this poor girl who is being exported. 

Hon. Nambooze calls it modern slave trade and that is the truth. This is just selling people. We are taking advantage of the vulnerability of these young people and the desperate situation that they are in. Now we have companies here making money off these little girls that are subjected to the pleasure of dogs. It is disgusting.

4.08
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank my colleagues, honourable members, who are here and who are going to be in the Tenth Parliament. For those who may not be there, we shall still meet as we are all Ugandans.  

The statement of the minister was that after noting that there was a problem, especially with our sons and daughters, brothers and sisters in Saudi Arabia, you suspended the travel of Ugandans to that country and engaged with the Saudis. What is the position of the Government of Saudi Arabia on this matter? We have the Embassy of Saudi Arabia here. Why don’t we organise an interface with them here if they have Members of Parliament in their country? They can also be invited to come here or we can find a place and talk over this matter. Why should it happen like this? All the time people are crying, especially Ugandans. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to request the minister to give us a typical agreement signed between a Ugandan worker and a company, say in Saudi Arabia. Some of the people I interacted with hinted that once you have left this country and you reach there, the terms and conditions of work may not be favourable but you are not allowed to enter into another agreement to change the job and move to another employment until after five years. You may see that your conditions of work are bad and nearby, there is an alternative but you are limited in making a choice to transfer from one job to another.

These are some of the things, which need to be factored into the agreement between us and Saudi Arabia, that the labour market in Saudi Arabia or wherever the Ugandans go, should be as free as ours here. As long as you qualify for the job –(Member timed out.) 

4.11
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to congratulate you upon your re-appointment by the people of Uganda not only by NRM because the people of Uganda, Madam Speaker, were for you. If the NRM made a mistake, they would pay a price. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the statement, which the honourable minister has given, has a number of glaring gaps. First, the joint technical committee that will implement this programme, from the onset, excludes the ministry, which is more competent in this country in terms of labour, civil service; the Ministry of Public Service is not included.

However, we are quick to bring in the technical team; external and internal securities who do not have the competencies of doing what is supposed to be done. The Ministry of Public Service should have been the first on the joint technical committee because they are better placed in handling matters to do with labour.

Secondly, $200 is about Shs 600,000 and the cost of living in these countries is high. A total of Shs 600,000 in an Arab country is like paying someone here in Uganda Shs 20,000 or 50,000; which money will not transform the life of the person who is suffering far from his or her family.

The principle would be that standards are set first; for example, where does one sign the agreements from to take up the job? Do you sign it while still in Uganda or you sign when you have reached there?

It would be fair that the people who are taken, would have access to their employment contracts while still here so that they see and gauge whether they are able to survive and take up the jobs; instead of going omnibus and signing from an environment where you will not access your passport for as long as you are out of your country because it has been confiscated in the foreign country. Madam Speaker, I feel that – (Member timed out.)

4.14
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like the minister and Government of Uganda to appreciate that if externalisation of labour were a coin, one side of it would read “externalisation of labour, therefore, jobs and opportunity.”

The other side that would be the most unfortunate would read, “Trafficking in persons.” The $200 speaks a lot about the value that has not been mentioned; what is done with that $200 is ultimately trapping this person into a position where the person is being trafficked and therefore, the global trend of getting more money by selling people who are vulnerable, have no recourse; cannot go back home; cannot find justice and that is where the money is in this animal called “externalisation of labour.”

I would, therefore, like to ask the minister and Government to do another thing beyond the contracts that you are signing. Please, empower the missions out there to follow up the people who are trafficked in this country; all our missions have expressed helplessness even when they get a call, they do not have money to follow up these people.

The embassies are powerless; there is no money to the extent that sometimes, the ambassadors and high commissioners have to use their personal resources to follow up these individuals. Is it possible among the stakeholders that you are putting in place, to place a central role on the missions as your eye out there?

Madam Speaker, if it were possible before the companies release Ugandans to their jobs wherever they are going to be, first, let there be a mechanism that requires them to report to the nearest mission, they are documented and that mission is facilitated with their contact information. 

If things go bad, you know you can get back home to Serere and you do not die there. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Mr Magyezi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Before Hon. Magyezi comes, honourable minister, you will have to explain to us; what is the minimum level of education of these people you are exporting?

4.17
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. The statement raises two key policy questions; one is the foreign policy of the country; that is how Government of Uganda relates with the other governments. Secondly, the policy on employment; how we handle the issue of unemployment. In regard to the first question, the minister told us in the statement that because we do not have the capacity to monitor implementation of the agreement we signed with Saudi Arabia, they contracted a company, which is called Samaoc Trading Services to do what Government should be doing. I have googled this company, honourable minister, I hope you have your iPad here and you can have a look at it. This company deals in animal feeds, grains, fertilisers, alkaline, petrochemical products and it is based in Riyadh. 

Honourable minister, we are dealing with a question about human resource, labour and you contract a company to do with animal feeds and fertilisers to help us to monitor the situation of our labour - I get surprised. How much are we paying in terms of the contract sum because we have contracted this company to do this job?

How much of this would have gone to build the capacity of our embassy to do what hon. Alaso is suggesting? Why didn’t we put an extra two to three staff in the embassy so that our people can report to the Uganda Embassy? How do you contract a company in Saudi Arabia to help you monitor the ways of your own people when this company deals with petro-chemical products? As for me, in terms of our foreign policy, we need to re-examine what we are doing.

At the heart of this, is the problem of unemployment, that our own people do not have jobs; so, what are the policy options that the ministry has advised Government to take - to sell off the people to other countries?

I do not know whether he will still be the minister but we need to ask Government to tell us our policy option; what do we put on table for Ugandans to address the problem of unemployment. How many people are unemployed? What are the strategies and regularly give us the figures like other countries do so that we know how much we are doing to address this problem.

However, if your policy option is to sell away the people who are not employed, then we are heading for serious challenges.

4.20
MR KENNETH ONGALO-OBOTE (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I wish to congratulate you upon bouncing back as our Speaker in the Tenth Parliament. I also congratulate myself for bouncing back too although it was not easy. (Laughter) 

I sit on the Committee on Foreign Affairs and we have had problems with expatriation of labour to foreign countries. 

These companies that the Government gets into agreements with are paid a lot of money to get cheap labour from Uganda. This is why our workers are paid little money because most of the money goes to these companies. Yet, they take no responsibility whatsoever for these workers once they reach in the foreign countries. 

For example, I have always wondered why the Government cannot agree with these companies that they will be responsible for repatriating these workers if they die abroad. Often, they are taken abroad, they die there; the embassy learns about them for the first time and when relatives in Uganda appeal to the embassy for help to bring the bodies back – and these companies that make a lot of money from these people bear no responsibility whatsoever for bringing these bodies.

I have also wondered often why these companies cannot be required to register every worker they take abroad with our missions. Our missions are ready – they have the capacity but they cannot force these companies to register the workers with them. Therefore, they are not aware of our workers who are in foreign countries and are being mistreated. Things will not change unless these companies are made responsible for that.

Finally, most of these people – just recently, I interacted with four of them who were telling me that once they are taken, for example, to Saudi Arabia or UAE, the first thing that happens is that their passports are retained and they will not be returned to them until they have worked for the duration of their contract – maybe five years or so. So, what some of these people do is come back to Uganda and then claim that they have lost their passports so that they can go back and using their contacts, they get other jobs there. (Member timed out.)

4.22
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, honourable minister, for the statement. I had an experience when I went to the UAE and met some of the Ugandans there. One of the challenges we noticed that the minister needs to work on, is the need for HIV testing before you allow our boys and girls to go. Once they are tested HIV-positive while there, they are taken to an isolation area where nobody is allowed to interact with them. So, it is a very big problem; some of our boys and girls are there in isolation and nobody knows what is happening to them.

Sometimes, when they get to know that you were not tested but you have got a job and it is later discovered that you are HIV-positive, you get tortured by the person who has employed you. These are some of the girls who run away without payment and end up on the streets selling their bodies. Therefore, there is a very big requirement that you, as a ministry, need to undertake. Before you send our girls out, test them for HIV.

Another claim, when we met them was – true, hon. Alaso talked about it; the Ambassador of Uganda to Dubai, who is the mother to the former presidential candidate, Ms Maureen Kyalya, has never in any way interacted with the people whom she is representing there. She has never called them for any interaction and so, she has never known their problem. We need to have ambassadors who are motherly and have Uganda at heart. 

THE SPEAKER: You have made a serious allegation; I am trying to think back to my conversation with that ambassador to see if she indeed has never met the Ugandans.  You know she cannot speak here. I think you should not cite names because she cannot come here to defend herself.  But my reports are different; that is why my head is a bit confused.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, I would like to assist my colleague here; it is not true that the ambassador in the UAE has not talked to these workers. I can give a practical example myself; when I went to the UAE, I found the ambassador had called some of the workers there and she was talking to them. We spent a good time with those workers. So, it is not true that she has never talked to them. And she has been on record helping some of those workers who have had problems with their employers. I would like to correct that impression that she has – (Hon. Members rose.)

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The critical information in this matter is the aspect of facilitating the ambassador to be in position to monitor the whereabouts of these workers and to know what is happening to them because if you read the statement critically, on page 4, these workers are required to observe the laws of the other land; to observe the traditions, customs and culture of the other land. 

This means when you go there, you cease to be yourself. Is the minister in position to negotiate with the employers that when these people come to your countries, as much as they must abide by your laws, they have their own customs to preserve? Do they cease to be Ugandans? The issue was about facilitating the ambassador to be in position to reach out to these people. Meeting them once in a while is okay, but does she have enough funds? That was the issue.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we should understand the problems of our people who go abroad; those who go legally register with the mission but those who go illegally do not want to be known so they will not register. Actually, the majority do not want the embassy to know where they are. It is only when they are in trouble that they come or send messages. I have been to the UAE with that ambassador; she gave me part of the information I brought here from testimonies she has received and the experience she has had. But the important thing, hon. Kiiza mentioned; do we give her enough money? The UAE has seven states; so, does she go to Fujairah, Ras al-Khaimah, Ajman, or Dubai? Let us try to assist them to do their work. 

4.28
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of Ugandans who had been incarcerated in Abu Dhabi came to this Floor and we asked the Minister of Foreign Affairs here, but he had no information. And it is the obligation of the mission – whether a Ugandan has registered with it or not – it is the consular service’s duty to see that if a Ugandan is sitting in prison anywhere, you have to go and pay a visit to that Ugandan. However, we had Ugandans who were in prison in Abu Dhabi and the mission did not know.

Therefore, it is important that the missions are facilitated to visit all those Ugandans who are in prison. That is the work of the mission. The ministry here had no record or report at all. I asked the minister whether he gets reports from missions but they do not send any reports at all because they do not know what they are doing in those missions.

4.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Madam Speaker, I just want to add to what hon. Muruli Mukasa mentioned. I was in Abu Dhabi recently and our ambassador to the UAE invited about 1,000 Ugandans to meet the President. In view of what we are discussing, these people even have an office and they meet. All those who are working in UAE are registered – whether they went there legally or illegally. They know each other because for them, the issue of going legally or illegally does not arise. They are already there and they are Ugandans. That is all.

Therefore, they have an office, which they usually contribute to for rent and I do not think the ambassador does not know her people who are there. She knows them and they are registered. They even have an office, which coordinates them in all the seven Emirates states but in Dubia. Thank you very much.

4.31 
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga East Constituency, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I also take the opportunity to congratulate you for being nominated by our party to be the Speaker of the Tenth Parliament? I am 100 per cent sure that the Tenth Parliament will endorse this decision.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister and Government for taking the initiative to sign the agreement with the Government of Saudi Arabia and I hope they sign with other Governments where Ugandans are working.

We should realise that the export of labour is very important for this country’s economy. However, we need to balance the needs of our economy versus the need to protect Ugandans who are working abroad. Whereas they have an important contribution to the economy, it is also important to protect them as individuals and citizens of this country. These agreements have to be reviewed from time to time so that they are up to date, and anything that has been observed out in the field that affects the agreement should be included when they are reviewed.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the people of Kiboga for sending me to this Parliament and I hope they send me again in the Eleventh Parliament. (Laughter)

4.33
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Given all these challenges in these undertakings that the minister has just been describing, and what the Members have been talking about, I just want to find out from the minister whether he has looked at the right of establishment within the EAC Protocol, on the Common Market and to what extent he has exploited opportunities under this protocol.

There has always been a tendency to sign such protocols on the last day. Ministries quickly look at these protocols and then sign. Under that protocol, Ugandans have a right of establishment within the EAC but we have to proactively take advantage of this opportunity.

I would like to find out the strategies in place in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the one that is responsible for providing for our labour, to know how much they have done in this area; to take advantage of this provision in the EAC Protocol on the Common Market. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there is something in the agreement, which I find difficult to appreciate. That is the definition of a domestic worker. Here you say that in Saudi Arabia, a domestic worker includes doctors, pilots, accountants, farm managers, houseboys and house maids, etcetera. 

Saudi Arabia is a member of the United Nations (UN) and UN defines a domestic worker. Therefore, if you allow Saudi Arabia to define your accountants as domestic workers, they will pay them $200. We think that a domestic worker is defined by the UN and we should, therefore, stick by that. Otherwise, this is how our people get shortchanged. I hope you will explain that one.

4.35
MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to seek clarification from the minister on page 2 of the presentation. You talked about the policy of Government that was adopted in 2011 that provides for prioritisation of externalisation of labour as the key priority.

Madam Speaker, this is a distortion of our policy. It is the duty of Government to provide jobs for its nationals. You cannot prioritise exportation of your own labour force. This is an area I am seeking clarification on, if that is the key priority to export our labour force.

Secondly, I would like to know whether the ministry has mechanisms to do due diligence on the 53 licensed companies that recruit our people for external jobs. Have you done due diligence on them? Have you been able to establish their integrity in the way they do their work? That is important and will give us the confidence that these people are being handled fairly.

Thirdly, I would like to know whether the 47,451 persons already recruited and who have already secured jobs have been followed up, and if so, what have you established? That will help you to decide on whether the agreement you are laying before us today can be amended or not. It depends on the evidence that you have got from the follow up mechanism.

Fourth, I would like the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to assure me, that he does actually understand the concept of minimum wage. I know minimum wage is influenced by many factors including the cost of living in that particular country, inflation and the social pressures of the area where you work.

I would like to know whether this $200 established as the minimum wage for the people we are exporting has actually taken care of that after they have paid for all the bread and butter and transport and so forth. Do they have anything that is left in their pockets to do other things?

Finally, Madam Speaker, I want to know whether the rights of the families have been taken care of in this agreement. In many cases, our men go for these kinds of jobs and the wives and children are left wallowing in poverty.

In any case, the kind of experience, these people have wherever they are shows it may not even be easy to send money home. Can this agreement assure us that whoever has been recruited can take care of the family, which has been left behind and whether the facilities are there to allow them to send money to their families. 

Madam Speaker, I would want to advise that before I can feel comfortable about the document laid before us, maybe some committee should take a closer look at the Memorandum of Understanding or the agreement, so that we can be sure that the agreement we are signing really takes full care of our people. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.40
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Thank you, Madam Speaker and Members for the contributions that have been made.

Most of the issues that have been raised had also been raised in the past with the committee that we set up when we were looking at these abuses. Indeed, these issues have been included in the report of the committee. The recommendations that were made by the committee have gone a long way to inform the ministry and the stakeholders involved in this process; some of the necessary improvements and changes that have to be made to make sure that this entire process is profitable, decent and desirable.

Madam Speaker, in the event of death, the stakeholders involved, particularly the employers and the companies that assist in sending people, have now become jointly responsible for returning the remains of the workers who have passed on. Indeed, in this entire process, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is involved, our ambassadors are involved even in signing the bilateral agreements. Initially, in the discussions of these bilateral agreements. –Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, after a good counsel from our elder, hon. Moses Ali, I was very reluctant to get up on a point of order. However, the minister has just told this House that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was even involved in the signing of the bilateral agreement. I have had the opportunity to look at the agreement; it is here. 

It was signed by hon. Muruli Mukasa and hon. Dr Mufarrej Al Haqbani, a minister in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. It was in the presence of the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Mr Bigirimana. I have read through this agreement and it does not mention the Ministry of Foreign Affairs anywhere. 

Madam Speaker, it seems the minister is giving this House a statement which is different from the agreement he made. For example, in the statement he said the domestic workers have to work for only eight hours, yet in this agreement they are saying they will only be allowed to rest for nine hours. This gives them 15 hours of work.

Madam Speaker, you wisely directed that most probably this matter will go to the committee for people to look at this agreement. The Attorney-General is not in the picture. It seems that a one Muruli Mukasa, being a minister, went and wrote an agreement to export our people to Saudi Arabia alone with his Permanent Secretary.

The point of order I am raising is, is it in order for the minister to continue telling this House things, which are different from what he signed as an agreement for our people who are being employed in Saudi Arabia?

There are very many things inside here. For example, it is after every two years that these people are allowed to go on leave of 30 days. If you could look at this agreement; it is very small. Everybody can just look at this. It is unfortunate that this matter has come when we are closing the Ninth Parliament and do not have time. Is he in order to continue telling us lies? The agreement reads different things from what he is telling us.

THE SPEAKER: We shall send it to the committee. But minister, who else participated in that agreement? I heard you saying the ambassadors were involved but I do not know whether their signatures are there.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, the process of arriving at this agreement involved all stakeholders – the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Attorney-General, recruiting agencies and the host country. It is a whole range of stakeholders involved in this. 

Certainly, before we arrived at that, that proposal was given, for instance, to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the Attorney-General and the Solicitor-General to give it scrutiny. It was also given to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs plus ambassadors and the technical people in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development as well as the people who are going to employ these people.

Finally, after they have given –(Interruption)

MR KASULE: Honourable members, what the minister is saying is that he got an agreement, and they have said that they will send it to the committee for them to interrogate the people and maybe advise further.

However, as someone who was mothered by a mother who stayed in Saudi Arabia for 30 years, what he got is the best he can get from Saudi Arabia. The whole country of Saudi Arabia is almost like a prison. You will never walk alone if you are a woman. That country is very complicated, given its nature.

The best we can do is to allow the minister to engage that Government if they have allowed to be engaged. My mother was arrested about five times for just going with her Bible to pray whenever she was there. Therefore, let us allow the minister to engage that Government if they have allowed to be engaged. 

Otherwise, people move from here and go there without anybody’s knowledge. It is when they get problems that they report to anybody. If they have agreed to be engaged, please, let us allow the minister and the committee that is coming in place to settle this matter without us spoiling that relationship.

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No.

THE SPEAKER: This relationship is a business. Those companies are making money.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, we understand the situation we are in as a country, where the majority of our people are not employed. However, I am not looking at this as a matter of life and death - that we should subject our people to inhuman and degrading treatment in the guise of giving them job opportunities. When the minister was alluding to the fact that the Attorney-General even looked at this agreement, I wondered. 

Madam Speaker, you mentioned the UN laws describing who a domestic worker is and I think that is why we are supporting you for the speakership. I do not know whether the Attorney-General of Government also accepted that a doctor is a domestic worker. I do not know whether the Attorney-General of this Government also accepted that a pilot is a domestic worker. 

That is why we should even question whether this particular agreement was scrutinised by the Attorney-General of the Republic of Uganda on behalf of the people of Uganda, so that as Parliament, we can pass it and allow our people to be prisoners in search of employment.

Madam Speaker, I am wondering whether the Attorney-General looked at this agreement and helped in either designing it or accepting that doctors of the Republic of Uganda will be treated as domestic workers. I wonder whether he accepted that pilots coming from Uganda will be treated as domestic workers. I wonder whether the Attorney-General accepted that engineers coming from Uganda will be bandwagoned as domestic workers. 

Did the Attorney-General really look at it and compare it with the UN standards and the laws that we believe in as a country? That is what I wanted to know from the minister. (Mr Kwizera rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Final comments from hon. Kwizera and then the minister, please.

MR KWIZERA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is slave trade. I have been to Saudi Arabia and Iran. All other countries of the whole world are running away from Saudi Arabia, except Uganda. It is very unfortunate to see that the level of ignorance in some Government departments is leading our people into enslavement. 

Even when the provisions of the contract provide that after two years, one qualifies for leave, they contradict our own laws. Why would a minister sign the laws and memorandum that contradict their own Constitution and standing orders locally?

Therefore, minister, in the Tenth Parliament, they should prove that this was passed and approved by the Solicitor-General. There is nobody now in Saudi Arabia. People are running away and that is why these companies have found a “kill” there. So, honourable minister, you were misled. I would like to suggest that this agreement be rescinded. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please conclude.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, there was intimation that this matter would be discussed further in a committee. I am quite agreeable to that. In the next Parliament, we could actually discuss it, because we now do not have enough time to go in all these queries, some of which need very sensible answers and which could be given, if we had time. 

It is not true, for instance, that other countries are running away from Saudi Arabia. Many countries are going there, including the United States of America, the Philippines and many others. 

THE SPEAKER: United States are working there?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Yes, because I have an idea on how much they are paid. The issue of $200 was just the minimum depending on the level of your skills and does not mean it is going to be the maximum. That was put in as a safeguard to make sure people do not go below $200. And the $200 is the net pay. For instance, for a domestic worker or a house maid - because everything else including health service is provided free for that particular worker.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, this is a very important issue and we should find time - and before then, I could give a written answer to this issue raised, so that the Members of Parliament get satisfied with what exactly determined or influenced our decision to put our signatures on this arrangement. Thank you.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like the minister to clarify because this contract is running. He has not said he is going to stop it. The questions being asked are very pertinent. For instance, one time I was traveling and I met eight girls at the Dubai Airport. They did not know English; they were stranded; and had Uganda Shillings while looking for food. They were traveling but not even guided.

Therefore, some of these things, Madam Speaker, do not need to wait. It is high time some people came out to admit they made mistakes. Otherwise, this contract should be cancelled immediately and the minister should come and clarify on this.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, as someone who will be going into a sabbatical leave, I had restrained myself from making contributions, but we need to understand where we are coming from. The minister has tried because his predecessor – you recall we had a saga of the companies and at that particular time when I was in Riyadh, it was the companies that were facilitating the ministerial officials to take for them businesses. I raised it on this Floor.

I am of the humble view that since we have a working document, we may not necessarily adopt it as a document we have accepted. But we can refer it to the committee, so that it pronounces itself on it and use these documents to facilitate debate in the next Parliament. However, for us to throw it away, automatically, we are going to have nothing. 

There are things - I am on record, I was in Saudi Arabia and Riyadh, when the minister’s predecessor was doing business with these companies. For them once you go, they will take away your passport and put it somewhere. If you would like to leave, they ask you to first pay back the money the middle man took.

Now that the middleman is willing to be identified, we shall trace for the minister to tell us who they were dealing with. It is also ironical to see a bilateral agreement in that form, but at least the minister has brought something. There is some exhibit we can base on to start.

Madam Speaker, I am wondering whether it is not procedurally right for us to refer this document to the committee so that it facilitates debate, now that there are competent and compellable witnesses on it. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, after the minister had presented and before Members started contributing, I said that it would be better for this agreement to be taken to the committee of the Tenth Parliament to study and advise us. This is because it is the first time we are seeing this agreement. At least, it will give us an idea on what to do.

Certainly, honourable minister, you have seen the holes, the lacunas and the areas that are not satisfactory. I do not know whether you are going to continue exporting people before the Tenth Parliament considers this matter. Are you going to continue exporting accountants and medical doctors as domestic workers?

MR MURULI-MUKASA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We put a ban, especially on housemaids, and it still stands. I quite agree with you that this agreement should be given further scrutiny by the committee in the next Parliament, and they should inform us on the next course of action to take. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. The agreement and the statement will be presented to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development of the Tenth Parliament for expeditious scrutiny and report back.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REQUEST TO PARLIAMENT TO BORROW UP TO $11.5 MILLION FROM THE ARAB BANK FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA (BADEA) AND $11.5 MILLION FROM THE OPEC FUND FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT TO SUPPORT THE UPGRADING OF LUWERO-BUTALANGU ROAD PROJECT

4.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, this is just laying of a paper. It is work that will be handled by the Tenth Parliament.

I accordingly, beg to lay a Government’s request to borrow up to $11.5 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa and $11.5 million from the OPEC Fund for International Development to support the upgrading of Luwero-Butalangu Road Project. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that request is sent to the Committee on National Economy of the Tenth Parliament.

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

THE SPEAKER: It was a report. Where is the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance?

5.01
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a Report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the reconsideration of the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016. The report is very small and we will not spend a lot of time on it. 

The President wrote back after we had repealed the tax on international calls. The repeal of the excise duty on international incoming calls was initially proposed because of the sharp decline in revenue since the tax was introduced in 2013/14. 

The revenue yielded was Shs 68.3 billion in the financial year 2013/14. But when Uganda joined the one area network in January 2015, the international incoming calls reduced and revenue projected for 2015/16 is now Shs 45.9 billion. This was attributed to incoming international calls terminating in Kenya and South Sudan and rerouted to Uganda as domestic calls, thereby denying Government of Uganda excise duty and telecommunication companies in Uganda from charging incoming calls termination fees. 

However, H.E, the President has been informed that it is not calls being terminated in Kenya or South Sudan, which is a problem but rather the presence of illegal sim-boxes, both within Uganda and at the borders. The committee was further informed that this vice can be fought as Rwanda and Tanzania have done. 

Therefore, the removal of excise duty will not lead to an increase of incoming international calls, but will benefit the illegal sim-box owners and lead to a loss of Government revenue. 

Observations

The committee observed that the problem of reduced revenue was due to lack of enforcement by Uganda Communications Commission. Uganda Communications Commission was allocated funds to purchase equipment to detect the illegal sim-boxes in 2013.  Through this enforcement mechanism, the Government will be able to detect all the foreign incoming calls and arrest all culprits operating illegal sim-boxes. 

Recommendation

The committee recommends that clause 3(1) of the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill be deleted. I beg to lay the report of the committee. I beg to move. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Are there any comments? 

5.05
MR KENNETH KIYINGI (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to take this opportunity to thank the chairperson for that report. It was indeed a wonderful observation from H.E, the President about the incoming calls. 

Madam Speaker, with me I have a concern from the business community relating to excise duty. They are seeking your indulgence and that of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come to their rescue regarding the 10 per cent increment of excise duty on chewing gum, sweets and chocolates. 

I do not think that thorough research was done as this increment was being considered. I presume there is no excise duty on these products in Kenya, Tanzania and Rwanda. Therefore, having this duty on these products in Uganda is causing a problem to the business community. Allow me to note that smuggling is being done, and yet some products are being brought into Uganda by the registered agents. So, business is not moving on well. 

Honourable minister and Chairperson of the committee, I seek your indulgence to come to the rescue of the business community. Having this 20 per cent in this financial year is not only going to cripple the businesses; it is going to cost our Government close to Shs 9 billion worth of revenue. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, do you have anything to say about that? 

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We considered this issue during the debate on that particular matter. The honourable member approached us at the ministry. We actually proposed to him and the business community that he represents them as we sit down and study their proposal. Thereafter, it will be considered in the next financial year, which actually starts in November this year, because it is difficult to consider a proposal at this very late hour. Sometimes it needs to be studied more, merits and demerits looked at in comparison with other countries and its real impact determined. I propose that we commit ourselves to looking into that matter in the next financial year, which actually begins in November.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kakooza, is it on the same matter?   

5.08
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Yes, it is on the same matter of excise duty. Madam Speaker, under the East African Customs Union, we sign protocols. If they are signed, we must adhere to them. When you look at the established protocol of the East African Customs Union, section 10 and 14, it is evident that for the internal tariff within a country to be varied at a tax rate, it must go back to the Summit and then it is agreed upon by the partner states.  If the partner states do not agree on it, then there is no other country which practices it. 

The excise duty of 10 per cent in Uganda does not operate in any other state. They agreed upon it that if it is a domestic tariff rate, it cannot be executed by the partner state. Unless you are saying that for Uganda to practice it, it must go against the agreement, which I find as a tariff barrier in trade; it cannot work. 

When you look at the protocol, it is here and I have it. We signed it and there is no other country, which can vary from it, not until it is agreed upon by the partner states. I can read it and lay it on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, the minister acknowledged that there is a problem but that we cannot solve it today. He is proposing that we solve it in the next Excise Duty Act. 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, there are two issues. There is varying a tariff rate and there is the tariff itself. What he is talking about is varying the tariff rate but the internal domestic tariff rate cannot be executed in partner states, unless you are breaking the protocol. 

THE SPEAKER: So what do you propose? 

MR KAKOOZA: What I am proposing is that since they brought it as a tax measure, they should consult more. June is not far. It is going to be effective in July. Let them consult from Arusha; the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is there but we cannot go ahead and put ourselves at collusion with other states. 

The worst of it is that smuggling is going to continue with the goods manufactured within the partner states and it will be costly for this country; we will not manage it. I can read the section which talks about that and I can lay it on the Table too. Can I read the section that says that for any country to vary and/or to put or to execute a tariff rate as a barrier, the partner states must agree? Kenya doesn’t have it. Tanzania does not have it and the rest of the other East African partner states. So, Uganda is going to be the only country executing it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourble member, we have taken note of that. We have taken note of the possibility that there is a breach of the protocols. I am, therefore, directing the Clerk that the first duty of the Finance Committee of the Tenth Parliament should be to look at this matter and advice Parliament and the minister. Let us do it early and as soon as the committees are formed, this should be their work.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you very much.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

Clause 3

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, the question is that clause 3 do stand part of the Bill.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, in clause 3, we propose to delete paragraph (i). The justification is that the problem of reduced revenue was due to lack of enforcement by UCC, therefore, removal of excise duty on international in-coming calls, will only benefit illegal sim-box owners and lead to Government revenue loss. I beg to move.

MR KAKOOZA: If it is the same Bill we are considering, why don’t we defer and deal with it in the first week of June after Parliament has come back and when the research has been done? We should defer the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, we are talking about the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, which was returned to this House, sent to the committee and it has reported – the committee of this Ninth Parliament has reported.

MR KAKOOZA: Yes, that is what I am also talking about. It is the same Bill, which institutes that excise duty of 10 per cent.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I have made a ruling on the other matter. June and July are not very far.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think you said that “I” but it is “L.” Your plan is in “L” not “I.”

MR KASULE: Okay, delete paragraphs “I” and “L”. Madam Chairperson, international in-coming calls and excise duty schedule is “L” and not “I.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think what you are looking for is to re-instate paragraph 13 (b).  Is that what you are looking for? You want to re-instate?

MR KASULE: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that section 13(b) be re-instated as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Section 13(b), reinstated.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker, presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

5.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Bill entitled “Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016” be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2016”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes.

5.18
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, let me use one minute of your time. Just as my “Muko” was saying that he has been given a “sabbatical leave,” I think I have also been given a “sabbatical leave.” Therefore, I would like, on behalf of the Committee on Finance, to thank Parliament for the many Bills we have passed.

I think the busiest committee might have been the one on legal matters and that on finance but legal – okay, they deal with those, but the finance committee has done more laws than the legal committee. 

Members have been committed to passing all revenue Bills, plus all the Bills that have been brought to the committee, including the hard ones that had spent almost seven years, like the “Anti-Money Laundering Act.”

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to, first of all, thank you, as Speaker for giving priority to the core function of Parliament, which is legislation. Whenever Bills delay in committees, they delay work, they delay jobs, they delay revenue for the country but I am very glad that at least this Parliament has done its best. We have left only one Bill of “Liberalisation of the Pension Sector” we even did a report only that Parliament did not process it. But also it was not that Parliament did not want to process it, but Government was a bit disorganised.

We, therefore, pray –(Interjections)- yes, we passed the Bill but the minister came here and said that we should stay the discussion. I will pray that the next Parliament passes the Pension Liberalisation Bill to free money, otherwise, there is no need for us to go and borrow yet we have a full basket, from which we can borrow to do our own infrastructure using our own money and on our own terms, as a country.

On behalf of the family that sent me here – the Kibirige family - if we don’t pass the Bio-technology and Bio-safety Bills, we would have murdered the many PhDs that have studied - many individuals have been sent to America and some are about to retire without ever practicing their work. 

Honourable members, biotechnology and biosafety are sciences. They are here with us. We must look at them critically. That is how people were rejecting computers thinking computers were going to replace jobs. However, this is a science which has come. Please, if you have any questions, feel free to ask the scientists. They are crying out there and waiting for Parliament to act on this Bill. I pray that the Tenth Parliament champions that science. I thank you very much.

Madam Speaker, I congratulate you. You are unopposed and we are sure of that. Thank you for building this House. No one can remove money from finance for development unless they are a hard man or hard woman. But, the Speaker of Parliament has managed to convince Parliament to release development money to build the parking, the sixth floor and also acquired us a new building across the road. Before the Speaker leaves, that whole street will be a Parliamentary Street. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: We have also secured money to construct a new Chamber. (Applause)

Honourable members, we had a very ambitious programme today but given the nature of the environment, we cannot go beyond what we have done today.  We also have guests in the country and we have been invited for a state dinner. 

It will be difficult to go to Munyonyo if we take too long. I would like to appeal to colleagues to trust us. The matters which are on the Order Paper will be considered as quickly as possible in the next Parliament. I call upon you to trust us that we are going to handle them. Therefore, on that note, I would like to now issue the proclamation.

Statutory Instrument 2016:

“WHEREAS Clause 3 of the Article 95 of the Constitution of the Republic Uganda provides that the Speaker may after consultation with President prorogue Parliament by proclamation;

AND WHEREAS the necessary consultations with his Excellency the President has been carried out and has been agreed that Parliament be prorogued;

NOW, THEREFORE, in the exercise of the powers conferred on the Speaker by Clause 3 of the Article 95 of the Constitution of the Republic Uganda, it is proclaimed that Parliament shall stand prorogued with effect from 11th day of May 2016. The pending business in the House or its committees is hereby saved. Given under my hand and sealed at Parliament House Kampala, this 11th day of May 2016.

Rebecca A. Kadaga MP/Speaker of Parliament.” 

God bless you, honourable members. (Applause)

(The House rose at 5.23 p.m. and adjourned sine die)

[Thus concluded the proceedings of the Ninth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.] 
