Thursday, 18 May 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliamentary House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice Chairman, Mr Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.

Clause 13 (2)(d):

MR KAZOORA JOHN: Mr Chairman, I have a proposal to make with regard section 32, sub-section (2) and it reads thus, delete the word; ‘is’ appearing between the words, ‘and’ and ‘renewable’ in the second line, and substitute shall be therefore, so that the subsection reads thus -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, we are on Clause 13 (2)(d).

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, I have an Amendment on the combined 2(b).  Mr Chairman, you remember that I talked about the importance of the appointment by the Minister to be either with the consent approval all in consultation.  Now, the Amendment of hon. Mwandha completely removes even the little that was provided there namely in consultation with.  I have had consultation with hon. Atwai and hon. Mwandha.  

It is proposed and I wish to propose now that the appointment of the distinguished scholars be in consultation with National Institute of Journalists of Uganda.  This is because the institutions dealing with schools of Mass Communication or schools of Journalism are a little bit too large and as time goes in future they will be too many and it may be a problem to the Minister how to collect these people together, consult them and so on.  But we are going to provide for a statutory institute which is easier for the Minister to deal with.  

Therefore, I move that distinguished scholars be appointed by the Minister in consultation with National Institute of Journalists of Uganda.  I beg to move.

CAPT. GASATURA: Mr Chairman, I wish to support the Amendment in that whereas we were informed yesterday, the information of the schools of journalism and mass communication is still in the young stages At the same time we want to accommodate other distinguished scholars who may not have necessarily gone through those two schools.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13(2)(e):

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, the Amendment says; ‘a representative nominated by the Newspapers Editors and Publishers.’ First of all as a clarification I am wondering whether this is a statutory body also which will nominate this representative and whether it is a recognised body.  Because if you are saying, a News Paper Editors and Publishers, is it an institution which is know in Law so as to nominate.

Secondly, if you look at (f) in front, it says; ‘four Members of the Public each shall be nominated by Uganda NewsPapers Editors and so on.’ 

CAPT GASATURA: Mr Chairman, just to clarify on that, there are errors that should be use paper editors in (d) rather than use papers editors - use paper editors and publishers.  In 13 (2) (f) (ii), each shall be nominated by Uganda - use paper editors and publishers and the other by journalists.  

Here the intention is, whereas we did not want to expressly use NUJA and UNEPA, we did recognise that there are two categories among the journalists.  So, we wanted to give each group to their own informal organisation.  So, one is by Uganda Newspaper Editors and Publishers and the other one is by Uganda Journalists. This was a way also to create room that there are journalists, editors and there is another incidence where we say, one is from the Press and the one from Electronic Media.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE MINISTER FOR INFORMATION (Mr P. Etiang): Mr Chairman, I realise the difficult that the hon. Omara Atubo has.  The mistake appears to have risen from the committee’s recommendation that UNEPA as UNEPA, thus, Uganda Newspaper Editors and Publishers Association.  That is what the Provision was in the original Bill.  But now they preferred to call those who are in charge of Newspapers, those who are Editors and Publishers.  Elsewhere, with the establishment of Media, I think it should now be the Newspaper Owners of Proprietors and Editors because elsewhere it can be explained that Publishers can very from time to time.  The population, Mr Chairman, could be Newspaper Proprietors and Editors. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13 (2)(e) and (f):

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, since we passed 13(2)(d), as having News Paper proprietors, and 4 is taking care of, in (f), I would like - if you look at originally (d) News Paper, Editors and Publishers, then when you go to (f), you find that Uganda News paper Editors and Publishers. These are about the same type of people.  Therefore, it would mean that there would be two people from the same organisation in addition to journalists.  

Now, my Amendment 13 (2)(f) read that; ‘There shall be appointed by the Minister, from among six names nominated by mainly religious denominations in Uganda.’ The point over here is that some of our morals are so down graded to the point that if you get religious leaders who also have got News Papers may be they put some religious feelings on the Council.  The Moslem faith has the Shariat.  Then the Protestants have got New Day and Munno is for the Catholic Church.  Therefore, if the people concerned are on the Council they may be able to impart good knowledge or God fearing and morals into the Council and, therefore, instead of appointing - (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, may I inform hon. Wanendeya that our radios are dominated by religious programmes, therefore, what he says is really sounding.

THE MINISTER FOR INFORMATION (Mr P. Etiang): Mr Chairman, I would like to offer the information to the Mover of the proposed Amendment to the effect that if as he says Shariat is owned by Moslems, New Day is owned by the protestants and Munno by the catholic church, those by themselves are proprietors of these News Papers, they are therefore covered under this.

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, even if the Minister was saying that those other News Papers mentioned will be included in the proprietor, but these are about three of them out of the many that are in the field.  Therefore, if the religious groups sent their representatives, it would be in the interest of the country to have some kind of good order of talking the truth.

MR PINTO: Mr Chairman, I seek clarification from the speaker on the Floor. Currently, the religious denominations that the gentleman wants to refer to are so circulated that you do not have main broad lines any more.  You have very sects of religious that are operating in this country.  How are you going to cater for this?

MR ETIANG: Mr Chairman, thank you.  In addition to the explanation I have given on the clarification, I want for the benefit of the House to hear from me that prior to the tabling of the very first draft of this Bill, I had very wide ranging consultations with all religious institutions in the country - Moslems, christians of all shades and even enemies.  

Now none of these - in fact at the highest level possible. I did put to them the issue of representation in this House and they all said that they will rather be represented as proprietors of newspapers rather than religious organisations because it would set into the country almost by statutory provision the invitation to the churches which they are very reluctant to accept but as a religious body, they would be by this Statute expected to participate in otherwise a legal provision.  And they told me that they will rather be represented as owners of newspapers rather than as religious leaders.  Thank you.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, I would be the one to support hon. Wanendeya but the view advanced here is that the publishers will bring in the religious bodies.  More than this, there is Uganda Aids Commission in place today.  We did not legislate here that the chairman should be the bishop.  But today bishop Misaeri Kawuma is the Chairman Uganda Aids Commission.  The appointment by the hon. Minister is a liberty to appoint someone with proven integrity.

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, what I am saying is this, I thank the Minister and the chairman of the committee.  But with all due respect, the way we have been doing things in our country, for instance, the court sits from 9.00 a.m. to about 1.00 p.m., then they go for lunch.  They come back at 2.00 p.m. and close at 5.00 p.m. But you find that a person like Kiwanuka was taken to court after 5.00 p.m. 

So, what I am saying is that we must have in the law something that will oblige the government so that these organisations should nominate their own persons, six names from which the Minister will appoint three people to be on this Council and, therefore, I strongly urge hon. Member to think about this seriously if they are interested in the young -(Interruptions) 

What I am saying is that if we as leaders in this country and legislature and we want good morals to be instilled in persons, then they should be on the board itself instead of waiting to be nominated like the retired Bishop Kawuma.  Therefore, it should be in the law if we want good morals. Unless we want to derail ourselves in the way we have been doing things.  I thank you and hon. Members should think about this. Thank you.

CAPT. GAD GASATURA: Mr Chairman, indeed as the reverend said, with all due respect we know there very many good people in each of all these religious sects but we can hardly assure ourselves that everyone there by virtue of belonging to a religious organisation is good.  Therefore, the Minister would by this bill if it becomes statute be at liberty to choose any person from any of those organisations and indeed it is hardly likely that anybody will come in who has not been baptised or circumcised. They will all be religious.  

But while he is accusing the courts of closing at 5.00 p.m. and the police takes Kiwanuka after 5.00 p.m. I am sure he has heard of a few wrangles in our own religious denominations. So let us leave the Minister not be bound by some state religion but rather be free to pick on any good Ugandan from whichever religion.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR MWANDHA: Hon. Omara Atubo moved an amendment to this which actually clarified the situation that really it will be the registered associations of newspaper editors and publishers.  It seems to me that under (f) (ii), they were including those and in addition, they were including the registered association of journalists.  Now if we leave Roman (ii) as it is, it will be a repetition of (d).  Therefore, I would like to clean the construction by saying that there must be one person nominated by a registered association of journalists because the journalists are not covered yet. The newspaper proprietors have been covered.  Now the registered association of journalists is not covered and the only way to cover it is under (f)(ii).  So, Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, if I may clarify on 13(2)(f)(ii), here in (f), we are looking for member of the public not being journalists.   So although we are repeating, they are nominating two; one by registered newspaper editors and proprietors association and another one by journalists.  So, the journalists are in two categories, one of the editorial and proprietary level and the other one journalists in general and the Minister also has opportunity in 13(2)(f)(1) to nominate two members of the public not being journalists.  So that is the clarification I wanted to make Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Excuse me, but I think hon. Gasatura, if you can read from (d) up there and down there (f)(ii), you find that several words are already subset of what is in (f)(2) and you better either clean up your (f)(2) to be clearer because really it is still meddled up.  If you read (2)(d) a representative nominated by a registered association of newspaper proprietors and editors.  Now then if you go to (f)(2), one nominated by Uganda newspapers, you find the word newspapers reflected there and editors also reflected there then publishers.  So I think you still need to clean up either through some proposed amendment so that it is clear.  Could you please clarify that one, please?

CPT. GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, in 13(2)(d), it is presumed that here we did not tie the hands of the registered newspaper editors and proprietors association.  We presumed they would most probably pick from among their number whereas in 13(2)(f)(ii), they specifically must nominate members of the public not being journalists.  Therefore, it should read; 13(2)(f), we want members of the public four not being journalists who shall be persons of proven integrity and good repute of whom two shall be nominated by the Minister and two, one each nominated by Uganda Newspaper Editors and Proprietors registered journalist association.  I hope I made it clear now Mr Chairman.

MR YONA KANYOMOZI: Point of clarification.  I would like to know from the committee or the Minister whether actually he means four because if you add them, two are already for the Minister, two are for the association now of Uganda newspaper editors and proprietors.  What happens to the publishers and what happens to the journalists?  Each of them will also nominate one.  I am just seeking clarification.  The wording, does it mean that the association covers Uganda Newspaper Proprietors, Editors and Publishers?

MR KALULE SSENGO:  Mr Chairman, as we said, we have in mind UNEPA and it consists of Uganda Newspapers editors and publishers.  It is a combination of the whole class.  Then the Journalists under UJA.  So there is that split and the number we have in mind are four.  I think that clarification is okay.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, I think the problem is really in the drafting.  I think it is easier now for the Minister and the chairman of the committee to see that Roman (ii) is badly drafted and that is the reason why they have draft confusion. What you have to do is to split Roman (ii) into two categories and to give the two interest groups a right to nominate and the two interest groups are really to me the ones in (d) - newspaper editors and proprietors association and I think the intention is to give one nomination to the journalists.  So in (ii), you have got to split into two; one shall be nominated by newspapers editors and proprietors registered association and then you add (iii), one shall be nominated by a registered association of journalists.  That will solve I believe, your problem.  

But having said that, the speed with which we are using, we possibly have missed something very important and I think under our Rules, there is something allows us before the committee reports, to revisit certain things we are passing because we are really at the Committee Stage.  I cannot recall the Rule directly.  The point raised by hon. Obwangor is quite important.  De we intend to have two representatives of the electronic media while we have deleted everything covering that one -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order, hon. Omara Atubo, could you speak to Clause 13(2)(f)(ii)?

MR OMARA ATUBO: Yes, I was just bringing it to your attention.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Please, let us deal with this one first.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Okay, thank you. So, if the Minister can agree, we should split roman (ii) into one which shall be appointed by the registered association of Uganda Newspapers, editors and so on, then roman (iii) now deals with registered association of journalists.  Thank you.

MR PAUL ETIANG: Mr Chairman, I have the advantage of sitting next to the chairman and Members of the committee.  |There is no problem in splitting the present Roman (ii) of (f) into (i), (ii), (iii) Romans.  That is he one nomination by the Newspaper editors and publishers and the other to appear now as roman (iii) by the journalists. Could I also take the opportunity of clarifying to hon. Omara Atubo that what we are discussing here is the membership of the Media Council and Media Council covers both electronic and print media.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, please, we are going to spend a lot of time on very few clauses. (Interjection) Excuse me, order, order hon. Members. There is an amendment on the Floor and this amendment was consented to by the Minister in the committee that presented their work here.  I am now putting the question to that amendment.  Now let me put the question that clause 13(2)(f)(ii) be amended as proposed by hon. Omara Atubo.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Chairman, I do accept the amendment by hon. Omara Atubo but it seems to me that either there is an omission or perhaps an intention on part of the Minister to have registered association of journalists not represented.  Because under (d), you have a registered association of newspaper editors and publishers represented.  Now the journalist who I said will come under (f) -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Excuse me hon. Mwandah.  The amendment of hon. Omara Atubo has covered that and we have put a new Roman (iii) in (f) to cover one from the registered association of journalists.

MR MWANDHA: I was in fact going to propose having given the background that we should have another sub-clause (h) to provide for the representation -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Then can you wait until we come to (g).

MR MWANDHA: Thank you Mr Chairman.

Clause 13(2)(g):

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Mr Chairman, I would be pleased if the Minister were to accept that distinguished practising lawyer be nominated by the Uganda Law Society.  Uganda Law Society is a legal body under the Adjudicature Act and it is well known and we would not like the Minister just to pick anybody but he will be very much guided if he were to work in consultation with the Uganda Law Society.  So, I beg to move.

MR ETIANG:  Mr Chairman, thank you.  The question is directed to the Minister and it is on that account that I stand. I would like Members to bear in mind constantly that you are considering the report of the select committee.  Now it is the Members of that committee individually and collectively who have reason for this.  But as a Minister, I have no problem at all with that but it is not for me to actually defend or accept this particular proposal. I only stand up to answer because a question has been put to me.  I would say that this question be answered by the chairman.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information. Mr Chairman about (g), the journalists vehemently objected to the idea of the Uganda Law Society appointing a suitable lawyer for them.  They said they are capable of doing it.  Their argument was that the Law Society should not impose on them a person who will not be of their choice.  So they said the Minister does it thorough certain consultations instead of the Uganda Law Society doing it for them.  I thank you.

MR OBWANGOR:  Thank you Mr Chairman. We need an orderly society whereby professionally we work in harmony.  Now it is in my view, imperative for the Law Society to nominate a member to be on this council.  Why?  It helps the nominated member to be more responsible rather than just being elected otherwise, out of an organised associated authority.  So in my view, we are developing in a civil society, an orderly society.  I strongly support that a nomination of this lawyer, let us all - you see, this House is a failure because w have come here because of the so-called personal merit.  What do we do? We cannot get things across to talk with the government. 

MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, thank you.  Mr Chairman, I would like to suggest that it is better to build up institutions and Law Society is one of those institutions which we should really respect.  If the Minister has no objection, we cannot also take only the emotions or the feelings of the Uganda journalists in considering a law and statute which is covering the entire country.  We are looking at the totality of legislation and therefore, we cannot only look at the interest of the journalists.  The advantage of using an institution is that the lawyers know better and they will give a person who will be beneficial to the law.  I am sure the Minister and even the Committee, have no objection to this.  And let us not go back to what they hear in the corridor when they were discussing.  That is why we brought the whole bill back to the House for consideration. 

So, I am suggesting with all due respect to the Members of the Committee that we use institution.  If the person is not acceptable, the Minister can as the Law Society to give the more acceptable person.

DR LUYOMBYA:  Mr Chairman, this council we are instituting is a professional council.  Now when you come to this lawyer, not every lawyer in this country is a member of the Law Society and being a member is optional. I know what I am talking about.  I would rather have that the lawyers pick amongst one lawyer rather than deterring those who do not belong to the law society but would benefit this council from service.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members as you can recall - order. Hon. Members, if some of you are under influence of something I am going to call upon the sergeant to come because this is not very normal conduct of the country.  (Interjections) I am repeating that if some hon. members are under the influence of something this afternoon, I am going to use the sergeant at arms to help.  Because we must behave according to the name of the House.  You remember hon. Members, this is a simple matter.  

Last time when the Committee presented their report in fact, we would have deliberated on this bill a long time ago but because of few amendments that came in we had to use the rule and procedure to come to the committee stage.  In fact, when we came here, not every sub-section was affected by the amendment.  But we agreed.  But now coming here, we are spending more time on even the clauses which were not affected by the amendment than even those which have been affected.  

So, I am calling upon your indulgence, if there is a new amendment proposed, I would expect the Members of the committee to react and if they cannot, then I will call upon the Minister responsible which has been the case here.  And if there is consent between the Minister or between the Members and the proposer of the amendment, then I will put the question from time to time whether that amendment is seconded than wasting our time here.  Please, hon. Members, I am indulging you, let us follow the procedure.  

Hon. Omara Atubo has proposed here a very simple amendment that in line with what we did this afternoon, we agreed that the Minister in so appointing these Members make consultation with the Law Development Centre.  This one is the debate which is straightforward and it is between the Member and the committee and the Minister and maybe some hon. Members who would like to contribute.  Please, let us follow the procedure, and then we mind of time.  I know you are very busy, we are all very busy.  I now call upon hon. Ongora Atwai to react to that proposal.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, earlier on, there was proposal that a retired judge be the chairman of the Council.  But Members, especially journalists who are trying to establish themselves as a body said that this is their professional and supreme council.  But it is legal knowledge that they are after law society has no intrinsic interest in the association and for this, they said let the hon. Minister appoint first of all this lawyer who goes to the council as a member and if he proves his worth, the council may elect him the chairman. So, I think it is just in order that we leave it as it is that the hon. Minister will appoint a lawyer.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 13(3)(4)(5):

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I wish to propose the amendment.  

MR OMARA ATUBO: Point of procedure. Mr Chairman, I would like to draw your attention to rule 30(h) of our interim rules; which says the following Motions may be moved without notice.  Any Motion made when the council is in committee.  In view of this rule I call upon you to -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: You could read that in conjunction with 31(4).

MR OMARA ATUBO:  In view of this rule, Mr Chairman  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Really together with 31(4) of the same rule of procedure.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, rule 31(4) says; no amendment shall be permitted if in the opinion of the chairman with substantially principles of the question of the question proposed. First of all, no question has been proposed.

THE CHAIRMAN: But the Motion can be a question.

MR OMARA ATUBO: And secondly, the Motion of hon. Mwandha does not alter any principles involved in the origination.  I mean, Mr Chairman, the purpose of Motions being moved at committee without notice is simply to assist us to make a good law.  So many things can just come in prompt to - and it may be the interest that it be entertained and discussed and the question be put, and I believe that the principle here which Mwandha was raising was that, it looks through all the representation; the journalists are nowhere, and I think this is a very important point. So, I believe that you do entertain the Motion of hon. Mwandha we debate it and see how far we can accept or how far we can dispose it.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Omara Atubo you raised a question that the journalists have been nowhere here, but you have helped them with one amendment already where we said even the minister will make appointments one from the Registered Association of Journalists, you have just put it here in the provision.  But concerning hon. Mwandha’s amendment he said, he had a major one, and normally I know what major comes from his. It is - (Interjection)- but hon. Omara Atubo, we would like to go through this Bill, and if anything finished as fast as possible, we spent 8 years on the bill alone, and here in the House we have spent more than a week almost and I would seek your indulgence that really we have been very accommodative to allow the bill to come to this stage, and really if you could recall we have accommodated so many amendments here.  But we must have a limit to new amendments; we cannot just go unlimited like that.  And I think the Chair should also guide the direction of the House.  So, please, you bear with me.

Clause 13(25):

Clause (5):

Clause (6):

(Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 14:

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Chairman, I am proposing an amendment to 14(1)(b). My Amendment is to delete (1)(b) altogether.  The reason being that I thought practicable to arbitrate between the public and the Media, and the State and the Media.  The public is such a big entity and a State is such a big thing that it is not possible that you can actually effect an arbitrate process between those two.  I think the committee either failed to find the right word or they probably did not mean arbitration. Because arbitration as it is understood cannot be in the form it is given under this particular sub-clause, and the best thing to do is simply to get rid of it because it serves no purpose.  I beg to move.

MR ONGORA ATWAI: I beg to oppose the amendment.  The word public and state as used are clear and they are not ambiguous.  Quite understandable in legal terms.  So, I see no alteration there. I beg to oppose.

AN HON. MEMBER: In supplementing what the chairman of the committee has given in opposing the proposed amendment, I would like to draw the attention of the proposer to the fact that, if you remove the act of arbitration for this council, then the whole sections stands cancelled because the argument that the House really admits that it was this council should facilitate the mediation, the arbitration, or whatever word one is going to use, between the parties interested in the freedom of the Press, namely the press, the public, if you are going to call it individuals and then the state that is the government of the day.

(Question put and negatived.)


EDITORS AND PUBLISHERS


MR OMARA ATUBO: (c), it reads; to exercise disciplinary control over journalist, Editor and publishers.  Mr Chairman, not the whole Council is going to exercise, and it is a disciplinary committee of the council. So it should read that to exercise disciplinary control over journalist, Editors and publishers through its disciplinary committee.

MR ONGORA ATWAI:  I beg to oppose this amendment because council is supreme, council is going to have a disciplinary committee whatever it carries, it does so on behalf of the council. (Applause)

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14(1)(d)(e):

MR ONGORA ATWAI:  As earlier on been circulated, I beg to formally propose that section 1(e) be amended to read to  -(Inaudible) film, videos-video tapes, and the -(inaudible) was played and other related apparatus for public consumption.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14(1)(f):

Clause 14(2):

MR ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, I beg to propose again that under Clause 14(2) that we insert the expression for public consumption immediately after the word acted occurring in the third line thereof. So that it accommodates whatever can be under public consumption.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14(2), as amended do stand part of Bill.

Clause 15:

MR OMARA ATUBO:  In sub-Clause (1) we talk of the provisions of the fourth schedule and in (2) we talk of the first schedule, I do not know whether reference in sub-clause (2) is first schedule or fourth schedule.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, this is a typing error, it should actually read; fourth schedule.

MR OMARA ATUBO:  If it was first schedule, I would have moved an amendment but if it is fourth schedule, okay.

Clause 15, as amended do stand part of the Bill, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 1, agreed to

Clause 18:

DR LUYOMBYA: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose that the entire first part be deleted but the objects which are appearing in Clause 19 be re-arranged and transferred and incorporated into the functions of the Media council.  This bill is defending recognised professionalism in Mass Media and the whole of the Media is ensuring and protecting -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But hon. Dr Luyombya, point of order, please.  Could you reverse to rule 31(4), and therefore retain your speech.

Clause 18 do stand part of the Bill.

Clause 19:

THE CHAIRMAN: Caution hon. Members, because of time, those amendments which have not been circulated, I am sorry we may not deal with them.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, mine is - this is going to improve like I did with the first schedule and the fourth schedule if we were looking for an amendment first thing we should have -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But honestly hon. Omara Atubo we have given you a lot of time. And if you have found it so nice, I am sorry we may not have all that time.

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Under the rules we have seen, this one is not very substantial diverting from the principle, that is in Clause 19(1)(d), it is seeking to establish and maintain mutual dealings.  My quarrel is with the word dealings, it looks so commercial and so business like.  I am wondering whether they would prefer the word relationship rather than dealings.  Thank you.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, we have no problem with that one.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19(1)(e):

Clause 19(2):

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I wish to propose an amendment to 19 sub-Clause (2)(a). This Clause 2(a) is very important because it is the one which is going to help in creation of the profession of journalists, and the way it is framed it does not quite do the job. Because they are saying they have to advise all courses and conduct qualifying examinations and generally on matters related to professional education for journalists in Uganda.  

My amendment to this Clause is to delete it and replace it with the simpler Clause simply to say - to approve a course of study to the recognized, to admission, to professional membership of the institute. Reasons being that there is a need for a standard course to be established

THE CHAIRMAN: Could you repeat the amendment, please?

MR MWANDHA: To approve a course of study to the recognised for admission to professional membership of the institute, and the reason is to really to establish a standard course.  Because journalism will be bringing in people from different professions, form different walks of life and the only thing that will bring them together to speak the language as professional journalist is to go through an approved course of study by this institute which will receive everybody to belong to this body.  Therefore, I wish to propose that this sub-section be amended as I have read.  I beg to move.

MR OBWANGOR:  Since now we are moving orderly and progressively to produce journalist, because this is sign -(Interruption) because it is a profession and as a profession is an industry.  So, I support the whole idea with my Colleague that we with this institute like I started the MPAT around there in Nakawa.  But those people are idle there do not worry about that but now, it is very important we start at a strong base of really bringing about their heart and soul of journalism to feed the nation. Because it is through this journalism that we have people educated, informed and progress, and orderliness.  So, therefore, we must have this provided in the law to really work progressively to produce the school of journalism as it is done all over the world even in America it is there as I said in the House yesterday.  Although my Colleague is not there, he said that there was no - he could not go and do journalism. But if he had to read, Mr Chairman, my books here, the new standard encyclopedia 501, I called him to my house at Kireka he can read. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. obwangor, could you stick to the bill.  

MR WANENDEYA: Point of order.  Is it in order for hon. Obwangor to divert us from what we are talking about to some other something else.

THE CHAIRMAN: He is not in order.  I think in the afternoon he gets excited I do not know why. (Laughter)

MR OBWANGOR: I do not get excited, I think this is deliberate -(Inaudible) and an offence to me individually.  When I think I speak to give the House wisdom.  We want a school of journalism eventually, and we to start with this amendment to organise progressively and knowledge.  

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  I beg to oppose that amendment basing on this if it is not going to teach, law society, Makerere Law Society does not, Makerere does.  Medical council does not approve what should be taught.  It is Makerere doing the work, and when these people are manufactured, they come out and find out where they belong.  So I do not see why there is ministry of education and we do not want it to do the work.  So, I beg to oppose.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19(2)(b)(c):

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, from what we have passed in view of what we have passed in Clause 7, this sub-Clause (c) should read to promote the school of journalism which is not contrary to popular public morality and to delete other social values.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Accepted, Mr Chairman.


(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19(2)(d)(e):

Clause 19, as amended do stand part of the Bill.

Clause 20:

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I have an amendment to improve Clause 20.  I am proposing that Clause 20 be deleted and be replaced with the following: It will have sub-clause (1) which shall say that the membership of the institute shall be in the categories to be determined by the institute from time to time.  And two; that the institute shall from time to time determine the qualification and experience criteria - and experience criteria required for admission or promotion to any of the categories of membership.  And thirdly, that the membership that the institute shall determine the benefits including voting rights and obligations or members according to their categories.  

As you can see, the objective of this amendment does not differ from section.  And, the institute should have the freedom to determine the categories of membership to specify their qualifications, rights and obligations according to those categories rather than being restricted as it is right now in section 20.  Because section 20 is introducing three categories which means that this institute for ever will have those three categories.  We know very well that other professional bodies have more categories for their membership than what is even here.  For instance, we know very well that you can have the categories of a fellow of the institute, you can have a categories of a fellow of the institute, you can have a category of a member of the institute an associated member of the institute, there are people who have studied but without having had adequate experience in that particular professional body, and they are normally referred to as the -(Interruption)- whether they have degrees or not but because they have just got the qualification without experience they have to serve a license until such a time as they can be admitted as members.  That is also included there in the statute.  you also only fellows, only fellows would be people who have been fellows in the business in the profession but after sometime they retire from the profession but you may still need their wisdom and guidance and actually give them a special possession as only fellows.  A person like or colleague the Rt. Prime Minister who is the distinguished journalist. By virtue of his position can no longer actively practice journalism.  But you can ward him that title so that his experience can all the time be called up on whenever the journalists are in a session and having meeting.  

So, I think the Clause as it is very restrictive and I must say also that we are just legislators, we are not in a position to determine the standard, the rights and obligations of these people the details of all these things are better than the journalists themselves.  

So, I would like - there is no implication here that the journalists will admit people with degrees.  In fact, the National Institute of Journalism must by now when they are formed they will know exactly that really this Parliament even when they read the Hansard they will know that we would require them at least to have a degree as one of the requirements for membership of this.  Therefore, I think it is better that we amend this section the way I have advised. I thank you.  

MR NTIMBA: I raise vigorously support the amendment as proposed by hon. Mwandha.  I happen to represent an urban constituency but with journalists who are in rural setting and following a series of comprehensive consultations with these journalists up-country, I have been specifically told that provisions of sections 20 as appearing in the draft bill, by enlarged criminatory and restrictive and exclusive for members who do not have a University degree, like those who have certificates and diplomas, and in connection with this I would -I really would have had a lot to say but there is one aspect of the press which we should not be giving step - motherly treatment and that is the rural press.  This is where majority of the none graduate journalists happen to come from.  

I am reminded of the fact that some years back UNESCO did launch a programme for Uganda to develop the rural press, and we have not done much in following up whatever they try to set up.  Now if we discriminate these non-degree holders and pay attention to the elite who constitute I understand less than 10 per cent of the population of the journalist, we shall not be doing service to the profession. And I am particularly attracted by the fact that the hon. Mover of the Motion have given provisions that these -(Interruption) 

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of clarification.  I seek clarification from the hon. Member on the Floor to the effect that in this House we are trying to have a bill to create a profession. Is he saying that because we are not catering for everybody who is now practising we are therefore, not supposed to have a profession.

MR NTIMBA: I will explain this further. These people who are non degree holders who would like to professionalise themselves in as much the same way as the people of the teaching profession, in the teaching profession we have people who have never had formal teacher training but they train themselves on the job and eventually go to a teacher training and convert themselves from licensed teachers  -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  I would like to inform hon. Ntimba who is a senior teacher who says those who - teachers those who do not have qualifications to train themselves on the job, that is not true.  Hon. Ntimba formally was the P/S and therefore again was the minister as actually retrenched them and has instituted another institute for training them so that they become professional teachers, grade 111, grade V and so on.  So it is not true; please be consistent.  Thank you.

MR NTIMBA: Mr Chairman, I was talking about licensed teachers who have just been going to the classroom teaching without a form of teacher training, and some of these have gone - decided to professionalise themselves and going to a teacher training college to acquire the professional qualification.  In brief, I am not only talking about people of the rural press, even some journalists around Kampala have expressed concern that if they are excluded from the opportunity of participating in the deliberation of UJA, it will not be really fair to the profession as such, and I beg to vigorously again support the proposed amendment by hon. Mwandha.

MR RWAKOOKO: Mr Chairman, I do not see the problem with hon. Mwandha’s proposal.  First of all, I believe that it is envisaged that this institute will grow.  The membership of the institute will grow and will continue expanding as it improves the quality of its membership.  Even if you wanted to start with certificate holders as your basic starting members, there is nothing to stop the institute in year five to say that now the minimum qualification required is a PHD, there is nothing to stop. I think that we are really - we really have probably not addressed ourselves to this question sufficiently.  What hon. Mwandha was in fact been trying to detail here is what obtains in many International Professional Institutions.  

Now right now, if you have done engineering, and you want to do an MBA, you have excess, if you have done law you want to do an MBA, you have excess.  If you have done classics, literature and classics you want to do an MBA, you have excess.  What happens is that, while you are allowed you are given time to catch up with those areas which are recognised probably as not being of your strength.  But you will allow the institution to grow into strength if you become restrictive.  

So, I think you should give hearing to hon. Mwandha’s amendment because I believe strongly, that it does not necessarily water down the quality of the members of the profession.  After all, if once you have laid out your examination syllabus you can have a transitional period and you say for diploma holder, that is for internal arrangement by the way which his proposal recognises or brings in.  The council can say - the institute can say now within this time those diploma holders should have converted to degree and certificate holders to diplomas and so on. once you know that you are off the ground, there is no reason why you should not keep growing.  So I think that it is a very fair amendment and it will make your institute viable, if it is not viable, I can tell you it will be very difficult to run.  

Secondly, you must remember that if you shut out many people who are believed themselves to be in the profession, they certainly will remain there. The all that will happen, they will go underground. So the best thing is to bring then in and do remedial action. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information, Realising that we are starting with a core in this institute, whereby you need to make a start of people that I would substance and realising that when a man has a very low qualification you cannot expect him to invite in people of higher qualifications.  Is the hon. Member aware that he is trying to kill the institute right from the start by suggesting that he brings in certificate holders and he is expecting them to develop the institute and inviting degree holder, is he aware of that fact.  

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  I am more particularly aware, Mr Chairman, and I have heard I think more clearly what hon. Mwandha has suggested, he had not said I do not think he can say he has said that certificate holders be brought in, no he has said that the institute be given the latitude to decide the entry levels, and the entry levels, once they have taken a stock of what people they have, they can decide the diploma or even what we are talking about or even better.  Why do you restrict them, I have not really seen the essence of restricting them.  Why are you providing as if you have a mass of people there whom you must contain in a syndicate I think you should really allow the growth of the profession and allow the membership to become much better qualitatively as time goes by. 

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Yesterday in this august House Her Excellency the Vice President was very clear on this, and everybody is ken that journalism indeed is respected as a profession, and if we are to respect it as a qualification, then there must be some people somewhere to start it off. You are trained as I keep on making reference you get your degree in you veterinary medicine, you are registered in Uganda Gazette, then there after you continue to your area.  In this particular respect, we are not - and what is why I do not know why hon. Rwakakooko could not read the committee’s proposal which is coming in Clause 50 which now reads, as in the circulated paper, it is going to be now Clause 50. A person who is practising journalism immediately the commencement of this statute may continue to practice journalism, until is duly enrolled as a journalist in accordance with the provision of this statute.  (Applause) 

So, we are not saying that whoever is not enrolled should now pack and go. We are encouraging them that they should know the line to top.  This is why I oppose that this amendment.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of order.  Is the chairman of the committee in order - half to go by what we have not passed here. That is something which is coming ahead, we may not pass that Clause.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, he is giving you prior information that while you are discussing this, you take note of what is coming ahead, so that you may tie your ideas together.

MRS MPANGA:  Mr Chairman, I support hon. Mwandha’s Amendment. Because laws are not reviewed everyday.  If you make a very restrictive law right from the beginning you exclude those people who have experience from the profession of journalism.  Because I think the experience of journalists we have today do not have that degree.  If you are excluding experience and you are saying you are going to build a profession, I think you are denying them something that would make the institute grow.  

Secondly, when the chairman says he is ensuring that they do up grade themselves, can you tell us what steps you have taken to give them chance for taking that training.  I know there is a Mass Communication in Makerere they take only about 20 people a year and that is A’level, and they do not have many - neither do they many lecturers.  The thing is really in its infancy. I think we are tying to make this unreachable by the majority of people who are practising journalism.

PROF. WANGUSA: Point of information.  I would like to strengthen the argument on the Floor by informing her that as a matter of fact the course of Mass Communication at Makerere has been going on for about the five years, and for about 20 years before that, there was an element of mass communication as one paper out of 8 in the literature department and I want to inform the hon. Member that many of the names in the journalism you hear today do not have a 1st degree in journalism.  These include winners of International Awards in Journalism in this country.  Peter Sulikie Kiisa, Godfrey Senoga, the girls you hear on radio Mary Buhamizo, Ann Sharita name them, some of them have high personalities at New Vision.  They took small elements of journalism or in a degree course.  And there are people like Ofwono Opondo, his 1st degree is in social science not even in literature.  But I would have an arrangement where you say the Ofwono Opondos of this world Excellent as he is, because his 1st degree was in social sciences, and now he does not have a formal qualification in journalism is excluded from this, it will be sad. (Applause and Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member and the House that even our neighbouring countries Kenya and Tanzania do not have provisions for degrees in journalism at Nairobi and Dar-es- salaam respectively.

MRS MPANGA:  Thank you hon. Member for that information.  I think hon. Members you have seen that it will be very wise of us to put down a law that allows a profession to grow, and that does not exclude the most experienced, and that does not exclude others.  The other day I told you in the teaching profession we have grown.  We started with grade 1, grade 11, now we have said no, then grade 11 now we said now the bottom is grade 11, maybe, in a few years time we may say the bottom will be grade V, you have done 0’level, you have gone for two years training but at least we have allowed ourselves to grow.  

Secondly, if you do not allow these people the non-degree holders, you are saying that you want to build a profession for only a few, few people in this country, and I do not think this is the right time to do it.  I agree we should be very, very professional and take only the best but there is no country in this world where only degree holders should be full members. Because by saying that they cannot be full members you are saying that in their profession they cannot stand for elections, they cannot take part in decisions that affect them, they cannot even stand for office in that profession, and I think they should be there to guide the young degree holders to merit.  (Applause)

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I oppose the amendment of hon. Mwandha.  And if I may begin with hon. Joyce Mpanga has just been saying, the bill is not saying that people who do not have degrees shall not practice journalism.  (Applause)  It is saying that anybody, a journalist who has a degree can automatically almost become a member of the National Institute of the journalist of Uganda.  The rest, it will be a decision of the executive committee of the national institute of the journalist. So really the labour which hon. Mpanga has been undergoing should really be put to rest on that point. 

In the case of Prof. Wangusa the wonderful Opondo, Mary Buhamizo, Toya Kilama, Sulikie Kiisa etc. those can become members of NIJU even if they have degrees in law, SWASA, whatever but after one year of practice as a journalist, you can become a member of the national institute of journalist. So all these other debates do not arise.  I will be very unhappy if the amendment of hon. Mwandha really through.  Because you will have denied Uganda Journalists a core, the basic of their very existence. Because they will -(inaudible) at nothing other than certificates and experience and nothing but nothing serious nothing on the ground in terms of professional qualifications of professional education. 

In the case of the Medical Council of Uganda you cannot begin to practice medicine unless the medical council has allowed you to start, and the medical council is made of Doctors not nurses, not what but doctors.  Yet there are nurses, there are medical assistants, there are dressers all those people continue to treat and work in the medical profession in the villages.  But if you say that the law is going to discriminate, against the journalists of Uganda who do not have degrees, that are not fair.  

The Law Development Centre. You cannot practice Law in Uganda today unless you have got a Diploma from the Law Development Centre.  But there are magistrates grade 111, there are others and even RCs there are members of the legal profession even but they cannot say that they are registered in the register of national lawyers.  So, it will be really unfair, unfortunate if this House does not assist the profession of journalists.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman. (Applause)

MR OPIO:  I would like to oppose the amendment.  Mr Chairman, the bill as it stands does not prevent somebody from being journalist.  I will just give an example of an accountant.  We have many people who work in the profession of accounting, some who just got diplomas in accounting from UCC and other places, others have got BCOM but when it comes to whether they are professional accountants, they are not.  So, I would like to allay the fears of some people that by making - passing this provision to become a bill some people are going loose jobs, it is not true.  We passed here an Act which is creating accounting as a profession.  We have not had people that they will be laid off because they are working in accounting department.  If you form a company and you are a professional accountant, what it requires you is to have somebody who is a professional accountant, but the majority of the people who are working are going to be people who have known how to do adding and subtracting and those who have got diplomas and even BCOM in the area of accounting.  

What we are trying to establish is a standard, and a standard must be fair so that as to achieve the objectives.  If we are going to go according to what is re-availing which is acceptable and currently and the past, but we might not forget our objective of creating a professional which is respectable which we are setting our targets to make people achieve.  Let us not forget that, and let us accept that these people who are there and they are practising as journalists are not going to be removed by this provision, that should be made clear and people would debate with very honest words and let that not be - we would like to set standards and live according to standards.

MR ORYANG:  I would like strongly to support hon. Mwandha’s Amendment. (Applause) My reason for supporting this amendment is that, the institute is an independent professional body.  As an independent professional body you are not going to dictate the category of membership they are supposed to take.  Many institutions set their own categories of membership that does not mean we are to eliminate people who are not qualified.  People can qualify by experience, long experience and become members of institutions.  I think this one improves the relationship i that an independent institution is going to set a standard which may be in accordance to International norms, not necessarily what Uganda wants only.  So I strongly support hon. Mwandha’s Amendment which improves this section.  Thank you. (Applause)

CAPT. GASATURA (Rushenyi County): Mr Chairman, I want first to pick out some good merits in the would be Amendment; that the category of the membership need to be given some lee way that the institute will grow.  In which case if hon. Mwandha was to agree, we could have 21 read: ‘Membership of the institute shall be the following categories; full membership, associate membership, honourably membership and any other category that the institute may wish to have.’  Something like that.  

Two, I have heard several voices including Prof. Wangusa saying that we have only had the school of mass communications for only two years, we are all cognisant of that and that is why there was section 22(b); the fee is the holder of (a) University Degree, and (a) I understand from Prof. Wangusa means any.  So, (a) degree, and I believe from 19 - whatever, Makerere and then you have universities from within and without, have granted quite a number.  

The concern from hon. Joyce Mpanga and several others throwing out those without degrees; talking of excluding them but excluding them from what? Only from full membership! I am well informed that you cannot be a lecturer in engineering at Makerere however, good a diploma and experience you have from Kyambogo -(Interjections)- Please, would you protect me from the gentleman behind me; he wants to get even - at close range.  Here full membership is meant to set standards; that is why they have the voting right.  If we give the voting right to certificate holders and others licensed - are not trained, as hon. Mpanga was saying, then obviously this vote would be so large, but those with quality would not have a say.  The issue is about, who sets the quality?  And we are saying let the quality be set by those who have gone through it.  It is an issue of setting standards!

Finally, the institute is a professional body and who are the professionals here?  Full members are professionals and, therefore, subject to the code of ethics.  Associate members are professionals at their level and are subject to the code of ethics.  Hon. Mpanga the other day said that we have professional teachers in primary; grade 3, grade 5 and so forth; but with all due respect a primary 2 professional teacher will never be given opportunity to teach in a secondary school, unless he upgrades.  Therefore, those who set standards, whether in TTCs or universities must be those who have attained those standards.  This is why I beg to oppose, with all due respect, the Motion moved by hon. Mwandha, except in the respect of allowing for expansion for categories.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR D. LUBEGA (Rubaga Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the Motion moved by hon. Mwandha.  I support this Motion because I do realise by analysis that the intention of the Mover, that is hon. Mwandha, is to give and enabling law whereby the institute, in his own words, shall determine the categories. Whereas in our Bill the categories are restricted; the Mover goes on even to expand that statement by creating possible categories which are not mentioned at all in the Bill or will not be mentioned in the Statute.  Usually it bad legislation which very much restricts the operations of bodies which are responsible for creating or for carrying out the functions and objectives of what is intended.  

One duty about the Mwandha Motion is that here, when you read you have fellow members, associates, honourable fellows, honourable members, and group members; that is a wider category.  One now has got to argue whether these additional or additions are relevant, and if one argues so one has got to beg a question.  Under 20, we talk of associate membership but who are the associate members? It is not even defined here  -(Interruption)

MR KALULE SSENGO: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the hon. speaker is a qualified lawyer, and when he talks of his fellow lawyers, the calls them his learned friends.  I am wondering, in their profession of lawyers, do they have grade 3 magistrates and diplomats being referred to as lawyers to form the core of their profession; and if they do not, why should he want it to be for the journalists when he does not accept it in the law profession?

MR D. LUBEGA: Mr Chairman, I think the hon. Member is giving me information which may not be relevant.  I have not even talked of a degree yet; I have not even talked of certificates - I am talking of categorisation, and I am also talking of possibilities where by the institute is going itself to determine, that is for instance, sometime ago lawyers who came into practice had only to qualify with a law degree, either that one or Barrister at Law.  But as time went on the Law Council could not and does not accept such qualification, because they were allowed room to vary whatever could be prescribed. Now if we restrict it here  -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the practice which is prevalent in Uganda where you got the Law Development Centre, came about because of the collapse of the East African Community.  In Britain apart from the lawyers, apart from doing what you call - being involved with in order to be membership so that they know how you dress; they do not allow third rate in their profession.  I thank you.

MR D. LUBEGA:  Mr Chairman, I think the Members with due respect do misinterpret my presentation; because even in England the practice was that one could immediately go and enroll for Barrister at Law in the inns of courts, but as time went on now the requirement is practice; the one has got first to an LLB Degree - what I am talking about is nowhere in the Statute, if you are going to say under clause 20, sub-clause (2), a person shall be eligible for full membership of the institute if he is a holder of a university degree in journalism or mass communication.  Time may come when this may not be sufficient, as I have outlined.  

So, it is important that the body is charged with the obligations of education and curriculum.  You may find that even this prescription itself is not enough.  So, it is important - I am not talking in terms of certificates and degrees, what have you, but I am supporting his Motion because he is recommending that we should give the institute freedom to determine - (Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Could you wind up hon. Member.

MR D. LUBEGA: I hope I am understood, thank you.

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I wanted to read him these two lines; Clause 20 subsection (3); ‘The general assembly may set qualifications for associate membership..’ and I do not know why he is not willing to look at those lines, and get meaning of them!

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, as you are aware, this Clause has generated a lot of debate for and against, and as I have been following it, I found that there will be difficulty in the decision of those who will be in favour - of ayes, or noes.  As a result we are going to proceed as follows: I am going to put two separate questions and get separately those who are for the Amendment, and put another separate question for those who are against, so that I can determine who have it.  I now put that question that Clause 20 be amended as proposed by hon. Mwandha.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order, hon. Members.  The ruling is that noes have it, and when we counted those who contested the ruling they were 23, and if you want to crosscheck you can deduct 23 from those who are seated. (Interjections) I am repeating; hon. Members, I knew that this decision was going to be contentious, that is why I had to ask two separate question.  I knew the problem, I am aware, and I must give you guidance, and I also knew that the ruling was going to be contested; that is why we had to count the numbers of those who contested and you were 23. (Applause) 

I now put the question that Clause 20 as amended do stand part -(Interjections)- order, order; hon. Members, I repeat the question. I now put the question that Clause 20 as recommended by the committee do stand part of the Bill -(Interruption)- hon. Elly Rwakakooko, what do you want to say?

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Mr Chairman, I thank you very much for your indulgence.  I think we have always followed the principle of consensus; we have also always followed strictly parliamentary procedures.  Before we are deadlocked we cannot have deadlock created; the deadlock was created in advance as if the results were supposed to follow one way or the other.  May I ask for your indulgence; you put the question in the normal way and it is handled properly and properly defeated, if that must be, and upheld if that is to be.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, hon. Members, I think I was the most democratic in the approach! You see, hon. Members there is a difficulty in deciding -(Interjections) let me explain.  You see, hon. Members, this I not the first time we are coming to this kind of decision; for some of you who may have attended the CA, at times even the chairman may not decide whether the noes or the yes have, but there the procedure is that when they have a deadlock they go for division, but here there is no provision -(Interjections)- wait, let me explain.  Listen, there they go for a division, but here we allow for the challenging of the ruling from the Chair by allowing hon. Members to stand up and be counted, which I did! 

Now, we must come to a decision and normally hon. Members the eyes have it or the noes have it; this is what we have been going with.  At least, even if we vote many times there will be one side.  Listen, if you consult your rule No.50, it is specified clearly that when the question has been put by the Chairman the vote shall be taken voices, ayes and noes, and the results shall be declared by the Chairman! But there was an Amendment that if the ruling of the Chairman is challenged and if 50 Members stand the counting can go into division.

HON. MEMBERS: But when the procedure is properly followed!

THE CHAIRMAN: In conclusion the noes have it.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, you have given a ruling that hon. Mwandha’s Amendment has been defeated.  So, it means clause 20 still stands, but according to what has been circulated, I still see some additional Amendments on that particular clause.  So, since some other Amendments have already been circulated, I would like, Mr Chairman, on behalf of hon. Marwas a Member for Kween County to propose an Amendment on Clause 20 as follows: that we insert paragraph 2(c) which reads: (Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, may I seek your indulgence, after you have ruled, must we go further in getting back to the issues which have been solves?  Because I can see the anarchy in our country.  Some of these journalists have been writing as though we should not even have a Police Force, and therefore, they have influenced some of our Members so that they can do whatever they want and therefore, I speak as a person who is in Parliament, elected by Badadiri, that we should not faut mood of procedure because no country can do without Police, no country can do without rules of procedure -(Applause)- and, therefore, I request that we close this debate on that issue of clause 20.  I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, you hon. Members, I have been accommodating all the procedures here, and I am also aware that normal duty is to be done; but as you have witnessed from the debate, from the results from what is being said, the more I try to be democratic the more misunderstanding may be generated, and it is unfortunate.  Therefore, I will now ask the final question that clause 20 as recommended by the committee do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21:

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, I rise on a point of order.  Is it in order for this House to continue debating this very important Bill when the House does not have a quorum; is it in order?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member you will be perfectly in order if the House does not realise a quorum; he will be perfectly in order and he would not stand challenged, because it is provided for in our rules.  Now, therefore, we will ring the bells and may be counted. If we do not form a quorum then we adjourn.

THE MINISTER FOR INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING (Mr Paul Etiang):  Mr Chairman, I now beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER FOR INFORMATION BROADCASTING (Mr Paul Etiang): Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered up to 20 clauses of the Bill entitled Press and Journalist Bill, 195 and passed all those clauses with Amendments.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, as you know most of you are busy, others are in the CA and so on, and I think with that we come to the end of today’s Session, and we adjourn the Council until next Tuesday.  Thank you.

(The Council rose at 4.40 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 23 May 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)

