


Wednesday, 16 May 2018


Parliament met at 3.16 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I do apologise for the late start; I was still receiving two important petitions. The first is from the Ugandan staff of the United Nations (UN) base in Entebbe, following the press conference by the UN coordinator here; it expresses dissatisfaction with the content of her message. They had come to tell me what is really happening at the UN base. We shall be informing you about it, after we have had more interaction.

The second issue is from the citizens of Amuru who had expected the Atiak Sugar Factory to open this year. They have grown their canes and the canes are almost one year old but that the money which was supposed to come from the Government has not yet gone. They are 300 of them; they came to present that complaint and they will be coming to sit in the gallery.

Otherwise, as I said yesterday, we hope we can quickly run through these reports so that the Committee on Budget can complete its work. There is only one issue of national concern. I do not know whether hon. Mwine Mpaka is here? 

3.20
MR MWINE MPAKA (NRM, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. In reference to an article that was published yesterday in the Daily Monitor, where 200 model farmers in Kaliro District who acquired citrus fruits and mangoes under Operation Wealth Creation have failed to find market for their produce. They go ahead and demonstrate that a sack of 90 kilogrammes of oranges and mangoes is now being sold at Shs 30,000.

As you are aware, Madam Speaker and honourable members, this Parliament has allocated money to the National Agricultural Advisory Services, specifically Shs 17 billion this financial year for agro inputs and seedlings in the country. However, we still have companies like Riham, Britania and Coca-Cola and Allied Industries Limited that is producing splash, which are importing concentrates from Kenya and the United Kingdom. If these factories and companies are allowed to import concentrates, it means that they are not going to buy the fruits from our local farmers. 

Therefore, I would like to request this Parliament to call upon the ministry responsible to ban or regulate the importation of concentrates so that our farmers can get market for their produce. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: He wants a solution and he is done with his matter. Sorry, honourable members, I think, I had not seen my papers - is hon. Isaac Etuka here?

3.23
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Arua): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. In 2011, Parliament approved a loan from the World Bank to improve the infrastructural status of secondary schools. Ulepi Secondary School, got Shs 260 million and Okollo Secondary School, under this project, got Shs 286 million for the construction of classroom blocks, VIP latrines, among other facilities. 

This contract was awarded to Cermel Engineering Construction Company for Ulepi Secondary School. The one for Okollo Secondary School was awarded to Roba Engineering Construction Company Limited. However, from that time to date, these projects have stalled and no project is completed under this loan. 

In 2017, the Prime Minister wrote a letter to the Minister of Education and Sports requesting the minister to find out what exactly went wrong with the projects but to date, there is no response to this letter. I am sorry that the ministers can also disrespect the directive of the Prime Minister. 

We have got two reports from these schools about the stalled projects. I beg to lay on the Table, the letter by the Prime Minister to the Minister of Education and Sports and also the reports from the two secondary schools. 

Madam Speaker, my prayers are: 

    1. The Government should do everything possible to see that these projects are completed. From the time the work stalled, students have now gone to schools with better facilities yet these were schools which would help the local community to benefit from such a programme.

    2.  I would also like to pray that whoever contributed to the failure of these projects should be brought to book because this money was really borrowed to benefit the people and the poor of the country.

THE SPEAKER: The minister is directed to answer when we are debating the report on education. Honourable members, those who would like to raise issues, will raise them tomorrow. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORTS OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FY 2018/2019

THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS

3.23
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Connie Galiwango): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to present a summary of the report of the Sectoral Committee on Education and Sports on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Ministry of Education and Sports for the financial year 2018/2019.

Madam Speaker, I am not going through the details of the report.

THE SPEAKER: Do you have an executive summary? Please use 15 minutes.

MS GALIWANGO: I have 15 votes to present and I think I have to read the votes.
    1. Vote 013 -  Ministry of Education and Sports;
    2. Vote 111 - Busitema University;
    3. Vote 127 - Muni University;
    4. Vote 128 - Uganda National Examination Board;
    5. Vote 132 - Education Service Commission;
    6. Vote 136 - Makerere University;
    7. Vote 137 - Mbarara University;
    8. Vote 138 - Makerere University Business School;
    9. Vote 139 - Kyambogo University;
    10. Vote 140 - Uganda Management Institute;
    11. Vote 149 - Gulu University;
    12. Vote 301 - Lira University;
    13. Vote 303 - National Curriculum Development Centre;
    14. Vote 307 - Kabale University; and
    15. Vote 308 - Soroti University.

Madam Speaker, I would like to give the indicative budget estimates for the financial year 2018/2019 – (Interruption)

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, we are reliably informed that Busoga University has become a Government University and I am wondering why it is not appearing on this list. Could I get some explanation for that?

THE SPEAKER: It must have been a slip of the tongue. (Laughter) Reassure us on Busoga University.

MS GALIWANGO:  Madam Speaker, those are the votes that I currently have. However, if Busoga University has acquired a vote, it will be brought to the committee – (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are harassing the chairperson. Allow her to present and then you can raise your issues later. 

MS GALIWANGO: Madam Speaker, the sector minister is in the House; he will give us clarification on this. 
 
The indicative budget estimates for financial year 2018/2019

Overall the education sector allocation for financial year 2018/2019 stands at Shs 3,620,100,000,000 out of a total budget of Shs 30,905,500,000,000 inclusive of arrears and appropriation in aid. This allocation, when compared with the one for the financial year 2017/2018 of Shs 2,828,985,000,000, represents a nominal increment of Shs 233,300,000,000 and the sectoral share against the National Budget stands at 10 per cent compared to 11.37 per cent in the financial year 2017/2018.

Madam Speaker, there are notable increases in the wage and non-wage component by 9.8 per cent and 10.50 per cent respectively. Largely on account of science teachers and public universities salary – (Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have noticed that when the women are presenting, there is a lot of interruption. (Laughter) Yes, I have noticed it. Please listen to the chairperson of the committee.

MS GALIWANGO: Thank you for the protection, Madam Speaker. However, the donor development budget reduced by 13.39 per cent due to some projects concluding as is shown in Table 4 - but I am not going to go through the table. I will go straight to page 7 where we have observations and recommendations.

a) 	Teachers' salary enhancement

The committee observes that Government took a decision to enhance the salary of science teachers in the coming financial year. However, according to this proposal, the increment will create disparities in the salaries paid to teachers of the same qualifications, since the proposed gross salary for the science teachers with a degree is Shs 1,900,000 - though the public service may have the exact right figures - while an arts teacher with the same qualifications is to earn Shs 600,000.   

For teachers with diplomas, the proposed salary is Shs 1,200,000 for science teachers, as per public service indication, and Shs 500,000 for the arts counterparts.

This disparity was attributed by the Ministry of Education and Sports to the current financial constraints and Government's decision to give priority to sciences.

The committee further observes that all teachers contribute to the holistic upbringing of a child with a healthy body, mind and soul. (Applause) The committee notes with concern that the proposed increment will bring about supervisory challenges since even the supervisors in the education sector like the commissioners and directors at the Ministry of Education and Sports will be paid a lower salary compared to the proposed salary for the science teachers. 

Further still, the committee observes that the arts teachers in most cases have a bigger work load due to the number of students compared to the science teachers, especially for A‘level. When you get to A‘level, you will find an arts teacher teaching a class of about 100 students whereas the science teachers may have only 15-20 students hence a greater work load on the arts teacher.

The committee also feels that the funds allocated towards the salary enhancement can be used to recruit the 2,000 science teachers that have always appeared in the unfunded priorities under the education sector budget yet there are districts like Buliisa that do not even have any physics teacher and rely on senior six leavers to teach students. Madam Speaker, Tunyi Girls SS in Bulambuli has not had a single biology teacher since its inception.

The committee further advises that besides the use of financial benefits, several other issues have got to be addressed including teachers housing, laboratories, classrooms and other teaching aids in schools to improve students' performance in science subjects. 

The committee believes that the policy on salary increment on its own will not address the underperformance in science subjects. To the contrary, it could create the following challenges for the sector:

    a) The Arts teachers will be grossly de-motivated and as a result underperform or engage in strikes;
    b) This may also bring about fights and strikes among the students since the arts students will feel disadvantaged over their colleagues who study sciences;
    c) The work atmosphere in schools will be characterised by tension and divisionism. The absence of unity of purpose in schools will further undermine the learning environment; and
    d) The focus on science will create a lot of students without human skills such as communication, ethics and interpersonal skills which are extremely necessary in a typical work environment. 

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that the Government halts the salary increment for the science teachers in financial year 2018/2019 and harmonisation of both the arts and science teachers' salaries be actualised through wide consultations with the concerned stakeholders. 

Further, Government should reconsider the proposal since what it intends to do is unconstitutional and discriminatory as per Article 40 (1)(b), which says: “Parliament will enact laws to ensure equal payment for equal work without discrimination.”

The amount allocated towards the enhancement of the science teachers' salaries should be used to recruit the 2,000 science teachers so that the schools without any teachers in the science subjects can be supported.

Salary enhancement in universities

While Government increased salaries for public university lectures from last financial year, the committee observes that the salary structures at public universities were yet to be fully harmonised since universities still rely on part-time lecturers whom they pay at their rates.

The committee observes that the public universities' total wage enhancement for both teaching and non-teaching staff was Shs 78 billion in financial year 2017/2018. However, only Shs 19 billion was allocated, leaving a shortfall of Shs 59.5 billon. 

In financial year 2018/2019, only Shs 33 billion has been allocated, leaving a shortfall of Shs 45.5 billion. This totals to a shortfall of Shs 105 billion in public universities' salaries. If not adequately handled, this could bring about unrest in the universities. 

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports, together with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, should harmonise the salary structures in all public universities and halt the opening of new universities which may come at a later stage when these first ones are already equipped with infrastructure and staff.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide for the Shs 105 billion shortfall in the salaries for lecturers in public universities to avert unrest at the universities.

The next issue was about students’ feeding but it has already been harmonised after the interactions with the universities last week. 

Inadequacy of teachers in secondary schools

The ministry informed the committee about a big gap in science teachers in secondary schools. A total of 2,000 science teachers is required to fill this gap at a cost of Shs 18 billion at a salary rate of Shs 750,000 per teacher per month. However, this has been rejected by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the account of unavailability of resources. 

As earlier highlighted in the report, there are districts and schools without science teachers in certain subjects yet all subjects are examinable at O’level and A’level. The committee also noted that there is a shortfall in the number of both teachers of English and Literature and the shortage stands at around 1,200 teachers countrywide. 

The absence of a strong science foundation in secondary schools could undermine the Government’s promotion of sciences in higher institutions of learning and vocational training. Therefore, the committee recommends that funds being proposed by Government to enhance salaries of the science teachers should be used to recruit more teachers to cater for the schools without teachers for English and science subjects. 

Vocational instructors and tutors' training

The committee observed that the education sector has been undergoing transformation with many institutions changing their key mandates. For instance, when Kyambogo was upgraded to a university, it shifted its priorities to recruiting university students and as a result attention to teacher training reduced. The special needs education and technical education too, suffered the consequences. The ministry has not yet streamlined the training of tutors and instructors for PTCs and BTVET institutions.

Therefore, the committee recommends that the ministry should pay more attention to the funding of teachers and tutors’ training and harmonises their curricula.

Inadequate staffing at universities

The committee observes that year in year out, the Auditor-General has reported appalling staffing levels at public universities. A review of submissions by universities indicated that all public universities are staffed at below 50 per cent. The situation is even worse in new universities with some standing at less than 30 per cent as is the case with Lira and Busitema universities. This financial year, the ministry would require Shs 156 billion to recruit university staff to at least 50 per cent level in all public universities. However, this has been relegated to one of those unfunded priorities in the proposed budget allocation.

The committee recommends that Government should take the matter of public university staffing as a key priority in ensuring quality in higher education in public universities. At the minimum, resources should be provided for the recruitment of essential academic staff in key disciplines such as medicine, dentistry, engineering and agriculture, among others.

Absence of human resource development planning

While the ministry engages in manpower development at all levels, it is of great concern that at a micro level, there is no data or specific report indicating the human resource needs and the possible plan of action for training the national human resources to fill these specific needs. This is partly responsible for the high rate of unemployment in the country because the education and training functions are not churning out the skills required in the economy.

The committee recommends that the ministry should, in consultation with other stakeholders such as the National Planning Authority and the ministry responsible for labour, take deliberate action in carrying out a national human resource assessment with a view of identifying the skills gaps and redirecting effort to filling them on the basis of the country's human resource needs. Prior proper skills and national labour requirements assessment is necessary to guide policy makers on matters such as curriculum reforms and financial allocation to the sector.

Gender and equity responsiveness in the education service delivery

Pursuant to the National Equal Opportunities Policy (2006) and in compliance with section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the committee considered the gender and equity responsiveness of the sector and would like to make the following comments - Madam Speaker, I request that Members read those comments before I get to the recommendations.

The committee recommends that the ministry should help education institutions in planning and budgeting for infrastructural improvements and modifications taking into consideration accessibility for persons with disability.

We also found that many times in the higher institutions of learning, we have very few principals who are ladies; we advise that the ministry looks into that.

Absence of funds for the inspection function

The committee notes that the inspectorate function is key in ensuring efficiency and effectiveness of the education system of our country. It ensures compliance with standards, enforcement of national policies, conformity to teaching professional code of conduct and adherence of educators to approved syllabus and recommended instructional materials.

The committee observed that funding of this function has always been undermined by under budgeting and many times cuts in actual budget releases. An analysis of the budget proposal for financial year 2018/2019, for the inspectorate function revealed a greatly underfunded priority.

In our early report to this House, on the state of private secondary schools in the country, we indicated that there were few inspectors, with poor facilitation and lack of transport such as motorcycles and vehicles to carry out their work.

The committee therefore, recommends that a total of Shs l.3 billion be reinstated as non-wage recurrent for the inspectorate function and Shs 0.9 billion, be provided to procure additional motorcycles for inspectors' transport.

Vote Status of some agencies

In February this year, the committee convened a consultative meeting involving the Ministry of Education and Sports, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, National Council for Higher Education (NCHE), National Council of Sports (NCS), United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). The purpose of the meeting was to exhaustively discuss the continued underfunding of the NCS, NCHE and UNESCO.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should fast-track this process to enable the agencies in question obtain the necessary autonomy and resources needed for them to perform their mandates effectively.

Funds for student loans under the Higher Education Students Financing Board

The committee observed that the ministry has not provided adequate funds for the students' loans under the Higher Education Students Financing Act. In addition, the ministry has not provided the necessary resources meant for higher education students’ financing, in a single basket under the management of the Higher Education Students Financing Board as envisaged under Section 42 of the Act which provides thus: “All scholarships currently offered by the Government of Uganda including bilateral scholarships, existing immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall vest in the Board.”

However, the committee has learnt that State House Scholarships, top up allowances provided to students on bilateral scholarships, in foreign countries are still managed by the Presidency and the Ministry of Education and Sports Headquarters respectively.

The committee recommends that all resources allocated to the higher education students financing including the 4,000 government sponsorships at universities and the over 6,000 government sponsorships at tertiary institutions, the State House scholarships and bilateral aid scholarships, be sent to the Higher Education Students Financing Board for equal consideration of all Ugandan students. (Applause) This is especially that the Government Scholarship Scheme benefits the rich who can afford expensive secondary schools and thus pass well enough to benefit from the merit scheme.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should consider granting the Higher Education Students Financing Board a vote status to enable it execute its mandate independently and more effectively.

The committee observed that the Board has supported only 5,247 students for the four years it has been in operation. The Board informed the committee that it had been allocated only Shs 4.340 billion for the new cohort, which is the same as the previous year yet this, can only cater for 1,100 new students, on the scheme for financial year 2018/2019. The Board would have desired to increase the intake for financial year 2018/2019 to 3,000 new students.

The committee recommends that the Board should be allocated funds each financial year to increase the number of students benefitting from the loan scheme for sustainability of the scheme. In the financial year 2018/2019, the committee recommends that at least Shs 4.050 billion extra should be re-allocated from within the budget ceiling of the Ministry of Education and Sports to cater for an extra 900 new students, to bring the number of new students to 2,000 in financial year 2018/2019 instead of the 1,000 students.

The committee recommends that all the funds for merit scholarships like State House scholarships and bilateral aid/scholarships should be allocated to the Board for proper management as required by law.

The committee further recommends that in order to achieve equal consideration for all the students, Government should halt the Government scholarship scheme and all students apply to the loan scheme, since it has been noted that students from well to do families are able to attend good schools and in the long run, get to the university on Government sponsorship, leaving the students from the not-so-well-to-do families access funding from the loan scheme.

Madam Speaker, the poorest of the poor students are the ones who apply for loans. Meanwhile, the students from very rich families are the ones who receive scholarships from Government because they studied in very good schools. (Applause) That is why the committee recommends that all monies should be put in one pool so that whether you are from a rich or poor family, as long as you are a Ugandan, you all get money from the loan scheme and eventually pay.  

 Examinations malpractices in Uganda National Examination Board (UNEB)

The committee observed that there has been concern over the rampant cases of examination malpractices and leakages in the country, which has resulted into cancellation of examination results for some centres. 

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. Stop your small meetings. 

MS GALIWANGO: The secretary informed the committee that 21 suspects had been apprehended and arraigned in courts in connection with the malpractices. The Board however, noted that the penalties for offenders prescribed under the Uganda National Examination Board Act were not punitive enough to deter offenders and the Board had submitted proposals for the amendment of the law to Cabinet.

The committee recommends that the proposed Uganda National Examination Board (Amendment) Bill should be fast-tracked to address the numerous issues affecting the operations of UNEB in the management of examinations in the country.

The committee observed that UNEB did not have a development budget from Government of Uganda and continued to hire ware houses for storage of examination materials at a cost of Shs 500 million annually.

The committee recommends that UNEB should be allocated funds amounting to Shs 12.38 billion, for the construction of a storage warehouse and containers for storage of examination materials.

The committee observed that the budget for Uganda Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE) and Uganda Certificate of Education (UCE) examinations had remained the same over the last three years notwithstanding the increase in student enrollment over the period. As a result of this, UNEB usually faces challenges in registration. 

The committee recommends that the ministry reallocates within its budget a sum of Shs 18.699 billion to cater for the shortfall in funding for examination fees of Government sponsored students in UPE and USE schools.

The committee observed with concern that UNEB has failed to undertake the National Assessment of Progress in Education (NAPE) in secondary schools for three consecutive years. Last year, this was not done for primary level. This was attributed to lack of funding. The committee observed that that NAPE secondary school assessment was one of the mechanisms for ensuring high quality secondary education since the data collected from the exercise would inform changes in policy and decision making.

The committee recommends that UNEB be allocated a sum of Shs 6 billion next financial year to undertake –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, please wait a bit. I had informed you that the farmers from Atiak are here. This is Atiak Sugarcane Growers Cooperative Society,  Gem and Pacilo Cooperative Society from Amuru, Adjumani, Lamwo and Gulu. All those are their MPs but today they were brought by hon. Anthony Akol and hon. Lucy Akello. You are welcome. (Applause) You can proceed.

MS GALIWANGO: Madam Speaker, the committee has recommended that UNEB be allocated Shs 6 billion in the next financial year to undertake the NAPE secondary school activities; that is three billion shillings and continuous assessment of three billion shillings in all universal education schools.

General observations on universities

Busitema University

The committee observes that the university is understaffed at 20 per cent for academic staff and 16 per cent for support staff yet it is a multi-campus university. For instance, the university was allocated Shs 1.321 billion in the financial year 20l3/2014 to start the Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery with a cohort of 60 students. 

Currently, the university has five cohorts with 427 students without any increment in the wage bill and so it relies on part-time lecturers to handle the 4th and 5th year students. The committee recommends that the university be provided with Shs 4.310 billion to recruit the critical staff needed to address this gap.

Further, the university needs an additional one billion shillings to operationalise the University Technology, Business and Innovations Incubation Centre, which was partly funded under African Development Bank HEIST Project. The centre is intended to promote innovation in agro-based industries.

Muni University

The committee observes that Muni University was moving fast to establish new faculties of Science and Education yet the existing ones were not adequately facilitated to function effectively. This expansion, which is not backed by proper planning and funding, is partly responsible for underperformance in universities –(Interjections)– yes, it is not proper planning. Therefore, we would request that those universities that are expanding fast should first make sure that they concretise the programmes they have before they get onto others. 

The committee further observes that the university has had under releases of the development budget at only 23 per cent, which affected the implementation of the planned projects. Being new, the committee recommends that the university should be provided with its full development budget allocation to carry out the much needed development activities.

The committee further recommends that the university should be allocated an additional Shs 400 million for the procurement of two vehicles to facilitate the movement of staff in the execution of the university activities.

Makerere University

The committee observed with concern the rampant accusation of cases of sexual harassment at the universities; the latest being Makerere University case in which a student accused a staff in the office of the Academic Registrar of sexual harassment in office. The Vice Chancellor of Makerere University informed the committee that the university had introduced a number of measures intended to address this challenge, including a centralised marking system to eradicate the “sex-for-marks” scenario.

The committee took note of this additional measure taken by the university. However, centralised marking of examinations alone is not adequate in addressing this complex vice. The committee therefore, recommends that universities establish effective deterrent measures to deal with sexual harassment, including decisive disciplinary action against the perpetrators.

The committee observed with concern the continued delays in the rehabilitation of the Makerere University Dental School, which has remained an unfunded priority for so many years; notwithstanding that it is the only public dental institution in the country. Through various efforts initiated by the committee, the university spent Shs 400 million on the rehabilitation of the building that was to house the dental school and Shs 200 million on equipment, which are expected to be delivered by end of June, 2018.

The committee recommends that further to the current resources, the university needs to commit more of its resources from the Non-Tax Revenue to retool the dental school and the school of veterinary medicine in a phased manner to obtain an advantage from the increasing need for dental and veterinary training in the country and the region as a whole.

Gulu University

The committee observed that universities have accumulated a lot of debts – sorry, this is not only Gulu. The universities as a whole had accumulated a lot of debts, among others Makerere topping with Shs 64.22 billion; Gulu University with Shs 3 billion and next financial year, the universities have been allocated a small fraction of the requirement. Details are in the figures in the main report.

The committee recommends that all universities should be allocated additional resources to clear outstanding arrears and avert the risk of litigation that could be costly to Government and undermine prudent financial management.

Mbarara University

The committee further observed with concern the under release of the development budget funds for universities. Mbarara University, for instance, had 22 per cent release by half year. Therefore, there was a risk of delays of the ongoing construction works and the resultant cost overruns and litigation arising from the delayed payment of contractors.
The committee recommends that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should always make timely releases to universities especially with respect to development activities that have been planned and budgeted for in advance.

Further, the committee recommends that Mbarara University should fast-track the purchase of the university bus, given the fact that the university was provided with Shs 300 million for this item. Without this, the Kihumuro Campus will remain an inconvenience to students.

Madam Speaker, just to explain this, Mbarara University has a campus in Kihumuro but it is an isolated area without hostels. Many times it has not been used. However, when we implored them, they started using it but the bus they have is very old. Therefore, if the Government could release the Shs 300 million to buy the bus, at least the students will be taken as people plan to have hostels in the area.

Makerere University Business School

The committee also observed that Makerere University Business School (MUBS) has been having a challenge related to its status as a public university. The Principal informed the committee that the university submitted an application for a university status to the Ministry of Education and Sports.

The committee learnt that National Council of Higher Education visited the school and advised the ministry to set up a task force to initiate the process of gazetting MUBS into a university. However, the process was halted by the ministry, pending the review of the Government White Paper on Education as part of the recommendations of the Visitation Committee to Makerere University.

The committee recommends that the ministry should take an appropriate decision, one way or the other, on the status of MUBS so that the matter is put to rest and staff are given a chance to concentrate on their work.

Kyambogo University

The committee observed that Kyambogo University is the only public university still using asbestos sheets on its roofs. Besides, the university's general physical infrastructure, including lecture rooms, roads and sewerage systems is outdated and dilapidated beyond repair and needs reconstruction.

The committee recommends that the university be provided with an additional Shs 15 billion to work on the critical infrastructure and replace the dilapidated sewerage system. In addition, Shs 5 billion should be provided to enable the university recruit critical staff which would only bring it to 50 per cent staffing level.

Gulu University 

The committee observed that Gulu University had opened up a campus in Kitgum and planning on opening another one in Karamoja besides the numerous challenges that the main campus is grappling with. The Vice-chancellor attributed the establishment of the Karamoja campus to a presidential directive which he said the university was obliged to comply with.

The committee observed that this is likely to cause more challenges with staffing and funding and create more problems associated with multi-campusing, which Busitema University has been grappling with. The Karamoja campus had a budget of Shs 500 million last year. However, only Shs 170 million was availed. 

Lira University

The committee observed that Lira University has been training students in nursing and midwifery yet it lacks the facilities and students are required to facilitate these courses. The university recently completed the construction of a faculty of health sciences block from the Government of Uganda. This is supposed to host, among others, medical training. However, the university has not been provided with funds to recruit staff to start as planned.

The committee stressed the need for additional funding for the recruitment of professionals to facilitate training of the students at the university. Therefore, the committee recommends that the university be provided with funding to a tune of Shs 5.5 billion to recruit staff. Without the human resource requirement, the new faculty building will remain a white elephant.

The committee still observed that the university development budget was too low at only Shs 1.5 billion relative to its infrastructural needs as a new public university -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: No, you complete your report.

MS GALIWANGO: There was still something on Soroti University but maybe, let me talk about the National Council of Sports. In summary, the Ministry of Education and Sports is supposed to support stadia. However, you find that some of the land for the stadia has been grabbed.  In Kapchorwa, we also have a high altitude stadium, which is supposed to be completed but still the money is not enough. Therefore, we appeal to the ministry to fast-track that so that we have money for the Kapchorwa stadium and the other stadia as well.

I also would like to report that Government has aided 100 schools and the money has at least been availed. I am going to lay on the Table the list of the schools. However, I would like to note that out of the 2,100 teachers that are going to be employed, the ministry was emphasising majorly diploma holders  - well while it is good to have diploma holders in schools, the ministry should not emphasise that schools should only recruit diploma holders. The excuse they were giving was that there was lack of funds yet the funds that are available are earmarked to only enhance one set of teachers who are doing sciences.

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, I beg to move that the budget for the Ministry of Education and Sports be approved as per the table below, subject to the above observations and recommendations and proposed intra-sectoral allocations.

The education sector budget allocations are as follows, Madam Speaker:

Vote 013: Ministry of Education and Sports - Shs 583,528,245,000;

Vote 111: Busitema University - both recurrent and development expenditures, the total is Shs 38,360,589,000; and

Vote 127: Muni University - the total of both recurrent and development expenditures is Shs 15,504,496,000 -

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable chairperson, for this one, you must go item by item because we have to do the Committee of Supply.

MS GALIWANGO: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports
Recurrent Expenditure – Shs 174,398,311,000
Development Expenditure – Shs 409,129,934,000
Total – Shs 583,528,245,000

Vote 111 – Busitema University
Recurrent Expenditure – Shs 36,597,768,000
Development Expenditure – Shs 1,762,821,000
Total – Shs 38,360,589,000

Vote 127 – Muni University
Recurrent Expenditure – Shs 10,905,444,000
Development Expenditure – Shs 4,599,049,000
Total – Shs 15,504,496,000

Vote 128 – Uganda National Examinations Board
Recurrent Expenditure – Shs 87,824,608,000
Development Expenditure – Shs 4,467,100,000
Total – Shs 92,291,708,000

Vote 132 – Education Service Commission
Recurrent Expenditure – Shs 6,607,909,000
Development Expenditure – Shs   377,387,000
Total – Shs 6,985,296,000

Vote 136 – Makerere University, Kampala
Recurrent Expenditure – Shs 266,340,847,000
Development Expenditure – Shs 12,634,105,000
Total  – Shs 278,974,952,000.

Vote 137: Mbarara University of Science & Technology

Recurrent budget - Shs 40,189,578,000
Development budget  - Shs 3,787,927,000
Total - Shs 43,977,505,000

Vote 138: Makerere University Business School
Recurrent budget - Shs 76,789,961,000
Development budget - Shs 7,250,549,000
Total - Shs 84,040,510,000

Vote 138: Kyambogo University 
Recurrent budget - Shs 131,542,368,000
Development budget - Shs 10,117,139,000
Total - Shs 141,659,507,000

Vote 140: Uganda Management Institute
Recurrent budget - Shs 33,274,028,000
Development budget - Shs 5,633,001,000
Total - Shs 38,907,029,000

Vote 149: Gulu University
Recurrent budget - Shs 39,091,989,000
Development budget - Shs 4,423,493,000
Total - Shs 43,515,482,000

Vote 301 Lira University
Recurrent budget  - Shs 10,123,215,000
Development budget - Shs 3,569,691,000
Total - Shs 13,692,906,000

Vote 303: National Curriculum Development centre
Recurrent budget - Shs 7,249,202,000
Development budget - Shs 185,000,000 
Total - Shs 7,434,202,000

Vote 307: Kabale University
Recurrent budget - Shs 20,996,434,000
Development budget - Shs 1,337,240,000
Total - Shs 22,333,674,000

Vote 308: Soroti University
Recurrent budget - Shs 6,927,173,000
Development budget - Shs 6,000,000,000
Total - Shs 12,927,173,000

Madam Speaker, I would also beg to lay on the Table the minutes, the copy of the report and then a copy of the 100 schools that were grant aided. I beg to lay and to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and your committee for that comprehensive report. Before I hand over to the members, I want the Government to answer why we do not have a national manpower development plan yet we had talked about going to middle income status in just a few years. Where is the national manpower development plan of this country?

Secondly, I want to know whether the Equal Opportunities Commission has assessed the infrastructure in this sector to show that it is compliant to both gender and equity. For instance, some institutions have boys’ dormitories but without girls’ dormitories. I do not know whether they took an interest in that. In Kamuli, Nawanyago Technical Institute has only a boys’ dormitory - despite a presidential directive five years ago, up to now there is no girls’ dormitory and I know that there are other facilities. Therefore, I want to know whether the Equal Opportunities Commission evaluated that.

Thirdly, I would like to know whether the sanitation facilities are there in all the schools for both boys and girls and whether water is there. We also want to know whether we are meeting the SDGs under this sector. 

Members who contributed yesterday will not contribute. Honourable member sit down, hon. Kibalya, sit down, hon. Pacito, sit down; I have your list here. You allow other members to also contribute. Yes, let us start with hon. Khainza. 

4.24
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. The fourth sustainable development goal is about inclusive and equity quality education for all. I would like, on this note therefore - and also the National Objective Directives 18, states thus: “The State shall take appropriate measures to afford every citizen equal opportunity to attain the highest education standards possible.” I would like therefore, to find out from the chairperson of the Committee about the affirmative action for Eastern Uganda. For the last three years, our performance has not been good and the ministry committed to have an affirmative action as far as those exams are concerned. Therefore, I would like to find out what the ministry has done in that case. 

However, on that note also, I agree with the committee recommendation that the funds for higher education like the student loan scheme and the Government sponsorship money should be put in one envelop so that we equally access those funds.

Madam Speaker, the role of inspection cannot be downplayed in our schools. Inspection plays a big role in the performance of our pupils and students country wide. Therefore, I agree with the committee recommendation that we should avail Shs 2.2 billion in this department of inspection to facilitate the inspectors but also to get the motorcycles, which will help them to do this job.

Chairperson of the education committee, I did not hear anything about –(Member timed out.)

4.26
MS ROSE AYAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My issue is to do with the Government aided secondary schools that have been considered for the financial year 2018/2019. Maracha has some three sub-counties namely, Maracha Town Council, Tara Sub County and Oluvu Sub County that do not have government-aided secondary schools. We have notified the ministry responsible since 2016 and the district officials have also been following up this matter with the ministry. 

However, to my dismay, out of the 100 secondary schools that will receive Government aid, Maracha District is conspicuously missing. So, I am wondering whether there is equity in this process. How was the criteria arrived at? Out of the 100 schools, there are some districts that still do not have secondary schools and have not been considered. For example, some districts have been considered for more than one secondary school in this lot – see Masaka, Mbarara, Mubende, Wakiso, Isingiro, Mityana, Luuka and Kanungu.

Honourable minister, why are some disadvantaged districts like my own not considered in this lot. I need a serious answer because our students are poorly performing. For example, in last year’s senior four results, we had less than 20 students who passed in division one. There are districts that are staggering yet they are not being considered. In any case the ministry should review this - (Member timed out.)

MR OKIN: Madam Speaker, we have just been scanning through this report and the chairperson indicated that there is a list of the secondary schools allocated to the sub counties but I do not see it in this report. Isn’t it going to be very difficult for us to comment on the issue of the senior secondary schools? So, is it procedurally right for us to proceed without the list? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Was this part of your report?

MS GALIWANGO: Madam Speaker, I think it was an error but the clerk was supposed to upload it.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let the Clerk upload it.

MS GALIWANGO: If, Members need it, we will provide it.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, they need it. 

MS GALIWANGO: Madam Speaker, let them photocopy this as the Members contribute on other issues.

THE SPEAKER: Let the Clerk arrange for that however; I also have an issue on that list. I have reported here more than twice that Mayuge District has eight sub counties with no government-aided secondary school yet it is also not on this list.

4.30
MR EMMANUEL KALULE (NRM, Gomba County East, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are all products of education but from the report of the committee, it seems that there are so many short-comings in our educational institutions. The universities are underfunded and understaffed, which means we shall be rolling out graduates who are half-baked and that is not good for the nation. 

According to the report, the inspectorate is not doing well. In fact in many of our rural schools one can take a whole year before seeing an inspector come to a primary school. I am told that before an inspector gets to a school, the head teacher receives a phone call, he prepares an envelope and as soon as he arrives he picks it and goes away without carrying out proper inspection. That is why many of our primary schools are not doing well as a result with standards and the buildings in many of these primary schools being in very bad conditions, not conducive for good learning. In short, I appeal to our Government to pay particular attention to the recommendations of the committee.

Lastly, it seems that we are expanding but in a very unplanned manner. We have opened up so many universities which are not well facilitated. We are rolling out so many graduates yet we have inadequate jobs in this country. 

Many of our doctors are running out of the country. We are a poor country but the people we trained are not helping us; they run out to other countries for greener pastures. So, we need to look at the emoluments of these doctors so that we do not lose them. Otherwise, it is useless to train them for other countries. Thank you very much.

4.34
MS STELLA ATYANG (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to comment on the presentation of the committee. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for presenting this wonderful report. 

I would like to comment on the plans by Gulu University to open a centre in Karamoja region. We all know that the literacy rate in Karamoja compared to the national rate is too low. So the creation of Gulu University centre in Karamoja is so important to increase the literacy rate in Karamoja.

It will reduce the transport and study cost that is normally incurred by students travelling to other distant places looking for tertiary institutions.

Sometimes students from Karamoja get scholarships but are incapacitated to utilise them because they are unable to afford transport to the tertiary institutions outside the region. Therefore, the creation of Gulu University centre in Karamoja will enable these students to exploit the scholarships that are available for them.  

My other concern is on the money that has been allocated to this university. The land that has been cited for this university is vast but without a single structure. So, to functionalise this university in the coming financial year, there is need for more money to be allocated to enable it construct these structures and employ more staff so that the university can become functional. 

I pray that the ministry allocates more money for this university to be functional in Karamoja – (Interruption)- you can have your information as I have completed. (Laughter)

MR GILBERT OLANYA: She has given me permission –
 
THE SPEAKER: No, she has finished making her contribution. She is no longer on the Floor. Hon. Olanya, do not smuggle.

4.37
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and the members for the good and comprehensive report they have presented to the House. I would like to talk about two issues.

First, I would like to say that it is not good to discriminate against the teachers in salaries where we are proposing to pay Science teachers more than Arts teachers. They all contribute equally to the development of our country and they are all rendering a good service. Instead, I would like to propose that we lift the ban on recruitment of teachers and we recruit more teachers. 

We have been moving with the Public Accounts Committee to different districts and we have found that the education standards that have been set have not been adhered to. The teacher-pupil ratio is very bad so we need to allocate more money to recruit teachers so that we reduce on the disparity. 

I would also like to request that there is affirmative action taken for districts that have been performing poorly in Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE), Uganda Certificate of Education (UCE) and Uganda Advanced Certificate of Education (UACE) examinations so that they get the necessary teachers to improve the education standards and we have a balanced economy. Thank you.

MR WAKABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Hon. Wakabi is a member of the committee; number 15.

THE SPEAKER: What? Are you a member of the committee? Why did you stand up? Please sit down. (Laughter) Honourable members, do not tempt me. Why do you stand up when you are a member of the committee?

4.39
MS JANET OKORI-MOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for a very good report. I have a few comments to make. 

First, on development of infrastructure in schools. I think this needs a lot of focus because even as we look forward to middle income status, which I know we shall reach selectively, some schools still lack sitting facilities. For example, the best performing school in academics in my district has its primary one to primary six pupils still sitting on the ground yet we are looking forward to middle income status. 

The other issue is water. Like you said in your opening remarks, Madam Speaker, fetching water by school children has become another extra-curricular activity. Students spend more time fetching water than studying hence the poor performance you hear about in some schools. 

I would also like to comment on lack of coding of schools. It is a Government policy to have secondary schools in every sub-county. Communities have struggled to put up these schools in the sub-counties. Last weekend, we were in Pakwach District where we were told that the community started a school in 1985 but Government has not taken it over up to now. In Abim, the last coding of schools was done in 2006. We need to focus more on this. 

Regarding the issue of the University of Karamoja, it is a welcome idea for all the Karimojong because we have been travelling long distances to look for these universities: 700 kilometres to access Mbarara University, 600 kilometres to access Makerere and Kyambogo – (Member timed out.)

4.42
MR MOSES NAGWOMU (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to thank the committee for the report. However, I would like to make my observation that much as there are so many allocations, which have been made to public universities, you may remember that Busoga University was taken over by Government but I have not seen any allocation of funds to that university. I propose that we pick some money from these universities so that we make this university move forward. 

Secondly, the honourable member has just talked about infrastructural development of secondary schools. All the historical giant schools in this country have gone downhill. Today you cannot talk about Bukedi College Kachonga, Nabumali High School, Manjasi or Masaba Secondary School. All those schools that we used to hear about and struggle for - If you took a teacher to teach in those schools, he would just pack the next day and leave because there is no accommodation. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you because you have talked about latrines and water. The issue of water in these schools is alarming. The Government cannot talk about development, without looking at the education sector as it is the foundation of everything. 

Lastly -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Ndamira starts, in the public gallery there are some young people from Mityana District represented by hon. Nabakooba. Are you the ones? You are welcome. (Applause) 

4.45
MS CATHELINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the comprehensive report. I would like to also thank the Government for the current heart it has put on.

I would like to comment on salary enhancement for science teachers. For sure, Uganda has been doing poorly in science subjects. However, other skills developers have also done well to make this country move forward. If we are to consider science oriented Members of Parliament in this House, they could be few meaning that we also need those other skills developers. 

Therefore, if the Government is to keep moving on, you cannot engage yourself in a sector that will not easily develop. I would like to urge the committee to look into this and consider the people who have carried on the work of Government despite being given peanuts as a token of thanks. 

I would also like to know the criteria in the students’ loan scheme. I have not seen it in Kabale and thus, I would like to know the criteria of giving out these loans. I have seen rich people getting the opportunity to use this scheme while leaving out the poor. 

I would like to urge the Government –(Member timed out.)

4.47
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We, the people of Karamoja, are grateful to the President for giving a directive that a university campus should be created in Karamoja.

Two weeks ago, we had a meeting with the Vice Chancellor of Gulu University and his team and all leaders of Karamoja were assembled in Moroto. There was good news about the university campus in Karamoja and all the people were very excited. They told us that Shs 500 million was readily available for the establishment of the campus.

However, today the report tells us that only Shs 170 million is available. This is very strange. In that regard, can I ask the Minister of Education, who is planning for this university campus in Karamoja? Is it Gulu University or the Ministry of Education and Sports? If so, what can Shs 170 million do to establish such a university?

Secondly, I kindly disregard the committee’s recommendation that the new university should be halted. Why such a proposal when it comes to Karamoja? Let me give advice to the Ministry of Education and Sports to get back to the President who had Karamoja at heart and tell him that his directive is not working because the Shs 170 million cannot do much. Where can we get more money? (Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, honourable, for the opportunity. Madam Speaker, we agreed that for purposes of regional balance and promoting education in some regions that are lagging behind, we need to have universities in areas like Busoga that did not have any Government-aided university, Karamoja and all those other places. 

However, for a committee to come here and say that they have no money for some of these universities to be created is not right.  People from other regions are accessing and enjoying free education while those from our regions are going to suffer and not benefit simply because they are saying there is no money. 

Madam Speaker, that is not right. We need the committee and the ministry to look for money since we agreed that there should be regional balance. We should have public universities in all regions so that we promote people at the same level.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you are now smuggling really. “Sodium”, I do not know whether you still have time.

4.50
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee for the report and specifically appreciate them for the very strong recommendation that they have made on the preferential or discriminatory payment of salaries to teachers: science teachers versus humanities teachers.

I wonder whether Government and all the ministers sat, put your minds together and agreed that science teachers should be paid three times the amount of money that the other teachers earn. Did you really agree to it and find that it was the right thing to do and even have the courage to propose it to us?

Madam Speaker, this is a very discriminatory payment system, just as the committee has observed. It reminds me of what we went through sometime last year when this Parliament voted on a certain amendment, which it was argued, was discriminatory. If that Article was discriminatory at that time, how again do we come here and say it is the appropriate thing for us to do to pay some teachers more money and we pay peanuts to those ones teaching humanities? This is an absurdity. I think it is not attainable and it should condemned.

Madam Speaker, if it is to be adopted at all, as it is proposed, it would mean that classroom teachers would be earning more than head teachers in their schools. You can imagine how the supervisor is going to earn probably half –(Member timed out.)

4.53
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this good report and for highlighting some of the objectives of the ministry, one of which is to improve the quality of education at all levels in the country.

Madam Speaker, this quality cannot be improved if we do not address the teacher:pupil ratio at primary level. If I look around my district, which I have been touring looking at schools’ performance, I found teachers marking books. Each teacher had about 300 books, which actually go above their heads when they are reviewing the exercises of the pupils.

When you ask them why they are performing poorly in school, they also ask you, “What do you expect us to do, Madam MP? Look at the books I have to mark before tomorrow.” In terms of supervision and checking on the work of these children, it is impossible for one teacher to supervise 300 students.

In Kumi District, I have a gap of about 400 teachers and I need to fill it but I do not know what the ministry is going to do to support Kumi District in that area. On average, instead of eight teachers, we have only five or less per school. Madam Speaker, I think that area needs to be strengthened by the ministry and a solution should be found in terms of providing more teachers per school.

Secondly, if access is not improved in my district, I will not stand here and congratulate the ministry. I have sub-counties, which do not have a school at all. Tisai Island has people living there but they do not have any school for their children. Therefore, I would like the ministry to take note that Tisai Island in Kumi District has no primary school but has over 3,000 people living there.

Another sub-county called Kumi sub-county has no school at all. Therefore, I wonder about the access that you are taking about as a ministry –(Member timed out.)

4.55
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also commend the good work done by the committee up to this stage. 

I have two issues I would like to discuss; the first concerns bilateral scholarships, which have not been widely given out. I come from Lwengo District and we have never seen even one student being awarded a bilateral scholarship. I am of the opinion that we should have these scholarships evenly divided among the districts so that each district can benefit. This way, those that are outside Kampala can also benefit.

Madam Speaker, I have seen that asbestos roofs are still in existence in Kyambogo University. Asbestos is very dangerous because it is cancerous. I wonder whether there are some other buildings with asbestos roofs because about 15 years ago, World Health Organisation declared asbestos as very dangerous to human beings. This matter is very urgent and the Ministry of Health should come up quickly to rescue our students and teachers. I rest my case.

4.57
MR JACK ODUR (NRM, Kibanda County South, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to add my voice to thank the chairperson and the committee for the good job. However, the people of Bunyoro are keenly watching and it would be very unjust for them - I have heard the report very keenly and Bunyoro University is not mentioned anywhere. This would be very disastrous after the Ninth Parliament passed these regional universities and some universities have been operationalised but Bunyoro has no university. 

I wish to request the ministry and committee that maybe it was an oversight but Bunyoro University is key and our people really deserve it –(Interruption)

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, it is true that regions that have a comparative advantage like Bunyoro, which has oil, should have some consideration for affirmative action regarding a university. However, in the Elgon zone, we have a similar comparative advantage naturally given; we have the altitude for sports. It would, therefore, be good for that sub-region to also have a sports university accorded to them. Mbale District would definitely be the best place to host such a university. (Laughter) 

MR ODUR: Thank you, colleague, for the additional information. Madam Speaker, we are privileged to have the oil institute in Bunyoro. Therefore, it would even cut on the costs for operationalisation if that institute is elevated to a public university and that would serve the purpose for Bunyoro University. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.59
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to pick up the idea of what I call regional or tribal universities. There is a saying that we cut our coat according to our cloth. While building all these universities is a good idea, as the top planning organ of Government, I think we should desist from hoodwinking our people with the idea that we will build regional universities when we do not have the money. 

One professor once said, in this country we call secondary schools universities for the expedience it has. I think we should really strengthen the universities that exist. Makerere University is still having problems, Makerere University Business School (MUBS) is having problems and Kyambogo Univesity is also having its own problems. We should make those universities good enough to compete internationally through equipping them and making sure that our students get the best education before we start thinking about these other universities, which have been allocated Shs 175 million to start. 

My other observation is, I would like to thank the team which has done what they have done – (Interjections)– I will not take the order, I have very limited time sir –(Laughter)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the century we are living in, we are always promoting affirmative action; we are promoting regional balance and doing whatever it takes to make sure that we uplift those areas and sectors that could be lagging behind. The Committee on Equal Opportunities is there and it is a programme that we are promoting right from Parliament and outside Parliament. We were in Parliament and resolved that we should have regional universities for regional balance. That is why you have every sector represented. 

I wonder whether it is in order for a colleague, the honourable Member of Parliament and son of a Bishop, to come on the Floor and say that it is not right for us to begin talking about regional balance and tribal a, b, c and d but we should concentrate on the few historical universities that were here. 

A few minutes ago, he heard one of the Members of Parliament saying that those students that get scholarships from Karamoja cannot afford to travel to Gulu University because they do not have the money and transport that can take them there. However, when a university is put there, they will access education and have that area promoted. Is it in order, Madam Speaker, for the colleague to really say that? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House took a decision that there should be equity and balance in the country. Therefore, you are out of order if you take issues out without –

MR GONAHASA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I still insist that unless the existing universities are made credible, we are going to have secondary schools called universities and they will not serve the purpose for which we would like them to serve.

My next point is on State House scholarships. I am very grateful to the Government for having done this for some time. However, a time is coming when I would like to suggest that we go back to the basics. When we were young, we had bursaries extended by districts. The districts identified which children deserved those facilities. Under decentralisation, I would like to recommend that we look at the possibility of decentralising State House scholarships such that districts support the best students who may not have the ability to pay. We have this thing called district quotas. I think it is good enough but we could make it better by having a decentralised effort –(Member timed out.)

5.04
MS LUCY ACHIRO (Independent, Aruu County North, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the Committee on Education and Sports for the comprehensive report you have given us. At least, your report has tackled the issue of salary disparity, teachers’ salaries, sports to girls and boys and feeding in schools. I must say, your report has been really good. 

I would like to commend the committee on their recommendation on sexual harassment in schools and universities. I would like to request the committee to send recommendations to schools to come out with policies like “name and shame”. If someone has done something wrong, has harassed a girl or boy in school, they should name and shame that person in public. 

Secondly, all universities and schools should come out with policies on sexual harassment so that we can protect our girls and boys in school. Sexual harassment does not only apply to the girls or to the teachers but it cuts across.

Thirdly, there should be an Internet policy in schools. They are people who are very good at sending bad pictures to their colleagues. I think when we have this policy in schools and universities, we shall be able to curb the rate of sexual harassment.

I would like to get clarification from the committee or the minister on any regulation that is in place regarding the creation of community schools –(Member timed out.)

5.06
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend the committee for a very good report. I have a few issues to raise because I totally agree with the committee on many recommendations, particularly on the issue of the salary disparity. I have just returned from my constituency and it is a hot debate. I therefore support the committee’s position that if there is any salary improvement to be done, it should be done across the board.

My second point is in regard to Muni University. I think the committee should have been kind to the university, young as it is. The fact that at the moment the university has only operationalised one faculty and is ambitious to have other faculties operationalised - you cannot begin recommending a curtail on the process of opening up other faculties.

The fact on the ground is that actually, there are plans but it is only the funding gap that is hindering them. Therefore, I expected the committee to be kind enough to the university.

The third issue is in regard to the sports facilities; the stadia. We have debated this matter over and over again and we agreed that Government should develop regional stadia in Arua, West Nile. Inzikuru Stadium was pledged here on the Floor of Parliament. We are happy that the High Altitude Complex is being worked on and there is also supposed to be work on Mbale stadium, Kakyeka stadium and others. However, we are not seeing any allocation specifically tagged to this development. 

Madam Speaker, I am directly involved in the sports industry and we see a lot of talent that goes to waste down there that could have been utilised. This is because this young talent, once exposed, can actually earn this country a lot of forex. 

We would like the ministry, this financial year, to come out categorically and explain to us the plans they have, the stadia they have built and the ones that are being planned for development so that we know that this year, maybe in Arua we have one, next year we shall have another one in Mbarara. The country needs to know that indeed there is commitment from Government. 

Therefore, I urge this House –(Member timed out.)

5.10
MS ANNE MARY TUMWINE (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for the report. I seek clarification on the policy of having a primary school in every parish, a secondary school in every sub-county and a tertiary institution in every district. This policy is not seen in some of our districts and we do not know whether it is still going on. For example in my district of Ntoroko, we do not have a primary school in every parish and children have to walk long distances to attend classes. Because of that, there are a lot of school drop-outs causing early marriages as well as poor performance. 

In addition, there is affirmative action and a policy on hard-to-reach districts. To my surprise, I discovered that Ntoroko district is not gazetted as one of the hard-to-reach districts so it does not have affirmative action interventions like qualified teachers, enough classrooms and some of our schools are not complete –(Member timed out)

5.12
MS OLIVER KATWESIGYE (Independent, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the elaborate report. I have a few observations to make. Some time back, we agreed here on the Floor of Parliament that all schools, be it Government or private, that do not have the required standards should be closed. There are Government schools in my district where children study under trees and they have not been closed.

Secondly, when the district quota system came, we thought that the poor and vulnerable were going to benefit on Government sponsorship. However, you must agree with me that those children who go to the universities on merit are children from rich families. These are the families that can afford to sponsor their children for private courses at Makerere University. The slots given to the quota system at the district level are very few. For example my district of Buhweju, they only give us four slots.

Therefore, in line with the recommendation of the committee, I think we should scrap everything and go for the loan scheme. I think that will serve us better. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Maybe I am not up to date but as per our resolution in the Eighth Parliament when we established the quota system, it was supposed to be 11 students per district. I do not know what has happened to that number.

5.14
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee has talked of planned outputs for financial year 2018/2019 and among them is the establishment of Government primary schools in parishes and secondary schools in sub-counties. 

Madam Speaker, there is need for Government to collect data on areas, which are very much in need of schools and also to see which ones are in need of human resources to enable Government make priorities for the most needy districts so that we can see which one comes first. It is unfortunate that the list that the chairperson talked about is not with us. Otherwise, we would know where we stand.

Yesterday, Madam Speaker, you told this House that seven sub-counties of Namayingo do not have schools and just now you have told us that eight sub-counties in Mayuge do not have secondary schools. Similarly, Amudat district has only 11 Government-aided primary schools and two secondary schools. The people of Amudat have embraced education. Right now, with support from development partners, they have constructed schools but who is teaching in these schools? It is primary school dropouts. What do we expect from learners being taught by dropouts? Will they be able to compete with other learners who are being taught by qualified teachers? It is very unfair and unfortunate. 

Therefore, I call upon Government to code these schools, provide teachers and supplement the efforts of the community and the development partners –(Member timed out.)

5.16
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, I stand here to raise issues that the Government must pay attention to. In the district I come from, Amuria, we have a shortage of 425 primary school teachers, which the central Government has not put on the ground. This is a very crucial matter.  
                                                                          
Amuria, Napak, Abim, and particularly the districts that border Karamoja, Acholi, Lango, Kapchorwa and Teso, have their communities returning to the areas that were affected by insecurity. There are many community schools that have been built by our own people without support from the central Government. Madam Speaker, these areas call for urgent attention from the Government especially as regards teachers.

Before I proceed, I would like to alert this Parliament to the core of our problem. When the Auditor-General brought the report for financial year 2016/2017 and that of financial year 2014/2015, they raised issues. According to the reports, the education sector failed to achieve the minimum standards of education in the country. I would have expected this Parliament to come out very strongly and demand the Ministry of Education and Sports ministry to explain why the ministry could not achieve the minimum standards of education in the country. That is where we should start from. They should explain why, before we talk about expanding institutions without looking at the quality of education and institutions put in the country.

Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to inform you that the list of the 100 schools is now on the iPads. You can check.

5.19
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the work well done. 

The committee has informed us about disparities in the education loan scheme. This is a situation where some districts are benefitting with about 56 and yet others have only two, three or four in a financial year. In their report, the committee says that there was little information given to the districts. However, the majority of the population in this country now know about the education loan scheme but I wonder why they are not benefiting. We need equal treatment. I saw from the list here that even girls are not benefitting. There is a situation where there were 16 applicants from a district and three males were admitted but no girl was admitted. You wonder what is happening. 

Madam Speaker, we would like to see a situation where all the districts are benefitting from this. We also want them to give us equal treatment. We do not want a situation where the children of the poor are not benefitting while the children of the rich are the ones benefitting. Therefore, we support the recommendation of the committee.

Madam Speaker, Lira University has been teaching students nursing and midwifery and there is already a science block that has been constructed –(Member timed out.)

5.22
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu)): Madam Speaker, I must thank the team because I interfaced with them when they were in Gulu and they did a great job in this report. 

I would like to raise one important issue regarding the state of Government historical secondary schools that are in total shambles. What plan is there for these schools? Madam Speaker, the minister is not attentive -

THE SPEAKER: Minister in charge of education and sports, this report is yours.

MR KOMAKECH: I am submitting a very important issue regarding the state of historical secondary schools in Uganda, which are in shambles. Start from Ombachi in West Nile, Sir Samuel Baker and Layibi in Gulu, Busoga College Mwiri - What is the strategic plan to raise these schools that were very prominent and produced very good Ugandans? They have all been centres of excellence; what is happening?

Secondly, I think the Ministry of Education and Sports needs to reflect; maybe they have lost the philosophy of education in Uganda. I say this because if today you asked anybody what the philosophy of education is in Uganda, no one will explain. Go to Tanzania, they will tell you, “education for self-reliance”. This could be one of the greatest problems, because education has now become for economic good; it is no longer for public good. That is where the challenge lies. We need to review this and see how we have advanced from the Kajubi Report. To date, no audit has been done in terms of performance. Therefore, we should generate ideas on how to move forward.

Lastly, I would like to say that Gulu Municipality, which I represent, has two divisions - Pece Division and Laroo Division - which have not had any opportunity to have an effective seed secondary school. Are you coming forward to ensure that these seed schools are put in place so that the people of Gulu Municipality, as part of this country, can also benefit from this Government policy? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.24
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee for the good work. 

I would like to support the committee’s recommendation that the Government sponsorship scheme be scrapped. This is the best recommendation so far. Madam Speaker, if you look at the people who are benefitting from the Government sponsorship scheme, you will find that it is the children of the well-off people who can afford to pay about Shs 2 million for their child per term; they are the ones who are benefitting from the Government sponsorship scheme. Therefore, if we can, let us divert this money into the district quota system. 

Right now, under the district quota scheme, each district is sending six or a maximum of eight students. We can agree that each district should send 20 students. There, we shall have equal opportunity for education in the country.

Secondly, if we are not careful, we are dividing the country through education. The way we are moving with our education system in Uganda, we are heading towards total disunity in future. I am saying this because in the past, students from eastern Uganda would study in northern Uganda, western Uganda or central Uganda. Madam Speaker, you are an example. You were born in eastern Uganda but you went to northern Uganda for your secondary education and then you came to Kampala for your university education.

Right now, one can start their primary one in Gulu, have their secondary education in Gulu, university education in Gulu, you get work in Gulu and you do not know how other –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: To add to what hon. Olanya was saying, it is not only at the top that we are discriminating; children in Kampala study in English from primary one up to primary seven but the others start studying in English from primary four and yet they sit the same exams.

5.27
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA	(Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale):	 Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for one of the best committee reports this House has had. 

I will just emphasise two points. One is about the recommendation on equity. I appeal to you, honourable members, to support the committee’s recommendation. The idea of discriminating payments to teachers between arts and sciences is abhorrent. The first five citizens in this country are not scientists and they are doing a wonderful job, save for one or two. We need to support the committee on this.

Two, in terms of equity, there is the question of Busoga University. Last year, we passed a resolution for affirmative action for Busoga region. There is no way you will develop a region without education. I would like to request the committee that although the budget for the universities is meagre, we should get money from these universities to have start-up capital for Busoga University. 

Further, if the minister has not issued a statutory instrument to take over that university as a public university, we should not pass her budget, especially on travel, until that statutory instrument is provided. This is the only way we shall have things move. Next year, we should do it for another region.

Lastly, on the issue of higher education student loan schemes, let the committee get the list of those students under State House scholarships, find out the schools they go to, both here and abroad, and the amount of money being spent on them. The committee should also get the list of those who are on scholarships through bilateral arrangements and the amount of money Government is paying for them. If you look at the discrepancy in terms amounts and the origin of those particular students, you will shudder. 

The best way is to get the money that is being paid for all those students, including those on Government sponsorship, and put it in one basket. That is when our people who are poor, like most of us who were before we got education, can access education –(Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have a programme where we send students to Israel for veterinary and agricultural courses. We also have a programme of training students in oil related courses. If you looked at the list of beneficiaries, you would see the inequalities, which are glaringly clear. 

The other piece of information I would like to give is that whereas State House keeps on promising – In West Nile, for example, State House promised that they would sponsor three students per district. When we cost this, it comes to about Shs 800 million. However, it turned out that the whole of West Nile region was only given Shs 100 million for that number of students for all the districts of West Nile. We rejected the Shs 100 million.

This comes to exactly what the honourable member was saying. We should bring this money together and quantify how much we are spending on those international exchanges and presidential promises to Karamoja, West Nile, among others. We can then sort this out once and for all into a loan scheme, which will serve the entire country equitably. Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, honourable member, for giving me the opportunity.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, honourable colleague –(Member timed out.)

5.31
MR IBANDA RWEMULIKYA (NRM, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to thank the chairperson and the committee for a wonderful report. 

I am going to talk about secondary schools. I have perused through the list, which has been uploaded, and Ntoroko is missing. We have 10 subcounties in Ntoroko and seven of those subcounties do not have secondary schools. It is so hurting to see Ntoroko missing, and there are also other primary schools at parish level. 

Madam Speaker, the President gave a directive in 2015 and January 2018. He also gave a directive that Mountains of the Moon University should be taken up by the Government. I have not seen that here. Given the fact that mid-west does not have any –(Interruption)

MR GAFABUSA: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. You have talked about regional universities, specifically Mountains of the Moon University, for which the President gave a directive. However, if you look at the map of Uganda, beginning from Karuma going southwards up to Kazinga Channel, there is no public university in that region. It covers the following regions: Bunyoro, Tooro, and Rwenzori up to Kazinga Channel. That directive is missing here and I find it quite challenging. That is the information I wanted to give. We do not have a public university.

THE SPEAKER: In the Ninth Parliament, we approved a resolution here for a university in Rwenzori region. So, the Minister of Education and Sports must activate our resolution. 

MR RWEMULIKYA: Thank you very much for that information, my colleague. 

On the issue of inspection, we have a very big problem in our schools. When some of us visit these schools, we usually check the visitor’s book but you will never find any record of an inspection - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Akugizibwe. Is that the issue you wanted to raise? Okay, let us have hon. Masika because he has been quiet.

5.35
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to comment on the imbalance in the teachers’ payments. All of us here have gone through formal education. When I was young, I thought that all teachers were equal. However, here I have learnt that the Ministry of Education and Sports has decided that all teachers are not equal because of this imbalance in salaries. 

Madam Speaker, if science teachers are paid more, the rest of the teachers will get demoralised. They will have what we call an “I do not care” attitude. They will not teach very well and there will be a rift between the teachers. Therefore, in order to balance this, the Ministry of Education and Sports should put in place an award system for teachers who teach very well, maybe in form of promotions. That will be a very good gesture to all our teachers in Uganda.

Apart from that, we know all teachers are needed. If some are well catered for, of course the rest will find their way elsewhere. Therefore, we shall be creating a vacuum. Those who earn less will look for a way out. Those who earn more will create something like ladders to climb up, then our teachers will not like each other and this will bring problems in future. Thank you very much.

5.37
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue I would like to raise is about the schools, particularly in the very hilly areas of Bugisu subregion. It is very difficult for children who live up in the mountains to walk the whole way up to places like Masaba Secondary School in the case of Sironko. I am also referring to areas like Bududa and Manafwa; it is the same situation. We would be very happy if the Ministry of Education and Sports found allocations to grant aid secondary schools in those areas. 

The other issue that has come to my attention is about Primary Teachers Colleges (PTCs). We grew up with PTCs like Buginyanya PTC in Bulambuli, Kabwangasi PTC and others, which were phased out. However, the population has now grown and again, for particularly Bugisu region, these are very –(Interruption)

MS WEKOMBA: Thank you, hon. Woboya, for giving way. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add some information to throw some light on what hon. Woboya has just said. 

In Bulambuli, we had Buginyanya PTC some years back but it was closed down. Teachers there were not teaching simply because they could not get to the schools. They could not access the facilities in the schools. So, as I speak now, Buginyanya was closed and there is no vocational institute in Bulambuli. All the children of Bulambuli are dropping out. They are not accessing all those facilities. Thank you.

MR WOBOYA: In conclusion, Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)

5.40
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and a job well done. 

As we are fighting to reduce unemployment in this country, we also need to look at our education curriculum. Inadequate education at all levels - secondary and tertiary levels, including technical and vocational education - is leaving students unequipped to meet the job market in this changing world. As a result, we are struggling with a mismatch of the skills and what the employers seek. My prayer would be that Ministry of Education and Sports adjusts the curriculum so that it can match the job market. We do not need to look at only the theory but also the skills in all departments and at all levels of education.

Madam Speaker, we are all aware that in the past, we lost very many pupils in schools due to lack of lightening arresters. In the budget of this year, there are only eleven districts allocated lightening arresters. My prayer is that Government should allocate more money to save these pupils in different schools so that many districts benefit from this.

We have policies but the implementation is very poor. As our –(Member timed out.)

5.42
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to those who have spoken earlier in appreciating the chairperson and the committee for the good report.

I appreciate the Government policies of having Universal Secondary Education (USE) schools in all subcounties and Universal Primary Education (UPE) schools in all parishes. These policies have been in existence for 22 years. However, I wish to convey my disappointment about the discriminatory manner in which these policies are being implemented. 

In Nakaseke Constituency where I have nine subcounties, only four subcounties have USE schools. With UPE schools, it is even worse; there are a handful of parishes out of the many parishes, which have got UPE schools. You can imagine Nakaseke of all places. One of the USE schools that we have is in a hard-to-reach area. Teachers cannot stay there because there are no houses to rent and the cost of living is so high yet they are not being provided with incentives. Even where they are provided with incentives, some of these USE schools do not have teachers. 

The same goes for the policy on technical schools. It has been in existence for nine years and as we speak today, less than 15 per cent of the districts have these technical schools. Even where they exist, they are ill-equipped without instructors –(Member timed out.)

5.44
MR PAUL ASABA (NRM, Kyaka County North, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two concerns that I would like to bring before this House. I thank the committee for the report. 

Madam Speaker, Kyegegwa District was granted a polytechnic and it is in Kyaka North Constituency in Hapuuyo Subcounty. During its construction, Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) took lead in building this polytechnic. However, they abandoned the institution without completing it. Therefore, I would like to know who is responsible for this construction and how it is going to be completed. I have not seen any statement about it in this report.

Secondly, when you are constructing a house, the foundation is the most important thing. We may talk of secondary schools or universities but this Parliament should be aware that there are some areas where we are still badly off even at primary level. In a place like Kyegegwa Subcounty, primary schools are very few. There are very many parishes where there are no primary schools. One parish may almost be equivalent to a subcounty and children travel long distances. We have not seen any information, guideline or inventory about the parishes that have no primary schools and the way forward to that effect. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 30 Members have contributed. I have really bent over backwards because we had said five. However, because the sector is wide, I allowed 30 Members to contribute. 

I would like to invite the Minister of Public Service to speak. Before he does, the minister should explain why we do not see Buvuma, Kalangala and Ntoroko on this list yet we have been talking about hard-to-reach, hard-to-stay and hard-to-access areas.

5.47
THE MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have been touched by the concerns of the committee regarding the salary enhancement for secondary schools teachers - both sciences and arts teachers - and the gap that exists between their proposed remuneration. However, I am a little bit uncomfortable by the committee’s recommendation regarding halting this enhancement.

Salary enhancement has been agreed on as a policy and the process, as you recall, started way back but it was halted because of obvious financial difficulties. Fortunately, Government decided it should be resurrected and carried forward now to its logical conclusion, but in phases. Therefore, when it has commenced, I think it would be appropriate to continue with it so that midway there is no halting and we do not give an excuse for it again to go down. We would rather create reasons to make sure it is carried to its logical conclusion.

Madam Speaker, in this proposal, recruitment of teachers has been catered for. We have catered for the recruitment of 2,100 teachers. Out of these 2,100 teachers, 100 are head teachers and 100 are deputy head teachers. Of the 2,100, we have 800 science teachers - 400 graduates and 400 diploma holders. We also have 300 graduate arts teachers and 800 diploma arts teachers. All these give us a total of 2,100 teachers.

Why these? This is in recognition that there is indeed a shortage of teachers in secondary schools. The desire would have been that we recruit to full capacity but because of the problems of finance, it is not possible. However, instead of doing nothing about it, I think we go by the African saying, “better little than nothing”. 

Madam Speaker, I am aware of the little time I have. The gap that exists between the arts and sciences does not mean the Ministry of Public Service is oblivious to it and is not going to do anything about it. What is clear, -(Interjections)– Excuse me, honourable members, let me explain. I am just being as simple as possible. I do not have a lot of time here and I beg to be excused over this.

Madam Speaker, this gap has been noted and it does not mean it is going to be so –(Interruption)– What is the problem now? (Laughter)

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is the Minister of Public Service talking and he knows for sure he oversees the civil servants in the country. In a situation where there are problems and they start rioting over small or big things, it is his docket that suffers. 

We are here to help as Parliament and we are saying this disparity is too much. These are teachers who went to the same school and paid the same school fees; they all go to the same market and teach the same students and yet you are giving the arts teachers Shs 600,000 against Shs 1,900,000 you are giving to the science teachers. I think it is not acceptable, honourable Minister of Public Service. It is you who is supposed to have helped us put these people at par. 

Madam Speaker, is he therefore in order to really support and mislead us to accept that we pay arts teachers Shs 600,000 against Shs 1,900,000 paid to science teachers? This is three times lower than what their colleagues whom they went with to the same schools, work in the same schools and go to the same markets are paid. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, he was trying to explain the reason for his actions. That was what he was doing. 

Honourable members, let the minister finish; no clarification.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, my colleague is a teacher just like me. So, he knows some of these things especially where sciences are concerned. Therefore, he does not need any clarification. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, we know the strategic importance of sciences. We know that at the base of every development in society, there is science. You also know the situation under which we find ourselves here in this country. There is a dearth of science people. Where they are, if they are not well handled, they will go away to look for greener pastures and we will continue suffering. Therefore, the consideration really for sciences is not discrimination but it is a realisation of the strategic need for science and the fact that we really need science for our development. 

However, Madam Speaker, - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the minister to present. You can listen and then vote against it.

MR WAMUKUYU: Madam Speaker, I am raising a procedural matter. The committee cited Article 40 (1) (b) of the Constitution, which states, “to ensure equal payment for equal work without discrimination”. Are we proceeding rightly on this matter when there is discrimination and this is a constitutional-

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Minister of Education and Sports. Are you about to finish?

MR MURULI MUKASA: I would like to give my solemn assurance, Madam Speaker, that the gap has been noted and the Ministry of Public Service has undertaken to narrow the gap come the next enhancement in financial year 2019/2020.

Also, the issue of discrimination does not arise. First, we have not derogated from the constitutional provision and it is not a policy. What we have is simply a method of implementation and that method is dictated by the reality, honestly. The reality is that we do not have enough money. The money that is available is what –(Interjection)- What point of order, honourable member?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are obliged to abide by the Constitution, that this House should not endorse discrimination. (Applause) Let the Government go back with respect to the teachers and work out a solution. (Applause)

MR MURULI MUKASA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Education and Sports, if you could use ten minutes.

5.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakabulindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, first and foremost, I want to express my gratitude to the chairperson of the committee. I have listened to the observations and recommendations. We are all here to strengthen the development of education in our country. Therefore, we take up the majority of your recommendations and observations wholesale and where necessary, we will amend them together for the good of our country.

Madam Speaker, a lot has been raised and as you know, the Ministry of Education and Sports cuts across these sectors or ministries-

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, honourable minister; there were just two areas I wanted you to speak about. One of them is the late releases of funds for schools; the funds are always late. The second one is that under the rural communications fund, the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) is supplying computers to schools but there is no facility for maintenance; there is no budget and no facility. We also did not hear much about early childhood education. I do not know whether they are training people on early childhood education.

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I was saying, the Ministry of Education and Sports cuts across or is influenced by different ministries. On one side as we talk about the Ministry of Education and Sports, some factors are handled by the Ministry of Public Service; I am happy that he is around. Others are influenced by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Therefore, somewhere I will be referring some queries to them so that we get a concrete answer.

Let me start with the last questions just quickly. We lost some students due to lightening in some schools. Indeed, this is an issue which is very serious. We sat in Cabinet and approved that budget but due to some budgetary constraints, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development could not accommodate all that.

You know this very well, honourable members, because you sit in various committees. What is submitted by the various ministries is not taken 100 per cent. I do not blame Ministry of Finance but it is because we are running a cash budget. However, this issue of lightening is something that is being considered and with the availability of resources, it is something that we want to handle urgently.

Ministry of Education and Sports grant aid schools in very difficult areas, like my colleague said. He gave the case of Manafwa and other such areas. I agree with you as I said. Grant aiding of schools, particularly identifying where the hard-to-reach areas are, is the responsibility of Ministry of Public Service. Probably, he will come back to tell you the criteria they use in order for an area to be granted that opportunity.

There was an issue –(Interjections)- I wish you could give me at least about five minutes then I get some clarifications. There was an issue that was raised about Government sponsorship to be scrapped. Dear colleagues, as I said, we are doing this for the good of our country in a sober manner. When you scrap this opportunity, who are you torturing - the parent or the child?

Let me give a very simple scenario. When we go for sports events – the Olympics or Commonwealth Games - the winner gets a gold medal regardless of where they come from because they have won. This particular area of motivation, where whoever performs well qualifies, was another way of motivating students to compete. Therefore, we can come with other procedures to modify it but scraping it will not be the best solution. That is my prayer to the committee and all the Members.

My colleague raised an issue on historical schools, that they were so popular in this country. I happen to become from one of them - St Mary’s College Kisubi. Honourable members, when the education sector and the economy were liberalised, the education sector become subject to competition and competition is not bad. So many non-historical schools have come up and they are performing well. However, he was asking about any strategy to protect the historical schools. I will tell you what is happening in some schools. 

Recently, I flagged off games at St Henry’s Kitovu. They were trying to do something to restore their glory. Very soon, next month, St Mary’s College Kisubi will be doing the same. Even some of us, Old Boys (OBs) and Old Girls (OGs) of these historical schools, have a role to play. They are being stretched as they compete with the new schools that are coming up. You cannot stop the new ones from competing because we are in a world of competition. 

All of us who are here are parents. You look for a school that is performing well and that is where you take your child. To me, much as we would like to protect these schools, there is also that idea of saying, “We who were there, how do we enjoy the glory of our schools?” (Mr OLanya rose-)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you should try and respond quickly. We need to finish; you can meet him outside

MR OLANYA: There is one important point, Madam Speaker. Thank you. Honourable minister, you are talking as if you are assuming that when a child is studying in these good schools, then those children will compete favourably. We are saying this money should be taken to the district quota system. Therefore, if you are saying every year, 30 students shall benefit from the district quota of Kamuli or Amuru, it means the students will compete highly from those districts to get that sponsorship.

Right now if you look at the categories of people who are benefiting from the Government sponsorship, it is only those from the well-to-do families. Those families can pay at the university the same way they are paying Shs 2 million at secondary school. Why not give the opportunity to the poor child who is coming from Amuru? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the debate ended. Let us go to the responses.

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and my colleagues. I have noted your concern but there are existing policies that you do not simply wake up overnight and change. Now that you have mentioned it, it is a matter of going back with the committees and seeing what can be done. However, the point is noted.

There was also an issue raised about the quality of education without addressing the teacher to pupil ratio. I agree with you. We are moving towards that. You know the rate of growth of our population vis-à-vis the teacher output, but the point is noted.

The criteria for giving student loans: This is something we can bring and lay on the Table for all Members access and get to know how it is being done. We are convinced it is being done in a transparent manner. Maybe it just needs to be clearly communicated.

As far as I am concerned, the issue of Busoga and Mountains of the Moon University is being handled by the Ministry of Education and Sports. However, as you know, when it comes to the status of a university, there are certain procedures that have to be followed, which cut across the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The Ministry of Finance will inquire as to whether they have met the laid down procedures, the Ministry of Education and Sports will inquire whether the visiting committee has finished its role and given a report, and then we continue from that point. However, in principle those are the issues that are being addressed.

Bunyoro University, however, is at a different stage from Busoga University and Mountains of the Moon University. It is still a political request whereas these ones have gone far. So, they are moving at different paces. 

On the issue of inspection of schools, I have nothing to change from the recommendations of the-(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you very much for giving way. Please, clarify to us how those two universities are moving and at which stage they are. When do we expect them to open the doors and gates to students under the “public university” name?

MR BAKABULINDI: I promise to bring a write-up on that. (Laughter) 

A matter was raised about a letter that was issued from the Prime Minister to the Minister of Education and Sports and up to now, I understand that there is no response –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister is dodging a very critical question. He has been asked to tell this House the stage at which the proposed Busoga University and Mountains of the Moon University are. How many stages are they required to go through? Are they five or six? At what stage are these two institutions? That is what we want you to tell us.  You should tell us which year they are commencing. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, is the honourable minister in order to try to dodge the question which is clear in terms of time, financing and manpower?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, those universities were taken over by the Government in January and the country wants to know their fate - what to do with their children, whether to apply or not. You are obliged to substantiate.

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think I was on course. What you call dodging is perception. I have been asked to give a concrete answer about Busoga and Mountains of the Moon universities. We can bring the report within two days. Even if you ask us to bring it tomorrow, we can. We shall go to the technical people and bring it to the House. Thank you very much.

Madam Speaker, the committee recommended the fast-tracking of the process of having a vote for the National Council of Sports. I agree with it. I support the observations and recommendations. 

Threat to land for sports facilities: As we talk now, we have taken steps to control this because there are many encroachers who wanted to grab land. However, I do not have the land title for Namboole. I am struggling to get it from the lands office. Nakivubo Stadium has a land title; the Public Private Partnership (PPP) has nothing to do with the land title.

Regional sports facilities are in our programme as we wait for funds. We would like to first concentrate on Teryet, Akii-Bua and then the regional grounds. Once you give us the money, it will be my pride -(Interruption)

MR MAKUMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, I am lucky that you are trying to give us an explanation about your own docket. As Parliament, we are trying to appropriate, what programme do you have in this budget for community sports? I ask this because Members of Parliament are busy financing your programmes in the schools, communities, subcounties, villages in their constituencies.  What have you planned for in this budget for the mobilisation of sports in the communities that we come from? 

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable member. He has talked of community sports, which is wide. Developing sports starts from the community - primary, secondary, tertiary and federation level. I would like to use this opportunity to show you that we are not idle even with the meagre resources we have. We are soon winding up our kids athletic championship in Apac, which was launched a few days ago. I was surprised that none of the area Members of Parliament was around. We had 4,126 kids coming from 86 districts. That is another way of developing sports from the grassroots. 

We have been having senior secondary school competitions in Fort Portal. That is another way of developing sports in this country. We have been having football competitions under an arrangement with Coca-Cola in Mbarara. We have just come back from the Commonwealth Games where different federations contributed to the national team. Dear colleagues, I agree that we have not gone into the community to the extent that you would want but at least we are doing something in as far as sports development is concerned. 

We have been experiencing some difficulties in Teryet in terms of transport when it rains. Some of you have reached there. We have a problem of connecting electricity, water and relocation of the primary school. The dormitory and other facilities are complete. Some transformers had got problems but at least they have now been repaired. You heard from the report of the committee that financing of Teryet has been slow. If the funds had been coming the way we wanted, we would be saying that we want to close the project and concentrate on Akii-Bua Stadium and then go to the regions. 

I agree with the committee and Members that we may not build all the regional stadia at once. However, at least we want to come out with a strategy so that if the central region has already got something like Namboole, we go to Arua and start from that region and every year, we can see how we are moving. Together I am sure we are going to achieve that. 

I do agree with the majority of the recommendations and observations of the committee. I think that if we move together, not only in terms of recommendations but also in supporting the financing, we are going to achieve all that we want. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You have not answered the issue of the distribution of schools. There are many schools that have not been included on the list of 100 and yet there are those districts which have two. Some of them already have. 

MR BAKABULINDI: You are right, Madam Speaker. I had forgotten about the list of schools and even my colleague had written to me about it. We normally want to feed Parliament with the right information. I can therefore confidently tell you that tonight I am going to call the relevant departments so that we can get a proper list tomorrow and the criteria that was used that caused some subcounties to be left out.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When a committee is presenting a report with documents provided to it by the ministry, we take them as authentic. The minister is telling us that he will come with another list tomorrow. Which list is going to be authentic? 

We have been provided with a list of 100 schools. There are some schools and districts, especially the rural ones such as Agago District, that have not benefited from this grant-aiding. We have been asking for grant-aiding for years but we do not appear on this kind of list. Are we proceeding well?

THE SPEAKER: What we want to see as an authentic list is a list that is inclusive, with districts that are missing such as Ntoroko, Kalangala and others. (Applause) Those districts that have two schools should surrender one; there are those with two and others with none.

MR BAKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, when I talked of a conclusive list, I did not say that I was going to change some names on the list. I talked about a list where there is an explanation as to what happened to each district –(Interjections)- Conclusive as you have said.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the vote on this matter is deferred until tomorrow when the minister comes with a list satisfactory to the people of this country. What shall we do with Ntoroko, Kalangala and Buvuma; there are no technical colleges?

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I appreciate your concern on this matter. In the Committee on Education, we found a lot of unfairness in this ministry. They get Government aided schools that are of their own class such as Mount St Mary’s College Namagunga, Trinity College Nabbingo, St Mary’s College Kisubi and Kings College Buddo - those first class schools - and give them over Shs 500 million each whereas in those schools, parents are also paying above Shs 1,000,000 per child. 

I asked the ministers at that time, if Kabukunge Secondary School in Kalungu or Kabungo Secondary School from my constituency are not getting money to rehabilitate their schools, how do you give Mount St Mary’s College Namagunga, which is already ahead of other schools, more money? We are actually supposed to tax them - get money from them to improve other schools! That is the uneven distribution of these schools.

How do you give St Mary’s college Kisubi money to develop when parents are paying over Shs 500,000 per term for development –(Interjections)– They pay Shs 2,000,000 for each child per term! In the committee, I remember telling the ministers that I will fight this vice. Even if my children are denied vacancies in those schools, I will go to hon. Muyingo’s school or somebody else’s school but fight for equity in this education system. (Applause)

What we are saying is that in some of our USE schools where they have been having a memorandum of understanding or a public private partnership, they have already withdrawn their support and these schools are going to collapse. So, when we have those schools that are suffering, why do we give money to a school like Mount St Mary’s College Namagunga, which is raising over Shs 5 billion in a term? Why give it more money? They are all supporting that unfairness. 

Finally, the minister is talking about sports.  According to the Auditor-General’s report, the Ministry of Education and Sports spent Shs 6 billion contracting people to go and survey and make structural designs for all national stadia but nothing has taken place –

THE SPEAKER: Let us start with the issue of equity in distribution of schools and then in the next financial year we can battle with the issue of the money. For now, let us make sure that the areas which are hard to reach, hard to stay and hard to access get Government-aided secondary schools. (Applause)

6.25
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Connie Nakayenze): Madam Speaker, the committee was concerned about this but these are the schools that had been grant-aided in the previous financial year but were unfunded priorities. No school has been grant-aided in this coming financial year. What I am saying is that the 100 schools had been proposed in the financial year 2017/2018 but they were unfunded priorities. In the financial year 2018/2019, they had still left them out until we engaged the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Unfortunately, they had not shown us the list – (Interjections) - but when we requested for the list, that is when they produced this particular one. That was after they had already grant-aided the schools. 

Honourable members, since the teachers have already been recruited in these schools, - they were interviewed and they are already there - I beg that the ministry gets more schools to add to these particular ones so that there is equity, but we should not cancel the ones that are there. This is because the teachers have already been recruited and the funds have been availed.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was giving me some information, which will clarify the situation. Let us hear from him.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, as you recall, these 100 schools were part of the schools, which were approved last financial year. You even recall that hon. Kaberuka, who is not here, pursued this during the supplementary request. However, for the other schools, which are going to be grant-aided, we are coming here in a few weeks – (Interjections) – The chair of the Committee on Budget can confirm that we have already provided money in the budget as part of the fiscal transfer loan as budget support with the World Bank. I am sure that the list of the additional schools which are going to be grant aided will be coming in a few weeks.

However, this list was approved last financial year. We failed to provide money and actually, the Chair then ordered that we should include these ones in this financial year. Therefore, the others are coming.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have remembered that hon. Kaberuka was chasing these 100 schools and saying that you grant-aided them but did not provide money. Therefore, let us not interfere with this list. However, we want an equitable list to come with the next one, which covers the hard-to-reach, hard-to-access, hard-to-stay areas and those who do not have.

MS NAKAYENZE: Madam Speaker, I have a corrigenda as regards to Busoga, Mountains of the Moon and Karamoja universities. Shs 10 billion has been provided,

THE SPEAKER: Shs 10 billion to each?

MS NAKAYENZE: No. Shs 10 billion has been provided for all the three universities.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we come to this Parliament, we need to be very honest to ourselves and speak the truth. In the FY 2017/2018, money was appropriated by this Parliament for these schools, which the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development said were grant aided. However, what happened is that Government borrowed that money and took it to Kabale University. That is what happened, honourable minister.

Therefore, for the honourable minister to come here and say the schools were approved by this Parliament for grant aiding and that there was no money for those schools is not true. The truth is that the money was transferred to Kabale University.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable member, I am happy that money has been found for these schools. If the other one was diverted, we have now made sure that Government is going to fund these schools. For me, that is satisfactory. I put the question that the question be now put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FY 2018/2019 

6.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(Ms Judith Nabakooba): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to present the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for financial year 2018/19. (Mr Karuhanga rose_)

THE SPEAKER: You have just arrived and you want to rise a point of procedure. Please, sit down.

MS NABAKOOBA: This is the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for financial year 2018/2019.

Madam Speaker, before I proceed with the report, I beg to lay on the Table the committee report and the minutes of the meetings held by the committee. 

As a committee, we handle seven votes:

    a) Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs
    b) Vote 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs Headquarters
    c) Vote 120 - National Citizenship and Immigration Control
    d) Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force
    e) Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons Service
    f) Vote 305 - Government Analytical Laboratory 
    g) Vote 309 - National Identification and Registration Authority

Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs 

The budget is projected at Shs 1,423 billion reflecting a net reduction of Shs 13.39 billion compared to the approved budget. This was attributed to the Shs 88 billion and Shs 25.44 billion budget cut on the external finance - African Union Mission to Somalia (AMISOM) - and Government of Uganda development budget respectively.

Wage and non-wage is expected to increase by Shs 80.44 billion and Shs 1.86 billion respectively. The significant increase in the wage reflects the proposed wage enhancement for lower military cadres. Budget provision for domestic arrears is Shs 36.61 billion; this has increased by Shs 18.69 billion from the approved Shs 17.928 billion.

Overall, the respective shares of the vote’s total budget include: Wage, 35 per cent; non-wage, 34 per cent; Government of Uganda development, 10 per cent; external financing, l9 per cent; and arrears, 3 per cent.

Observations and Recommendations

Reduction in Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs Budget

The committee observed that the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs’ budget for the financial year 2018/2019 has been reduced by Shs 8.l billion specifically for the budget items of training and travel inland and abroad. The committee noted that the strength and effectiveness of the military is determined by its professionalism and deployment capabilities. Therefore, any reduction on training and travel inland and abroad directly affects the effectiveness of the army. The committee recommends that Government should reinstate the ministry's budget with the Shs 8.l billion, which was originally cut.

Shortage in Food and Clothing

The committee observed that the key items that persistently lead to supplementary requests in the Ministry of Defence’s budget are food, fuel, medical and clothing for the military. Continuous underfunding to these items has led to the vicious cycle of domestic arrears since the army has to feed and dress. The ministry requires an additional Shs 75.86 billion to adequately feed and dress the military. The committee believes these items are critical to their welfare.

The committee therefore recommends that Government allocates an additional Shs 39.26 billion and Shs 36.6 billion to cater for food and clothing for the military.

Pension and Gratuity 

The committee observed that Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs has accumulated a pension and gratuity backlog worth Shs 503.4 billion. This has reached an unspeakable level, which affects the morale of both the retired and serving officers.

The committee recommends that the Government should consider amending the Uganda People’s Defence Forces Act to include veteran affairs. In addition, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance adopts specific budget proposals in subsequent financial years to offset pension arrears of the veterans.

Domestic Arrears

The committee appreciates Government’s effort to reduce domestic arrears as reflected in the increased budget allocation to arrears, from the approved Shs l8 billion to the proposed Shs 36.6 billion in financial year 2018/2019. 

The committee recommends the use of a holistic approach to clear the arrears. The current stock of domestic arrears should be consolidated and recognised as part of public debt and cleared under Treasury operations.

Wage Shortfall

The committee observed that currently 4,000 recruits are undergoing training and they are expected to access the wage bill in August 20l8. However, their wage, worth Shs 24.1 billion, has not been provided for in the current budget proposals yet wages are statutory.

The committee recommends that Government should provide Shs 24.1 billion to cater for the wage bill shortfall and the recruits currently undergoing training should be put into consideration. 
Furthermore, Government should desist from recruiting without prior planning.

Solar Equipment at Kololo Ceremonial Grounds

The committee observed that during the financial year 2016/2017, Parliament of Uganda approved a supplementary request from the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs of Shs 6.7 billion to urgently install solar power at the Kololo Ceremonial Grounds. To date, the solar power has never been installed despite the urgency the request attracted to have the supplementary passed.

The committee recommends that Parliament should pick interest in the matter and investigate to see if the project is still worth funding.

Payment of Arrears to Suppliers 

The committee observed that the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs has accumulated arrears worth billions of money to organisations and individuals who supplied goods and services. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs should restructure their budget to ensure that all the outstanding arrears are cleared.

Vote 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs Headquarters 

The total budget earmarked for vote 009, Ministry of Internal Affairs, is projected to decrease by Shs 1.5 billion, from Shs 19.269 billion in the financial year 20l7/2018 to Shs 17.761 billion in the financial year 2018/2019. Overall, the recurrent budget will account for 84 per cent while the development budget will account for only 7 per cent. The wage allocation is projected to increase by Shs l.784 billion approved for the financial year 20l7/2018 to Shs 1.998 billion in the financial year 20l8/2019. 

Observations and Recommendations

Operationalisation of the Non-Governmental Organisations Act, 2016

Parliament enacted the Non-Governmental Organisations (NGO) Act, 2016 which establishes the NGO Bureau among others. The committee observed that the NGO sector is dynamic and has been operating without a firm regulatory framework. The level of transparency and accountability is not upheld as envisioned by the Act.

We therefore recommend that Shs 2 billion should be reallocated from vote 309 and vote l20 in favour of the NGO Bureau as a start-up to enable the NGO Bureau carryout critical activities next financial year, 2018/2019. 

Trafficking in Persons

The committee observed that Government has not fully provided for the activities related to curbing of trafficking in persons, which requires an additional Shs 1.5 billion.

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that Shs 0.20 billion should be reallocated from votes 309 and 120 for financing the effective implementation of the Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Act to enhance its human resource capacity.

Amnesty Commission 

The committee observed that His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda extended the life of the Amnesty Commission to carryout unfinished pending works before the expiry of its term. The committee further observed that due to financial constraints, the commission could not demobilise, resettle and re-integrate the reporters. Although His Excellency the President gave the commission an extension, it is not matched with the requisite funding. The committee was informed that out of 27,500 reporters demobilised, only 8,875 reporters have been re-integrated. There is need to provide resettlement and socio-economic re-integration support to the remaining 18,625 ex-combatants. Shs 4.5 billion is required for this activity. 

The committee recommends that based on the extension of their tenure, which is expiring next year, Shs 4 billion should be re-allocated from votes 309 and 120 for resettlement and reintegration of reporters to avoid desperate situations.

The Police and Prisons Authorities 

The committee observed that the Ministry of Internal Affairs established the police and prisons authorities. These authorities are expected to carry out oversight and supervision of the Uganda Police Force and Uganda Prisons Services respectively. However, the budget provision for the two authorities is inadequate.
 
We recommend that Shs 2.65 billion and Shs l billion should be reallocated from votes 309 and 120 to the Police Authority and Prisons Authority to enable them effectively carry out their oversight functions as provided in their respective Acts.

Vote 120 - National Citizenship and Immigration Control

Their budget is projected to increase by Shs 16.941 billion, from the approved Shs 43.8 billion to the proposed Shs 60.815 billion. The budget for arrears is expected to remain constant at Shs 1.046 billion, which is the same level as approved. A significant increase of Shs 14.l32 billion and Shs 7.88 billion is observed under the development budget and appropriation in aid respectively. 

Observations and Recommendations

Absence of the National Citizenship Board of Directors

As a committee, we observed that there has been a delay in the appointment of the new board since the expiry of the old one. The absence of the board has created a supervisory and oversight vacuum in the directorate. The committee was informed that the proposed names for the new board members were forwarded to the Parliament for approval. 

We, therefore, recommend that Parliament should expedite the approval process of the new board members for the national citizenship directorate for efficient and effective supervision.

The committee further recommends that once the board is in place, a strong system should be put in place to monitor revenue collection because what is currently collected from immigration is far below our expectations as a committee.

Lack of Accommodation for Immigration Officers

The committee observed that the directorate of immigration does not have decent accommodation for immigration officers, especially at the border points. 

We recommend that the Directorate of Immigration and Citizenship Control should design a project for the construction of accommodation premises for all immigration staff at all gazetted border points. Government should allocate funds from the Non Tax Revenue (NTR) generated by the institution annually until completion of the project.

Electronic Passport Issuance 

The committee observed that whereas many countries have transited from paper passports to e-passports, Uganda is yet to achieve this. The committee was informed that despite the fact that the heads of the East African Community Partner States launched the new electronic passports during the 17th Ordinary Summit meeting and directed Partner States to commence the issuance of e-passports by January 2017, Uganda has not.

The committee further observed that the implementation of e-passports will save Government an annual expenditure on purchase of empty passport booklets and associated wear and tear of printing machines deployed internally and externally. The initial activities for the establishment of the e-passport infrastructure require Shs 28 billion, while full implementation requires US$ 100 million. This has remained unfunded in the financial year 20l8/2019.

The committee was further informed that Government was considering negotiating a Public Private Partnership (PPP) arrangement as an alternative to outright financing. However, this has taken a long time yet the legal framework on PPPs is in place. We, therefore, reiterate our earlier recommendation that Government, through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, should provide Shs 28 billion start-up funds to kick-start activities leading to the issuance of e-passports in financial year 2018/2019. Alternatively, Government should fast-track the option of a PPP arrangement to ensure adequate funding to implement the resolution of the EAC heads of state.

Vote 305 - Government Analytical Laboratory 

Last time we presented a report on the Government Analytical Laboratory; so, I will go straight to the observations and recommendations. 

Procurement of a Mobile Laboratory Van

The committee observed that there is urgent need for procurement of a mobile laboratory van required for rapid response by the experts to visit complicated scenes of crime. This, therefore, requires an appropriate mobile laboratory van fitted with kits for rapid collection, identification, security and preservation of exhibits from crime scenes. Government Analytical Laboratory, therefore, requires Shs 0.7 billion for its procurement. The committee recommends that Government should allocate Shs 0.7 billion so that they can procure the mobile van.

Non-operational Regional Laboratories

The committee observed that the construction of the two regional laboratories in Mbale and Mbarara was completed but the laboratories remain without the required laboratory furniture and fittings. This requires Shs 4.05 billion. Shs 2.9 billion will be used for furnishing and fitting Mbale and Mbarara laboratories and Shs 1.15 billion for acquiring high performance thin-layer chromatography equipment for handling drug crime scenes and exhibits. The committee recommends that Government should provide Shs 4.O5 billion for the above items.

Samples and Case Backlog

The committee observed that the current sample backlog with the Government Analytical Laboratory is 5,556 forensic cases expected to be analysed in financial year 2018/2019. Shs 6.11 billion is required to enable timely supply of the reagents, consumables and chemicals to clear the case backlog. The committee noted that lack of evidence in courts has in some instances caused Government to lose cases hence huge compensation costs.

The committee recommends that Government should – 

THE SPEAKER: Please, read the subject and the recommendation because Members have the report.

MS NABAKOOBA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. We recommend that Government should provide a total of Shs 5.4 billion to clear the forensic case backlog.

Vote 309 - National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) 
We shall go straight to observations and recommendations.

Implementation of Exaggerated Organisational Structure
As a committee, we recommend that the Ministry of Public Service in conjunction with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should review the organisational structure of NIRA to make it more efficient and cost effective.

Governance and Management of NIRA Affairs

As a committee we recommend that the Registration of Persons Act, 2015 should be amended to provide for an autonomous board of directors with at least two-thirds of its members being fully committed to the oversight of NIRA, without competing individual mandates from other offices and institutions.

We also recommend that the Registration of Persons Act, 2015 should be amended to expand the powers of the board of directors, to limit the powers of the Executive Director, NIRA, and to ensure a system of checks and balances in the functioning of the authority. 

Construction of the NIRA Home

We recommend that Government avails Shs 12 billion for the procurement of land and phase one construction of the NIRA headquarters

Vote l44 - Uganda Police Force (UPF)

Conflicting Position of Domestic Arrears

The committee observed that during the financial year 2018/2019 Budget Framework Paper, Uganda Police Force reported that the total accumulated domestic arrears for goods and services, utilities and gratuity was Shs 85.26 billion however this figure is now reported to be Shs l25.592 billion. The current allocation for arrears in financial year 20l8/2019 is Shs 31 billion, which will reduce the arrears position to Shs 94.5 billion. 

During the consideration of the National Budget Framework Paper 2018/2019, the committee recommended that the stock of arrears should first be verified by the Auditor-General before any payment is made. To the contrary, UPF reported that verification by internal audit was ongoing concurrently with the payments.

The committee recommends that the office of the Auditor-General conducts a special audit into the domestic arrears of the Uganda Police Force immediately in order to harmonise the conflicting figures and provide an accurate reflection of the same.

Budget for Fuel and Oil

The committee observed with concern that the budget for fuel for the Uganda Police Force fleet is Shs 23.3 billion but we realized that most of the fuel remained at the centre.

The committee recommends that the Uganda Police Force should expend its fuel and oil beyond the centre to other outposts especially upcountry so as to improve its efficiency.

Inadequate Accommodation

We recommend that Government should provide a total of Shs 0.6 billion required for rent and Shs 95.48 billion for the construction of adequate accommodation for police officers in order to avoid the accumulation of domestic arrears by the Uganda Police Force and improve the standard of living of police officers.

We already discussed the domestic arrears. 

Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons Service

Domestic Arrears Resulting from Supply of Food Items

The committee recommends that the Auditor-General should verify the accumulated arrears on food supplies upon which Government should provide Shs 21.33 billion to cater for the Uganda Prisons Service outstanding commitments.

Food Shortage

The committee recommends that Government should provide Shs 78.8 billion for food to avoid the vicious cycle of food arrears.

Enhancement of Prisons Industries Capacity

The committee recommends that Government should provide Shs 9.175 billion to the Uganda Prisons Workshop in order to develop their capacity to supply furniture to Government entities as directed by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda.

Staff Accommodation

The committee recommends that Government should provide adequate resources for the prisons staff accommodation project because we were informed that 6,245 staff were not properly housed. Out of the total number of 9,843 staff, only 3,598 are accommodated in permanent houses, 5,043 live in makeshift structures while 1,202 are not accommodated at all. They improvise by renting at their own cost with their overstretched salary. Therefore, the Prisons Service needs to construct accommodation for their staff.

Proposed Budget Estimates For Financial Year 2018/2019
Vote 004: Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs
Recurrent – Shs 907,252,894,000
Development – Shs 405,731,440,000

Vote 009: Ministry of Internal Affairs
Recurrent – Shs 23,574,918,000
Development – Shs 1,258,702,000

Vote 120: National Citizenship and Immigration Control
Recurrent – Shs 34,285,054,000
Development – Shs 12,945,746,000

Vote 144: Uganda Police Force
Recurrent – Shs 470,569,592,000
Development 	– Shs 164,320,219,000

Vote 145: Uganda Prisons Service
Recurrent – Shs 165,931,211,000
Development – Shs 38,123,724,000

Vote 305: Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory
Recurrent – Shs 12,174,018,000
Development – Shs 7,194,357,000

Vote 309: National Identification and Registration Authority
Recurrent – Shs 49,652,622,000
Development – Shs 10,349,563,000

Madam Speaker, I have a brief comment to make on state enterprises and corporations. During the presentation of the ministerial policy statement for financial year 2018/2019 to Parliament, Uganda Air Cargo Corporation did not feature anywhere. Therefore, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs did not comply with Section 13(11)(f) of the Public Finance Management Act because the minister is required to provide estimates for state enterprises and corporations.

While scrutinising the budget for financial year 2017/2018, the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs requested the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the Ministry of Works and Transport to present to the House the performance of Uganda Air Cargo Corporation, with a view of ascertaining the state of affairs in regard to commercial viability, but that was not achieved. Therefore, while considering the ministerial policy statement for the sector, we could not make recommendations regarding the Uganda Air Cargo Corporation. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the committee. I would like to inform the House that the Committee on Appointments has already vetted the members of the Citizenship and Immigration Board and the report has been sent to the President. Equally, the Amnesty Commission has already been vetted and the names sent to the President. The Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs is going to handle the resettlement committee - You did that today? That is fine.

The report has been signed by the necessary minimum members and you are free to debate.

7.01
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good job. 

I have two quick comments. One is on the Ministry of Internal Affairs. I think the Ministry of Internal Affairs has very many votes, which are autonomous. Actually, the Constitution provides that the accounting officer for the Ministry of Internal Affairs is the permanent secretary. However, because most of these departments such as immigration are autonomous and they have their internal accountants and auditors, they kind of bypass the permanent secretary and go straight to the Secretary to the Treasury. This is causing a lot of problems. That is why even when we ran short of passports, the permanent secretary was powerless. 

I think there will come a time when we will need to harmonise, especially the Public Finance Management Act, and see how the accounting officers in ministries which have autonomous votes can be made in charge of all the votes. This is because the Constitution says the accounting officer of the ministry is responsible for all the accounts’ queries.

Madam Speaker, that said and done, the committee chairperson ended with the issue of Uganda Air Cargo Corporation. That is the most disappointing thing and it made me come to the front here because I always stand at the back. Uganda Air Cargo Corporation was established by the Uganda Air Cargo Corporation Act and this Act was passed in 1994. In Section 2 of the Act, it says, “There is established a corporation to be known as the Uganda Air Cargo Corporation.” 

We need to mention here that the Uganda Air Cargo Corporation transformed from Uganda Air Cargo Limited, which was formerly for Gen. Tito Okello, Paul Muwanga and Gen. Mondo. They were shareholders. It was a limited company but Government felt that it should become a corporation under Government. 

As a corporation therefore, the Uganda Air Cargo Corporation has been given very many functions in Section 5 of this Act. Among others, the functions are: air freight services, air passenger services, air passenger chartered flight services, airmail services, giving instructions and providing training in flying and use of aeroplanes. This Act goes ahead to define the sources of funds that would be used to fund the corporation. In section 13 –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: I think we need to hear information about this because it was not in the policy statement. I give you three more minutes.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The funds of this corporation will include, among others, money from time to time appropriated by Parliament for that purpose.

By the time Uganda Air Cargo Corporation resumed operations in 2002, they had debts accumulating to Shs 27 billion and they had one plane which was unserviceable. However, they went ahead to service it with the help of the Ministry of Defence that gave them Shs 2 billion. They went further to begin operating from 2002 up to 2015 when their operational licence was withdrawn and I will tell you why. 

Within that period of operation, they wiped away all the Shs 27 billon loss and moved this corporation into profits of Shs 701 million. Madam Speaker, when their operation licence was revoked by Civil Aviation Authority (CAA), they stayed non-operational for 18 months and that made them accumulate losses. One of their planes that needed to be repaired at the time their licence was revoked still remained down. 

It is painful that even the President, through the Ministry of Defence, wrote to the ministry in charge of finance saying that this corporation needed only US$ 10 million to repair the C-130 plane which was down. Madam Speaker, a new C-130 plane is US$ 70 million. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – hon. Bahati is here – adamantly refused to provide the US$ 10 million needed to repair this plane, and that was in the financial year that is ending now.

Madam Speaker, for the chairperson of the committee to come here and say that because they could not capture their expenses and expenditures in the budget, they could not consider it, I think is being dishonest. We have 75 Ugandans who are employed by this corporation - (Interruption)

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, honourable colleague. Madam Speaker, sometime back, when I used to work in Juba, South Sudan, I came across some old Uganda Airlines planes, which fly between Juba, Boro and a few of those regional towns. I was made to understand that these planes were part of the Uganda Air Cargo fleet. Now, for us to fail to bring a statement within the ministerial policy document of the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs –(Member timed out.)

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, this corporation employs 75 Ugandans. The other day we were here saying that the United Nations (UN) should not go because it would lead to unemployment. I think we need to pronounce ourselves here and make re-adjustments within the ministry or anywhere else this financial year to have all these air cargo planes operational. Actually, most of the UN-related bodies in South Sudan use these planes for strategic defence purposes. That is how we shall make money other than having them grounded and yet we already have our equipment in operation. I think this is tantamount to us shooting ourselves in the foot.

My prayer is that the committee should consider it. If they do not consider, we should not pass their budget. Otherwise, passing their budget would mean that we are not considering the strategic defence interest of Uganda.

As I conclude, there is no air cargo fleet in this region that flies a total of 60 hours in a month. For our involvement in Somalia or elsewhere, we cannot hire any other air cargo plane to carry some of the dangerous or strategic and important equipment to Somalia, Juba or Congo except maybe calling for Kenya Airways or any other airline. It is in our best interest that we provide this money. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: I hope that we shall get an explanation. How can a ministry forget part of its component?

7.10 
MR JOSEPH	SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Madam Speaker, let me put this on record. Most of our soldiers who fly these cargo aeroplanes are not insured. They fly them without insurance and this is very serious. However, I would like to thank the committee for this good report. 

With the indulgence of the Speaker, I would like to request the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to take more interest in UPDF budget allocations. The report of the Committee on Public Accounts that is going to come out shows that UPDF has a lot of money but they spend the money badly. I will give an explanation but for now, let me give you a scenario. The UPDF bought tyres worth Shs 5 billion in preparation for elections, but the tyres were bought six months after the elections.

Madam Speaker, I am more interested in money being given to soldiers and policemen as salary increment. Honourable minister, I do not know why you are not considering these policemen. You give them ranks but they do not get good salaries. This is not fair. 

On the issue of operation funds - I think that is why we have rampant killings and kidnappings taking place. District Police Commanders (DPCs) are given only Shs 300,000 as operation funds. In Kalungu District, where I come from, they kidnapped a girl of 17 years. The kidnappers rang the parents of the girl demanding for Shs 1 million. After ringing the parents, they rang the Member of Parliament to give them Shs 1 million. I refused to give the money and I suggested that we instead use it to look for the kidnappers with the police officers. However, the parents of the girl got the money and sent it to them. The money was removed from the phone but unfortunately, the girl was killed. Up to now, the DPC does not even have money to move around to see how we could get a phone as an exhibit to look for this person. 

I do not know what Parliament can do. We may need to get more time to debate the issue of the killings of girls and the demand for money. How can police fail due to lack of operations funds to look for victims? In 2005, someone sold to me a stolen phone when I was teaching at Shimoni Primary School. After getting that phone, when I put my line inside the phone –(Member timed out.)

7.13
MS MARY BABIRYE (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. 

I strongly support the provision of accommodation to the police. The police stay in “Mama Ingia pole” houses, which degrade the Uganda Police Force. Uganda is now at the take-off stage in development. I do not know how we are going to achieve Vision 2040 if the houses where the police stay still reflect that we are in our traditional state of development. Therefore, I would like to recommend that the police be given favourable accommodation.

There is a lot of bribery in the police. Police are paid very little money yet they are rendering services and they are here to stay. In developed countries like America, policemen and policewomen drive very expensive cars. When you try to locate where they sleep, their accommodation is very conducive. Why is a policeman or a policewoman paid very little here and yet we expect them to perform?

As Parliament, I think we should stand for these people. As we think of giving teachers Shs 1.9 million, I would recommend that we give Shs 1.8 million to police officers, if they are to protect us. I thank you.

7.16
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to also thank the committee for the report. 

I agree with the committee that it is important that fuel is taken to rural areas. In rural areas, cases have increased. The other day we were in Buhweju for International Women’s Day celebrations and they told us about the increase in domestic violence and how women are not being helped by police because they cannot afford. People call the police for help but the police say they do not have fuel. For police to help you, you have to facilitate them. Facilitating does not mean that you cooperate and provide information; you can provide the information but they will say, “First help the police so that they can help you.” What they mean is “facilitation”. I would like to therefore support the committee’s recommendation that fuel is taken to the rural areas so that the police down there can help our people.

Secondly, I also would like to recommend that salaries of the police officers are increased. We have seen the police concentrate on buying more teargas and mambas to move around Kampala chasing a few politicians instead ensuring that the salaries of these police officers are increased.

During the primitive accumulation of wealth, it was thought that if you give somebody a living wage, they would then concentrate and work best, especially when they were doing donkeywork. However, they want police officers to behave like dogs because a dog is vicious and can attack – I do not mean hon. Mbwatekamwa - when it is hungry and not well fed. You can find the police very annoyed when they are arresting people. They are very angry simply because they are hungry. Of course, a hungry man is an angry man. Therefore, we need to help them so that we reduce that anger, so that even when they are arresting some of us, they are not as hungry and angry as they appear these days. Thank you.

7.18
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also add my voice to thank the chairperson for a good report. You were precise and to the point. However, I seek clarification on a few areas.

One, the report mentioned a mobile van which will cost Shs 0.7 million. This is just one van; will it take care of the national need?

Two, I did not hear the concerns of many Ugandans, especially in the just concluded school registration project under National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA). There are actually a lot of complaints about arrears. There are some people, if not all of them, who have not been paid up to now. Are these people taken care of?


My other issue is in regard to the facilitation of the police to do their work well. There is a known person masquerading as hon. Muwanga Kivumbi. Yesterday, I was actually chatting with him; I wanted to nail him. He said, “I am hon. Kivumbi and I am in Morocco. Please give me Shs 300,000.” This is a known number which has been circulating on the platform but this person has not been nailed up to now – (Interjection) - Yes, but the number is all over. It has been circulated on various platforms. It is the same number –(Interruption)
 
MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my sister, hon. Akello. The person masquerading as hon. Kivumbi also says that he is Dr Kenneth Omona from the NRM Secretariat. He also masquerades as hon. Robert Migadde using the same number. I am wondering why that number cannot be tracked. At one time, he also chatted with me. Each time, he says he is admitted with his wife in Nairobi Hospital. Therefore, we really need to find out who the person is. Thank you.

MS LUCY AKELLO: My concern is that if we cannot enhance the capacity of police in tracking down some of these fraudsters who are actually well known, they will do these things almost every day. It is not a one-off thing and it worries me a lot.

My other – (Member timed out.)

7.21
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you look at page 414 of the ministerial policy statement, you will realise that the salaries of NIRA staff have been exaggerated. When you try to look at the current wage, it totals up to Shs 6.4 billion. For the number they are proposing to recruit, it comes to Shs 11.28 billion. The total current wage however is Shs 25 billion. After you add Shs 6 billion and Shs 11 billion, it just gives a total of Shs 25 billion. However, the committee tried to reallocate Shs 5 billion, leaving Shs 2.3 billion in suspense, and yet I think that money can be reallocated –(Interjection)– No, it was not. According to their budget, they are supposed to – 

If you add up the wage for the staff they intend to recruit and the current wage, it totals to Shs 17 billion and yet they had budgeted for Shs 25 billion. Out of the Shs 25 billion, the committee reallocated Shs 5 billion, leaving Shs 2.4 billion in suspense. Therefore, can we reallocate that money and maybe take it to police to add to their money.

Lastly, they have mentioned the gratuity and pension they are trying to pay to soldiers, which is around Shs 540 billion. Are they also talking about the soldiers in the World War II, the King’s African Rifles (KAR) and the Uganda Rifles? Have they included all those because many died without getting their pension and they are not catered for? Funny enough, they have been made to open bank accounts which they had in the last 30 years. You cannot sustain an account in any of the banks for all those years. Therefore, have you catered for these people? I thank you. I need to spare some time because I need to get time for agriculture.

7.24
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to thank the committee for the report on the ministerial policy statement. 

The solar equipment at Kololo Ceremonial Grounds must be an issue that this House should take keen interest in. The committee says, and indeed it is true, that in the financial year 2016/2017, this Parliament approved a supplementary request by the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs of Shs 6.7 billion. The urgency that this supplementary request attracted was very high, and they said that they were going to install solar power at Kololo Ceremonial Grounds. This House was duped. Nothing whatsoever has been installed at Kololo Ceremonial Grounds. I would like to concur with the committee’s recommendation that this House takes keen interest in this. I even think that the House should constitute a committee to conduct investigations into the mysterious disappearance of these huge funds.

Information is abundant from reliable sources that there is a company called AMPROC, which has 99 per cent shares belonging to a one Mwesigwa Rukaari. Mwesigwa even appeared before the Justice Bamugemereire Commission and admitted to actually receiving Shs 3.7 billion. He is also still anticipating the balance but he admitted doing nothing because he had had to “kick back” and recoup. He made so many kickbacks and in the process, he is recouping what he kicked to those who actually contracted him for this particular solar equipment contract of Kololo Ceremonial Grounds.

Madam Speaker, I would join the committee -

THE SPEAKER: Is it part of the solar -

MR NAMBESHE: I am well informed on this one. This is part of the solar equipment at Kololo Ceremonial Grounds, Madam Speaker. At an appropriate time if you –(Member timed out.)

7.28
MS ASHRAF OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I wish to thank the committee for a job well done. My concern is about the ex-servicemen and I am glad the committee has tried to bring it up in the report that they are supposed to be paid. Their pension and gratuity has accumulated to a tune of Shs 503.4 billion. 

Madam Speaker, some of these people have served this country with dedication. Some of them have passed on without getting any coin from the Government. This will kill the morale of the current people who are serving the UPDF and even the police because they know that at the end of the day, they cannot be given anything. They will be treated like their colleagues. So, Madam Speaker, I wish to implore this Government to make sure that this money is availed so that these people are paid. 

Normally, when it is time for campaigns, we run to these people; they are mobilised and asked to open accounts. They are pushed here and there because we want votes from them. Why don’t we handle them as human beings? They served this country; why can’t we pay them? Some of them are miserable people; when we go home, they come to us for soap. They say “Just give me soap, my son. I served; how about my money?” These are UPDF and UA former soldiers. What are you doing with these people? 
My prayer is that you consider these people and get them something so that when they are going to die, they know they have “eaten” their money.

My second point is on the police. Right now, Yumbe actually has 270,000 refugees and the district’s population is 500,000. Now, that is half a million people and yet the police we have on the ground is thin. My concern is that we should add more police in the areas with refugees so that they are manned properly. Otherwise, guns from across will enter the country and they will even cause problems in that region. Let more police be sent there so that the checkpoints are manned properly. The UPDF can also go there because Kerua is an entry. Last time someone was killed and now it is the second time. Even a South Sudanese Member of Parliament was killed in Kerua. So, my concern is that we should try to add more security personnel in Yumbe so that we maintain the peace. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Angundru comes, I hope the minister will come out clearly on the issue of the veterans- the KAR. They are not very many; they are old men and yet we are treating them shabbily. 

7.30
MR MOSES ANGUNDRU (NRM, Terego West County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson for the report she has given to us. However, one of the things which caught my ears was the board of directors of some of the agencies under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. We have agencies like the NGO Board, NIRA and the Immigration Board. 

One of our colleagues expressed disharmony one time here on the Floor about how board of directors of these agencies are appointed. To the best of my knowledge, in the report, it was said that once somebody has a job somewhere, he is not supposed to be a board member. I need some clarification from the minister about the magnitude of work because the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Internal Affairs doubles as a board member in NIRA and NGO Forum. Thank you very much.

7.32
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report but my concern is on NIRA. First of all, there is a problem with NIRA. Some people do not have national identity cards; some have lost them and some have never got them. 

When you go to their office to acquire a new ID, it can take you more than six months before you get a new ID. There is someone I know who has been going to Kololo for over two years and he has never got a new identity card. He was told to go for deed polls and he did them. He was told to go for a lot of work - He was finally given another card but with a wrong name. When he went back, he was told to go and repeat the same process. So, my concern is: How long should one take to get a new identity card? 

Another point is when you go to the finger print rooms; there are some people who can take four hours working on one individual. I have witnessed it myself and it is becoming a very big problem. We must help NIRA to help Ugandans.

Secondly, in the recent exercise where they were registering primary school children; many children were not registered. Some of the people who were registering the children were never paid and yet they claim money was released. I think it is really a problem for most Ugandans to get identity cards or for those who worked to access their payments.

Finally, the issue of enhancement of police cadres is very important. I thank the committee and I would like to call upon the committee and the members to uphold the report. Thank you very much.

7.34
MR ROBERT KASOLO (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I, first of all, take this opportunity to thank the committee for the due diligence they have done on the report. 

However, Madam Speaker, I do not know whether the current wave of insecurity requires a lot of money to equip all the security agencies. I do not know whether the committee has taken that into consideration while we are in the budget period. We needed to budget enough money to cater for the current wave of insecurity which is so sophisticated that it is not easy to detect.

Madam Speaker, many times we have seen the CID department of the police not even coming to logical conclusions of investigations simply because they usually do not have the money. There are incidences like in my constituency where somebody was murdered. The police get there with their vehicle because they would like to do a post-mortem but they cannot do it because they are handicapped. They do not have enough resources.

Madam Speaker, I would expect the chairperson to put into consideration the current wave of insecurity and sophisticated investigations which require money. If we do not get money, then we are likely to continue in this kind of misery and –(Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the honourable colleague for giving way. When you talk about the wave of insecurity, the information I would like to give is that recently, the President gave a directive to absorb the crime preventers into the UPDF. The report does not indicate the number of crime preventers that are going to be taken on. Also, we are not seeing any budget provision. 

Therefore the information I want to give you is that we are standing on a time bomb if we don’t take care of these organised groups and we leave them loitering; they are going to cause havoc.

MR KASOLO: Thank you, honourable colleague. Another issue which I have detected and Parliament should take into consideration is the current wave of drugs. The Anti-Narcotic department of Police requires a lot of money if we are to fight these drug abuses and drug problems in this –(Member timed out.)

7.37
MS RUTH KATUSHABE (NRM, Bukomansimbi North County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to add my voice to my colleagues’ voices. I also recommend that the operation funds should be increased, especially at the district level.

As we speak now, papers have been circulated in my constituency in the areas of Kayanja, Kitanda and on the list is the officer in charge of Kitanda and the youth councillor. They may even circulate to our different areas. Therefore I propose that they should increase funds for operation.

Secondly, UPDF should provide funds for the reserve force to work with police, especially in the affected areas like the areas of Greater Masaka, Bukomansimbi inclusive. Thank you. 

7.39
MS AISHA SEKINDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to talk about the issue of the veterans; these people - much as we would like to support the committee and their budget, it is my humble request through you, Madam Speaker, that we get to know those people who are going to be paid - whether they exist.

It is not the first time we hear of the defence ministry paying ghost veterans. Therefore, this time around we want to know whether these people are true persons who are supposed to be paid.

Another issue, I would like to know from the chairperson of the committee whether you are aware that some Ugandans who were given identity cards by NIRA - and by this time, like in my constituency or my district, when people want to go across the borders of Uganda and Rwanda, they remove those cards from them and tell them to come to Kololo. When they come to Kololo, they refer them to the Permanent Secretary or the commissioner.  Imagine a person from Kagongero deep there being told to come and look for the commissioner or the Permanent Secretary; it is not easy. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

7.41
MR LAWRENCE AKUGIZIBWE (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the committee for the good report. However, my issue is on vote 120 - the National Citizenship and Immigration Control. As we know, Section 7 of the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Act, Cap 66 of the Laws of Uganda, mandates the National Citizenship and Immigration Control to facilitate legal and orderly movement of persons to and from Uganda.

However, what is the case currently? There are very many foreigners in Uganda without identities, passports, travel documents and they can even buy plots, are free to live here and nobody is bothered. Yet we appropriate funds for the Immigration Control Department to do their work which they have not done properly because we have seen very many foreigners without proper documents allowed to be in this country.

Some of them are buying - the Congolese, Rwandese and Sudanese are buying land here and nobody is bothered yet they lack proper documents. Therefore, I believe this could be the reason why we have an increased crime rate in Uganda - because people are here illegally.

Recently in Kyenjojo, three thieves were killed by boda boda boys and found with an AK 47 gun and one of those people who were killed was found to be a Rwandese national but illegally in Uganda. Therefore my appeal here is that this Citizenship and Migration Control Department makes sure that they verify the people coming in whether they have valid documents to be in Uganda so that we can have security in this country. I thank you.

7.43
MR ANGEL MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the committee for the job they have done. If you go to any police station in Uganda, at least you will not miss seeing displays that condemn corruption. I am happy when I heard about the figure that has been allocated to them.

However, my problem here is whether these figures we are talking about truly reach these various stations in the districts. If it is there, for the purposes of transparency, I feel we should treat it like road funds. Once it is dispersed, then those figures have to be published and copies have to be distributed to the Members of Parliament and at district level so that we are able to educate our people about it.

According to the calls we are receiving, when you take a case to the police to effect an arrest, you will not miss getting a request for fuel. You wonder whether it is a new phenomenon that when you take a case like that, you should as well facilitate the police when this fund here is allocated.

Then technology has made it very simple; there is a certain organised group of people here who pretend to be taxi operators. You put there a taxi - recently a friend of mine boarded like that and on reaching just before Nakawa, they told them they had problems with their taxi and were not going to their destination anymore but after their computers, telephones and other items had been mugged.

There is a taxi company, Uber; you guide them here – First of all, you know where the car is located and the name of the driver, number of the vehicle, and model. Why can’t security agencies think about things like this so that life is made easier? How much does it take to make that? 

At least if we have a comprehensive strategic plan to see that even if we cannot do it in one financial year, at least we should lay a plan that it is going to be implemented phase by phase. That is when we shall be happy. Without that, I don’t think we shall be able to get out of this. We are like locked up in a circle and we shall continue to be there. I thank you very much.

7.46
MR FRED ANGELLA (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the committee for the report. I want to support their recommendation of extending oils and fuels to the lower units. 

Madam Speaker, oil and fuel is very important in the operations of the police. There is widespread car theft in the country right now but they are not reported.

Recently while in Soroti, a friend lost a car and when he reported the case he was asked to provide some fuel. The district police commanders in the country are suffering and should be supported.

It is unfortunate that the work of the police is not recognised in the country. We only know them for tear gas. While I was growing up, the police and army were respected but these days even children do not respect them. It is because they ask for money even when they are investigating simple cases; this is a shame to our country. These people’s salaries should be enhanced so that the image of the police can be regained. 

MR JULIUS OCHEN: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my brother about the inadequate remuneration of the army and police. At one time when this country was in a crisis, Government made an appeal to the Amuka Group and Arrow Group who offered to deliver a service to the country but unfortunately Government did not pay them.

In Teso the Arrow Boys gave a service and part of the UPDF officers stole the money that was meant for paying them; the report came out. 

Teso lost 125 Arrow Boys in that war but their families have not been compensated. They promised bulls, ox ploughs but the families and orphans are doing without any help at all. Government should be considerate for the service contributed by the gallant sons and daughters of this country. 

MR ANGELLA: Thank you, honourable colleague. The issue of passports mismanagement is rampant - (Member timed out.)

7.50
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good work. However, there are a few points to note. 

In Kyankwanzi, specifically in my constituency, there is land grabbing and land conflicts. It is unfortunate that the police in charge of lands is there but does not have any facilitation to move to the site. Not even a motorcycle is in my constituency. 

I am imploring my colleagues that we should plan to buy motorcycles for the people who are managing these sensitive areas so that they can move easily.

I have suffered the same challenge on the payment of ex-servicemen; our people, who are still alive or their relatives, do not access money directly. Someone is called in one day and finds that the card and the bank had been prepared. The money is shared between the middleman and the beneficiary. 

The National Identification and Registration Authority went to schools to register pupils but they have never delivered the cards. Some schools are sending away candidates to liaise with NIRA to confirm whether they are registered. 

I request that we direct NIRA to issue the cards so that those children can be saved from that inconvenience. 

Finally, as we talk about ironing out issues of people who have cards and yet they are not supposed to have them - I feel that the national identification registration was politically influenced - targeting the 2016 elections. That is why we did not capture important data. We have a challenge of increased crime because people do not live in the places that were registered in the card. We should review the identification data so that we can differentiate those people.

There are people who have cards indicating that they are in Kampala and yet they stay in Masaka. Let us review without any political influence to give correct data so that people can be traceable in case there is a need.

7.53
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this wonderful opportunity. I have three issues to raise: 

(i) 	In my view, Kololo Ceremonial Grounds should not be lit using solar energy because it is one of the most important places in this country. Even if we have sold the entire power sector to foreigners we should be able to light up Kololo using the power that we generate in this country.

(ii) 	We talk about Public-Private Partnership in trying to implement the electronic immigration system. Our passports are being held by non-Ugandans but we are trying to bring in private partners to implement in a very sensitive sector despite a legal framework to protect Public-Private Partnership. We should get our own resources to implement such a programme.

Finally, I have heard that in the policy statement they would like to establish two more authorities; the police and prisons authorities. What value are they going to add to improve the performance of these agencies? We are all aware that we are struggling with resources to fund unnecessary Government institutions. Thank you.

7.55
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and the chairperson of the committee. If there are individuals that we need to talk for then police officers are the ones. There is an increase in crime but we need to ask whether the police officers are policing.

The other day, the Members of Parliament were getting an opportunity to have police officers at their homes and in their vehicles. I received 40 calls from police officers I did not know calling to offer me security so that they get an opportunity to leave where they are to where they do not know. 

About two weeks ago, police advertised opportunities for officers to go to Somalia; most of the rooms were occupied by senior police officers who wanted to leave working here meaning those opportunities were better. 

The teachers and the medics can demonstrate but the police officers cannot because they are in security forces. Therefore, we need to see how they can work better. 

The other issue is about equipping them. I have 18 police stations in Buvuma District, 15 of which were constructed by the local people. Four have been demolished four times because every time the community that constructed them are unhappy with police actions they say, “Let us demolish it after all we are the ones who constructed it.” After some time, they reconstruct.

Another issue is about the marine police. We talk about vehicles but how do we ensure security on the lake? You have a marine boat, stationed in Buikwe District, which gets 60 litres of fuel a month. These 60 litres can be consumed in an hour on a lake; how do they police the lake since these lakes are prone to other countries?

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, hon. Migadde, for giving way. That is a very serious matter. We procure boats to carry out surveillance on the lakes to fight illegal fishing. You do not give them money to do their work but you put Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF), which is beating people and breaking their boats. There is no equity.

MR MIGADDE: Thank you for the information –(Member timed out.)

7.58
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report that they have given us; it is a very important report and the decisions therein. Allow me mention some few issues that concern me.

The first is about the welfare of the police, which we must take with keen interest and seriousness. For example, you can imagine a police station, which is cracked from up downwards. It can collapse any time. One of them is in Ngora District where I come from. I am now asking the ministry: When are you constructing the police stations so that these police officers are safe? 

Madam Speaker, assume that you went to visit our District Police Commander (DPC) and a building collapses when you are inside, what would happen? –(Laughter)– Those are issues we should be very concerned about because it can happen anytime, anywhere. 

Secondly, I am talking about the fallen soldiers and police officers; those who have died in service. Up to now, many of the soldiers who died in Somalia have not been paid. This is where the trouble is yet they went to Somalia to fight for the good of Uganda. Now they have perished and nobody is paying them; their children are at home and they cannot afford to go to school. These are the issues that the ministry should be telling us. I would like the ministry to be considerate on that matter. 

One other critical issue I would like to know is that sometimes the discipline in police is questionable. Sometimes, it is we who have created the conditions that are palatable for indiscipline within police because you do not pay them enough salary that can enable them to live in a fair environment. Sometimes you treat them like animals, ignore them when they talk or chase them like goats. For example, in Naguru, they were recently chased from their homes; here in Naguru –(Laughter)– these are issues that are very critical, which we must address as a country because it is bad manners.

MS NAJJUMA: Thank you, honourable Member, for giving way. Such conditions have a direct psychological effect on these police officers. We know that anger and frustration could easily translate to revenge. We need to request Government to put up measures to see that police officers’ situations and conditions of living are improved. Thank you.

MR ABALA: Finally, the level of corruption and bribery is very serious in the police force, which we must all fight with one heart if we to –(Member timed out.)

8.02
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues; first, I have a problem with the National Identification Registration Authority (NIRA), which recruited very many people in the name of registrars to register the learners in schools. To my dismay, there are very many of these people who have not been paid and the worst of it is some of their appointment letters were withdrawn. I would like to ask the minister when these people will be paid?

Secondly, I would like to talk about the injustices and discrimination in this country, which is everywhere. This afternoon, I am so much disheartened to hear that a Government entity called Uganda Air Cargo Corporation (UACC) has not got any budgetary assistance from the Government yet the entity is supposed to get money from the Government. 

I have a recommendation from the Inspectorate of Government recommending that the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Defence aliases with the parliamentary Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance so that the money for the staff should be paid and this entity should also be helped. However, since UACC started working in 2007, no budgetary allocation has been given to it. 

Therefore, I would like to know from the Ministry of Finance when this entity will be helped. Even the minister in charge of defence, hon. Adolf Mwesige wrote some time last year to the same Ministry of Finance. I have the document here that the minister wrote, requesting the Ministry of Finance to help this entity, which is doing well. As Parliament, we should not encourage this kind of discrimination. If an entity is also supposed to benefit from the national treasury, so be it. 

My request to Parliament is that this is the right time for us to help the UACC so that it also gets part of the budget. It is unfair for us to give some entities money – it is like when you have children then you give this one and the other food but leave one yawning for years. My request is that this is the time for us to put our feet down and make sure that we allocate something for UACC. 

Finally –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nzoghu might walk to Busongora; come and take the Floor.

8.06
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the issue of food for prisons, the army and the police. Most of the existing prisons were planned in such a way that they have sufficient land for them to do farming. For example, Mubuku, Ibuga and many other prisons - They have sufficient land to do farming. In addition, it is from this that the prisons are supposed to get food. I do not know what happened then with the other prisons that they are even in a position to run out of food and yet originally they had planned that the prisons would be self-sufficient - (Interjection)– Self-sufficient; I am careful with what I am saying.

Madam Speaker, I also want to point out the issue of crime preventers. When they had just gone out of the elections, they were asked to supply food to the Police but the supply of food to the Police was like on a gentleman’s agreement. I do not know whether the committee has looked into this to the extent that most of the crime preventers’ money has not been paid. They even do not have agreement with Police. I do not know how they are going to be paid and yet they supplied the food and the Police acknowledged that they got that food.

Finally, I would like to look at the issue of the Kasese report. The Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs - it is good that they have been able to come up with this report on the ministerial policy statement. 

Madam Speaker, you are aware that  the directive that you gave to this committee to come up with the report on the issues of Kasese, they based in Kasese and Rwenzori sub-region and it is now more than one year.

I do not know how the people in the Rwenzori will view this; that when our people died, they needed to know why they died and what the remedy is -(Member timed out.)

8.09
MR HAROLD MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonzo County East, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and the chairperson of the committee. I realised that Government institutions are beginning to do things in the same way though in wrong direction. Just to highlight, we have money that is being sent to districts specifically to extension officers. This money is sent as fuel and yet they do not have motorcycles or cars.

When we interfaced with the district accounting officers, they indicated that they give money to the respective officers to manage themselves to reach out to the field. This clearly shows lack of accountability.

In the same way, fuel is going to be decentralised to the field where there are no motorcycles and cars. We were in Kyegegwa and found that it has over 15 motorcycles parked because they broke down.

Madam Speaker, I was in Kasese and I realised that they had parked over 18 motorcycles. I would love that there is a recommendation that service centres in regions be established so that if there is any breakdown, these motorcycles and other facilities can be repaired immediately so that services continue reaching our people. Thank you.

8.11
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to debate these policy statements, specifically directing myself to the welfare of police officers.

Madam Speaker, this House is aware that at least for primary school teachers who work for 10 hours these days can be able to get a salary of Shs 500,000. However, for police officers at a lower rank, for 30 days, he earns Shs 270,000. When you look at that amount for a person who works for 24 hours, you realise that there is unfairness somewhere. What can you do with Shs 270,000 when you have children to pay fees for; you have a family to feed, and no accommodation? There is a very big problem.

I would like to ask - if the House agrees - that we have to deal with the salary issue of the police officers so that this money is increased. If it were possible, we would not even pass their budget unless there is a component for increasing salary for police officers.

Madam Speaker, the other issue I would like to address myself to is the issue of the Amnesty Commission. Indeed, I know that there is a law governing the Amnesty Commission and its operations. However, we have been having challenges; I do not know that the Amnesty Commission Act extends its mandate to the State House. For example what happened in Kasese, there are some people who got amnesty just by saying to the President that: “We are sorry,” and the others who have refused but would even have the opportunity of benefiting from the law are in prison not even allowed to have bail. There are others who have gotten bail but cannot move from their houses, specifically the king. You find that there is a very big problem.

The mandate of the Amnesty Commission must be clearly known to the population so that we know that if I need amnesty and I am a criminal I know where to go. If it is State House, I must know and if it is somewhere, I must know. This Government has been making these mistakes that it must correct.

Madam Speaker, there are issues I do not compromise as an individual and one of the issues is the security of this country for anything.  However, it sometimes pains me that even security agencies, including Police, compromise the security of this country. If you can see, what has been going on - ISO arresting police officers and the police are now the ones answering for crimes they are committing instead of preventing crime. It means the country is taking a wrong direction –(Member timed out.)

8.16
MS FLORENCE NAMANYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have some observation to make from the committee’s observations and recommendations. The committee seems to suggest that the board of directors of NIRA are fulltime. They are saying that the board of directors of NIRA occupy other pre-existing offices that demand most of the time away from NIRA.

It is well known that being a board member you are not fulltime. The committee is going to cause conflict because of the recommendations they are making. They say: “The committee recommends that the Registration of Persons’ Act, 2015 should be amended to provide for an autonomous board of directors with at least two thirds of its members being fully committed to the oversight of NIRA.”

I think that is their mandate. It does not mean that they should be housed in the premises of NIRA or when they are doing their work, they are not supposed to be fulltime like the chief executive. I think that will cause conflict between the executive and the technical officers and the board of directors. Each one has his role properly defined.

Madam Speaker, another observation on the running of National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) activities - they are saying that the board operates through sub-committees. If the board operates through sub-committees and they bring their recommendations for the board to approve, I think that is very normal. It is like, we work through our committees and Parliament approves. I do not see a problem with that. I think we need to revisit the way this was drafted so that we do not cause conflicts at work. Thank you very much. 

8.17
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to associate myself with some of the recommendations the committee has made. They have rightly observed that in a number of immigration posts, accommodation is lacking.
 
Madam Speaker, I had the opportunity to experience this with you, when we went to a border post and there was no immigration officer. Whoever wanted to benefit from immigration services at that post would certainly not benefit and that reflects badly on the country. However, the committee report falls short of tangible recommendations. They have proposed that the immigration board should write a project and in that way, they may be able to have accommodation for immigration officers. I would like to know why they could not say that Government must provide resources.

Secondly, a number of courts have been built in different parts of the country but prisons’ facilities are not being enhanced. I have been informed that in a number of prisons, Hepatitis is spreading at a very alarming rate because the rooms are very congested. My thinking is that we should be able to find money to expand prisons facilities in several parts of the country if we really want prisons to be correctional facilities. In fact, they are now becoming death-traps for different people.

Thirdly, there is a lot of opaqueness in the way in which the security agencies operate. Every time we are looking for money yet accountability for funds allocated to them is hidden under “classified” expenditure. I am reliably informed that the United Nations (UN) has been compensating Uganda for some of the equipment and guns it uses in various missions we have engaged in. However, we have never received any accountability or indication that we have got this and that. Therefore, who “eats” that money UN pays Uganda? This is the kind of money we would expect to deploy within our budget. We now have the Uganda People’s Defence Forces working in Equatorial Guinea and about 200 soldiers are there. Under what terms are they operating and who are they paying for that service? I think these are the areas where we must enhance accountability so that the country and Parliament can be –(Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, the general rule of the UN in peace operations is that the country contributing the force will appropriate money for the mission. However, at the end of the financial year, the UN peacekeeping mission refunds that money. We have always appropriated money, giving to our soldiers in Somalia from this Parliament but we have no accountability of the funds which are given back in compensation to compensate Uganda for the appropriation. Where does that money go? That is the information, I wanted to give.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, honourable for giving way. Madam Speaker, the money that is given in compensation, it is also a principle that, once you are injured or killed in such a mission, you have to be compensated. I have more than 20 people in my constituency who were injured in Somalia and they have never been compensated. Therefore, where does this principle apply?

8.22
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and committee chairperson for the report. I would like to talk about security along the border and especially in Moyo District. As I speak now, Moyo District is a regional centre for the police; a regional centre for the army with the brigades and having a brigade commander. This covers the districts of Moyo, Yumbe and Adjumani. 

Due to the influx of refugees in my district, there are security concerns, especially theft, robbery, kidnaps and proliferation of small arms. Madam Speaker, the police station in Moyo District is a colonial police station. It is very small and congested. It is squeezed within the town centre hence there is no room for expansion yet it is a regional police station. Hon. Obiga Kania knows about it. Therefore, there is need for the force to get land elsewhere and construct a better regional police station.

Madam Speaker, as I said before, the issue of logistics; recently you must have heard and witnessed that there was cattle rustling along the border where over 2,000 heads of cattle were taken from Moyo District. The cattle were rustled by the South Sudanese and taken to South Sudan. Up to now, the cows have not been recovered. Therefore, there is need for the increment of the numbers of the police, army and also the Anti-Stock Theft Force so that such occurrences do not happen again. 

There should be a deliberate effort to have all the refugees in the refugee centres. It has been discovered that arms are being kept –(Member timed out.) 

8.25
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the report. However, in the report, I heard the chairperson talking about buildings for the police. I want to interest the chairperson in line with the Uganda Land Commission under the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. All along, we have been asking for a comprehensive development plan that can really handle most of these other programmes that could be handled by another sector that is not supposed to handle that line. Uganda Land Commission, in the budget that we have, has a provision for buying land to build for Government institutions. I would like to request the chairperson to get in touch with that body and see how best you can fit in there and how best you can utilise these other resources that you had earmarked for that. 

I would like to seek the attention of the Minister of Internal Affairs who is the minister in charge of the police. Honourable minister, in my area, the policy now is that somebody cannot get anything, including what the Minister of Agriculture gives out here; you cannot receive coffee, citrus or anything else unless you have a national ID because it is what the quote on the forms. Many citizens in my area miss out because of that. They have been calling on several occasions and crying out for help.

We have told the minister and everybody concerned that there are very many people who have not yet got the national IDs up to now. They say the data is not yet back. I wonder which data takes two or three years to come. We need the minister and the chairperson to tell us whether they have any plan for that.

Lastly, on the issue of kidnapping people, in Parliament here, we have a staff member whose cousin was kidnapped. He got in touch with the police officers at the top. Police has the most sophisticated equipment for tracking people. They tracked that kid and found him in Kawempe in less than two days. There is a system they used which is in police. We need the police to inform –(Member timed out.)

8.28
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Elgon County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I also thank the committee for the report. In the previous Parliament, we gave some money to the Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory (DGAL) because they were unfunded. However, when I met with one of the bosses recently, he told me that the information they produce, is misused. 

Now, a case in point is URA, they send samples to DGAL to determine classification of some materials. What some of the officials in URA do, if it is steel, for example, if you go downtown, imported steel is cheaper than steel produced here. The Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory gives them classifications, and they go back and negotiate with the importer to change the SA quote so that they pay lower taxes. This has been going on for some time. Recently, there was a disagreement between two URA officials over the sharing. So one of them came and told me. Honourable minister, I have this information, I can pass it over to you. Secondly, please inform URA that when they are sending samples, the letter should be signed by the Commissioner General or another authorised person other than all other people taking samples.

Then on the issue of domestic arrears; I do not know how we are going to handle this with the minister of finance. This has pushed many Ugandans out of business. Many have lost property. These days, the people who do business with police and UPDF are almost not there in town. Many of them are just selling on debts. If he has a claim there, he can sell to you and you pursue it because they want to get money. Some of this money has got loans attached to it. 

In the report, the chairperson talked about conflicting figures of domestic arrears under the Uganda Police Force. We know that domestic arrears are very fine. In her report, she has indicated to us that they should not pay that money –(Member timed out.)

8.31
MR JOSEPH KAKOOZA (NRM, Buwekula County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for the good report. I have two issues:

I am going to talk about the influx of people who are entering Mubende District, coming from the neighbouring countries. They come to Mubende District, more especially my constituency, Buwekula and also the neighbouring constituencies. They come in large numbers, in trucks, in an organised manner and the security personnel is lax. 

When they come to our constituency, they buy land because they come with money. Then they start replacing the indigenous people. These are the cries that you are always hearing in Buwekula Constituency. There are a lot of struggles and deaths because of these people. Very many people are entering the constituency and nobody bothers to ask them for documents. They do not have identity cards. They have caused a lot of problems.

The second issue concerns the crime preventers. I commend them for the good work they are trying to do in my constituency. I would however request the chairperson to urgently include – you know they say these people have been integrated into the army. However, how can someone who does not have a raincoat or gumboots or a whistle -(Interjection)- I would request the committee to give these people the basics especially a raincoat. They sometimes sleep outside in their regular clothes and with no gumboots. I request the committee to consider giving these people service numbers; what happens when a crime preventer commits a crime?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the point raised by the member is so serious. There is no local government in the villages. There are no MPs, so who will ask questions? I wish the Government could take seriously the issue of electing the LC I governments. There is no one taking charge. People just walk in and out of the country.

MR ARINDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for the good report. Of late, there has been a wave of crime in Bushenyi and I am happy that I reported it here. I am very happy that the Minister of Internal Affairs visited Bushenyi yesterday and was able to assess situation on the ground.

However, the most important issue that the people were actually asking was that we have national identity cards and when they are registering our IDs, they capture all the information including our finger prints. Crime intelligence quite often goes to the scene of the crime, pick finger prints and they have been asking, why is it that we are able to capture finger prints at the scene of crime but we are not able to link them up with NIRA? That would quicken the intelligence work and hasten prosecuting the criminals. I would like to hear from Minister of Internal Affairs on why it is not possible to link those two so that we are able to get the culprits quickly. I beg to submit.

8.37
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the work well done. The police are like all of us; they have children to take to school; they have families to look after. They fall sick and go to the hospitals and they do not have health insurance. They face all the challenges we face. In addition, they serve us tirelessly despite the challenges – 24 hours a day, seven days a week and 365 days a year yet they are paid very low salaries. 

Madam Speaker, it is hard life to have a low pay and poor working condition. It means the environment of that person is tempting. Therefore, my prayer is that Government should put in effort and allocate more money to this institution so that we can make them a better police.

On operation, a district like Kagadi has 19 subcounties, but we have one vehicle at the main police station and we are allocated Shs 700,000 for fuel per month. I can tell you that things sometimes become very hard and we have to come in to make things work yet they are supposed to be funded by the Government.

These people in the upcountry districts are not even given operation food when they are doing their work. It is a very hard condition and my prayer is that we increase their funding - such situations cannot stop somebody from revenging against the very society they are meant to protect. My prayer would be that we look for the money so that we can have a happier and more professional police. I beg to submit.

8.40
MS NOELINE BASEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I thank the committee for a very good report and I would like to concern myself with the aspect of curbing trafficking in persons. 

Madam Speaker, this is a very big problem and Government should take a deliberate effort to put in place measures to curb this vice. Our daughters in this country have fallen victims to traffickers. I would like to address myself to the problem of porous borders. 

We need to strengthen the security of our borders because most of the girls who have fallen victims in this country, cross by road through our borders and we do not have enough security to check who is going out and for what purposes. Therefore, I support the committee’s recommendation that a budget allocation be made to ensure that this is fully attended to.

Madam Speaker, I also add my vice to the support for improvement of accommodation for the police. Just like my colleague has said, the police are like us and it is very disheartening to find that they are living in conditions that are degrading and dehumanising. I used to live near a police station and we would always feel bad to find these police officers living in mud-and-wattle grass-thatched and ramshackle structure. It is really bad. Therefore, they should be supported so that their condition can improve and they can give us better service as a country.

Finally, I would like to end with the support for allocation of fuel, especially to upcountry police stations. Madam Speaker, at the moment, what happens in my district – I do not know what happens in others – when the local people go to report cases at the police stations, especially where the police have to go to the scene of crime, they ask: “Are you able to provide fuel?” If fuel is not there, those cases will not be attended to. Therefore, we have the “haves” and “have not’s” in the service delivery. I think this intervention will go a long way to improve the situation. I thank you.

8.43
MR BONNY OKELLO (NRM, Kole North County, Kole): Madam Speaker, I thank the committee for the wonderful report. However, there are two things I would like to bring to the attention of this House. I am a son of a retired police officer. When you talk about the welfare of police officers, people tend to zero down on salaries. 

Madam Speaker, most police personnel up country do not have uniforms. I have not seen this happening anywhere. The uniforms they have are the ones they get when they come to Kampala and buy from colleagues who are deployed within Kampala Metropolitan Area. If you went to rural police stations, you would find that the police do not even have shoes. If you see a police officer with a clean uniform in the village, he is either from the training school or has just been deployed recently. These are areas that need to be taken care of.

Madam Speaker, the second aspect is the education of the children of the policemen and policewomen. Much as the police have primary schools, most of the police personnel cannot even send their children to the police primary schools because these schools are headed by civilians who even charge extra money, which the police cannot afford. 

In addition, the police personnel cannot even send their children to secondary schools. Unlike the soldiers who have their secondary schools, the police do not have, yet the police have more than 30 per cent of their personnel who are trained teachers. Why don’t we establish at least one police secondary school in every region so that the police can take their children to affordable schools? We are all aware that the police are among the people who are blessed with very many children but in most cases they are able to educate one or two only.

Finally, Madam Speaker, the most important aspect is the life after serving in the police. Most of the policemen and policewomen have served this country diligently. My father is one of them but up to now, he has not yet got his pension. Every day, he comes to the headquarters, he comes to my house with two, three or four colleagues with whom he had served and have not yet got their money. 

The two ministers are here – internal affairs and Public Service – why don’t you have a mechanism in place such that when a police officer is exiting, he goes home honourably? Unlike the teachers whose pensions have been decentralised and are processed in their districts, the police still have to come to the headquarters. Some of them come from Kaabong and they cannot even afford transport. When they reach the headquarters, they find young girls – of the age of their grandchildren – tossing them up and down. I have been one of the people who have been traumatised. Every time –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I think the point has been made. The issue raised by hon. Bonny about the uniforms is extremely serious because I officiate at many functions and I have also noticed that upcountry they do not have good uniforms. When the IGP came for vetting, this was one of the things we raised to him – that he should support the other areas outside Kampala also to be smart and have some facilities.

8.46
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank the committee for the report. However, when you look at the regional government analytical laboratories, whereas the Government made provision of over Shs 4 billion, for the equipment and furniture in the laboratories, it makes no provision for the wage bill.

The effect of this is that the laboratories are not going to be functional. I know there is ban on recruitment in Government.  However, I would like implore the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to donate money for the President for the wage bill to this department so that it is functional.

These laboratories will help criminal, commercial and civil justice system, which will make the public and private sector competitive. This will be in line with the National Development Plan. Therefore, I would like to request that before we pass this budget, we should make provision for the wage bill for this sector so that the issue of money will not arise. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development clarify this matter?

8.48
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, there is no way we can fail to provide for a wage bill for an institution that has employees. Unless hon. Mwiru is talking about new recruitment, which is a different issue but the people who are there have been provided for.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think hon. Bahati has not solved my problem. Actually, he has no idea what I am talking about. We are talking about the Government Analytical Laboratories in Mbarara and Mbale. These laboratories were newly created and whenever, they are created, police usually advertises and takes people for training. This area caters for people with special skills.

Therefore, I would like to request the honourable minister to make a provision for the wage bill. This is going to help you raise more money. It will also help people quickly resolve cases in courts as you expand the budget and not put the burden elsewhere. I have made my point. Madam Speaker, if there is no money, the President could donate to this department so that it can start work; we can recover it through a supplementary. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me invite the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs to respond -

MR PENTAGON: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to draw the attention of the minister to the issue of the budget for fuel. We have noted with concern that there is a lot of fuel allocated to the centre but the outpost do not receive any.

The committee recommended that more fuel should be allocated to the outpost without trying to direct in terms of percentage of how much fuel should go. This might remain redundant. Therefore, isn’t it procedural right that Parliament stamps it further, to say that a certain percentage of this money goes there so that we can easily know how many people are at the centre and the average amount of fuel they use? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: How shall we enforce it? That is difficult. I think let us allow the ministry to deal with that. They should take into account our concerns that there should be support to the outposts in terms of fuel. Otherwise, it is difficult for Parliament to say send in 100 litres of fuel in a month. I think it is difficult. Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs – Could you use seven minutes?

8.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Col. (Rtd) Engola Okello): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for coming up with this budget. I am going to be brief because time has gone.

I will begin with Uganda Air Cargo Corporation. This issue was being handled by the ministry and the finance ministry. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here; he should tell us why it has delayed up to now. We shall hear from him but if it fails, I would request that we pass this budget and then we can make a supplementary later –(Interjection)- that is the issue on Uganda Air Cargo Corporation.

Secondly, we have the issue of payments of veterans, ex-gratia and estates. These are terms we use. Ex-gratia applies to those old soldiers of the UN; we have the veterans and the estates. These are those who are alive at the moment. They are surviving but they are at home. We have been paying them. From 2010, we had 154,577. We verified them but amongst them, there are only 140,441 and verification is continuing. We have continued to pay them. In the budget for Financial Year 2016/2017, we paid 2,714 of them because resources were small -(Interruption)

MS AKELLO FRANCA: Thank you, honourable minister. In 2010, close to 2011 General Elections, some seemingly verification exercise was done across the country when veterans in those categories you mentioned and their survivors were asked to open bank accounts and wait since Government was going to pay them.

However, since 2010 up to-date, Parliament has not received an accountability of that verification exercise and the payment there after. Is that the category you are talking about or it is another verification exercise?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let him answer the question. You have already spoken. You are anticipating his answers.

COL (RTD) OKELLO-ENGOLA: I said, we verified and got 140,414. Of course, more are still going back. We cannot pay without the verification exercise.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, could you please answer? We need to do the other reports and go.

COL (RTD) OKELLO-ENGOLA: In the Financial Year 2016/2017, we paid 2,714 soldiers at Shs 11.4 billion. In the Financial Year 2017/2018, 2,115 were paid and it costed Shs 15.3 billion. We are remaining with 78,284 cases, which is equivalent to Shs 500.09 billion to be paid. If the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can handle us quickly, we intend to pay them in two years’ time - in the Financial Year 2018/2019. Everybody will be covered –(Interjections)- I told you there are three groups. We have the veterans, ex-gratia and estates.

The third issue I am going to talk about is the solar system at Kololo. Madam Speaker, I want to correct one of the Members who gave us a name of the contractor, which we do not have. I know that the contractor who was contracted there is Nexus Green Limited. The term of the contract is that it is to be worked on in four phases and this is going on. 

The first phase is the feasibility study, design and documentations. The second phase is production and shipment of equipment. The third phase is delivery and installations. The fifth is training, testing, inspection and commissioning -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think our committee can follow up what he is saying. He is saying this on the Hansard. It is here. The committee should follow it up.

COL (RTD) OKELLO-ENGOLA: Successful completion of Phase One was hindered with the condition precedent to implementation of Phase Two, Phase Three and Phase Four. The project implementation spent more time on Phase One than earlier planned.

Further, it was planned that Phase One should be completed before but there was a problem which the contractor was required to hire local technical consultants from Uganda. That one disturbed Phase One to get completed quickly. The ministry was undertaking consultations with Electricity Regulatory Authority. That one also caused another problem in the successful completion of Phase One because they had to wait. At the moment, the process is going on and the work progressing –(Interruption)

MR OCHEN: Honourable minister, I am seeking your clarification on two things. Madam Speaker, I have a matter here where the military officers have destroyed people in my constituency -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ochen, please sit down. Take your seat.

COL (RTD) OKELLO-ENGOLA: I pray that this budget and these other issues be passed. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The Minister of Internal Affairs, please use seven minutes.

9.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, let me also join in to thank the committee for the work they have done and the points that Members have raised, which certainly will help us. There are so many so I will probably not be able to go into every detail as you asked. I will try to give a summary which can give an answer. For those others which we can handle later on, we shall be able to do so.

Firstly, in brief, somebody raised the issue about many accounts being controlled by different accounting officials and not the Permanent Secretary. The only point I wanted to mention there is that appointment of accounting officers is by the Secretary to the Treasury and he does so. He can appoint anybody, not necessarily the Permanent Secretary. That is at times the reason why you find that an accounting officer is different from the Permanent Secretary. This is the case in relation to all the accounts under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The accounting officers are different from the Permanent Secretary.

There are issues that you have raised about the welfare, housing, fuel, clothing and salary; particularly of the police. I would like to thank you for the concern you have seen. This is something we have seen in the ministry. We know it is not the best. We appreciate how much work as a country and as a ministry these people are doing. However, as you are aware with us, the Ministry of Internal Affairs is not the only department in Government. We share from the same resource envelope and this is what our colleagues in the finance ministry could allocate for us.

Luckily enough, they are here. They know they need the police and I hope next time, they will be able to give a little more. The committee is our witness. We have always been asking for more but because of the low resource envelope, what is given is not what we ask. 

Specifically, regarding the issue of uniforms, of course we do not simply stop to lament. We try to do something out of the little that we have to make the condition a little bit better. Regarding uniforms, we have established a tailoring firm where we are now not importing uniforms. We tailor all our uniforms and in fact every year, we give two pairs of uniforms to our officers –(Interjection)– yes, from the lowest level –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when did you start that?

MR OBIGA: For the last two years, that is what we have been doing, Madam Speaker –(Interjections) – yes.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I have gone to many districts. I see them on the parade and it is clear that their uniforms are old. Maybe you are sending them but they are not reaching, especially outside Kampala.

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, I will check further but when the new political leadership in the ministry was sworn into leadership, this is one of the first facilities we visited. We have it on record and we know they are making the uniforms. What we cannot say is the maintenance and whether they get lost on the way. I can vouch here that the records show that we are giving our police officers two pairs of uniforms per year but I will check.

This is as far as the welfare is concerned. The fuel given is definitely very low. Three hundred to seven hundred litres per month obviously are not enough for operational areas. However, as I have said, that is one of the reasons why it happens.

Regarding accommodation, we have also tried to improvise. I have already stated generally that it is bad but we have also tried to improvise. Our ultimate intention is that we must accommodate all our officers, not in Mama Ingia Pole. We should do better. We have started with the forces in the town, particularly in Kampala. The reason is that these people are more exposed in operational hazards. 

We are trying to build flats. By the end of this year, we should be able to finish four blocks of flats which will be able to take – that is why we have a development budget there – about 1500 officers of the lowest ranks; the constables not the officers above the Assistant Inspectors of Police; that is how we improvise. 

Operationally, we are also concentrating on training our officers because we know they have weaknesses in terms of equipment. Therefore, to concentrate on that, we need to train them more. As of now, we have done four bases of middle class officers and we have eight schools in the country where we are training them. Our reason for concentrating on the officers is that we believe, when they go back at some point, we should be able to use them to broaden the training. 

There is also the issue of police headquarters. Again, that is in relation with the building. 

However, let me specifically talk about police in the refugee areas as mentioned by the colleagues who are holding refugees and the police therein. When the refugees come, they bring their differences from their countries.

Therefore, we need more deployment. This issue has been addressed and the latest police council meeting held resolved that in the coming month, the number of police personnel deployed in and at the border of the refugee holding districts be increased. 

Regarding specifically the police station for the regional centre in Moyo, I am also aware there is a provision offered during the recent visit of the Secretary General of the UN. The UNHCR is offering to put a facility in Moyo as a regional police headquarters for that region. However, the little hitch we are having is that the leaders are not agreeing as to whether it should be built in Moyo or Obongi. I think that is a small matter and we should be able to handle it.

There is the issue of why we are establishing the police and prison authorities at this moment. These are already authorities which were established in the respective Acts: the Uganda Prisons Act and the Uganda Police Force Act. Their role is to do supervisory work over the administration of the police and prisons. They recommend and consider the issues of recruitment and promotion.

Madam Speaker, they would be able to see the whole country rather than limiting it to the IGP or the directors. So, they are very important and the members are very senior people. In some cases, they are members who headed the police force and prisons service at that time. As heads of the force and service, they provide us very good consultancy work. 

The authorities are being administered under the votes of the prisons service and the police force. We think this compromises their services. So, the best way is to provide them independent funds which are administered directly by the ministry. That way, they will be independent enough to do their work.

On money to police station, I think I have already done that. 

Now, let me talk about the police and the issue of the joint operation or cooperation between the security forces. I would like to assure you, Madam Speaker, that we do have a good working relationship with all the security forces. If there are areas of individual misunderstandings, those are not institutional issues. 

We have an organisation called the Joint Operations Command which meets every week. We do have the Joint Intelligence Committee which also meets every week. We also do have the National Security Council which meets, at the national level, every month. They are able to bring together these organisations to work together. In fact, over the areas of the killings and some of the insecurities, although the police have been leading the operations because it is an internal matter, the supports of those other forces have always been extremely useful.

So, I would like to assure the House that we do not need to really have a problem over that matter. It is working and it is even working much better as I am talking -(Interjections)- well, on where they sit, I can only say they sit in Uganda. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, has the National Security Council been fully constituted under the Act? 

MR OBIGA: The National Security Council is fully constituted under the chairmanship of the President. 

THE SPEAKER: Are the five civilians who are supposed to be appointed from the public there?

MR OBIGA: All of them are there and the council meets every month. Madam Speaker, at an appropriate time, if you so wish, we can give you that list. It would be at your liberty to give the list to the Members but we are willing to provide it. 

Let me talk about NIRA. There was the issue of the registration of learners being inadequate and incomplete. We entirely agree. When the first projection was drawn, it was estimated that there would be about 17,000 schools with 10 million people. However, when the team went to the field, we found there were more schools; we found 28,000 learning centres to be covered with 14 million people to be registered. That is what delayed the process. The reason is that the number in the data given to us by the Ministry of Education and Sports was much lower than what we found in the field.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we had a census in this country and you have the results. Can you really stand here and say you did not know the estimates?

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, what I am saying here is on the record. We made a statement and if you go back to the Hansard, you will see that what I am saying is not new. It is what we found on the ground compared to what we were given by the Ministry of Education and Sports on the number of schools. Therefore, what we found on the ground -(Interjections)– I said it is on the record here, honourable members and you can check it.

Therefore, we have realised this project has to continue and we are going to come back. Even in some schools, not all the children were registered and the registration is going to continue. 

However, I heard a member said some are stopping children from registering for examinations because of the National Identity Cards. That is wrong. It is their interpretation but not NIRA’s or the Ministry of Internal Affairs’. First of all, we have not issued the National Identification Numbers (NIN) to the schools and neither have we submitted this data to the Ministry of Education and Sports. We are actually going to submit them at the end of next week.

So, there is no way a teacher or head teacher can know that a student was registered or not. They must wait and if that is true, we are going to instruct schools to make sure that they do not jeopardize any child because of that learning situation of those people since it is in a continuous process.

There is the issue of new identity cards and their replacement taking long. This has been realised and we have asked NIRA as in the next budget; once they get their money they must reopen the district offices and they must sensitise the community development officers at the sub county level and sub county chiefs to continue to carry on that registration generally for the people without national identity cards -(Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you honourable minister for giving way. The clarification I am seeking on that is, if I lose my identity card and I know the number and if you go to my details, the data is there, why should I come from Gulu to Kampala in Kololo to get a replacement and yet I pay Shs 50,000 and have to travel?  I could even be coming from Agago, from very far away to come to Kampala when all the data is there. Can you help us to understand that?

MR OBIGA: That is why I am saying that we have asked NIRA to reopen the centres at the district level in the next Financial Year which means from July they will be open. When they get funds and recruit the personnel to be there; those centres are going to be equipped with the machines which can read your ID details in Kololo in your district headquarters or at a later stage in the sub counties.

Therefore, you do not need to reach Kampala, the reason why at the moment you have to come to Kampala is because we do not have those machines to read the IDs or the details at your district headquarters. They were withdrawn.

Once you give the details, then the server will be connected to all those district centres, that is why we are opening it. It does take time to read your number or details but what you need is that machine. You cannot read it on any other thing.

I will give you an example, recently, UCC is in communications house - NIRA is in Kololo but until NIRA was able to give those reading machines to UCC, it was unable to read the data in the server and now UCC is able to read it.

Therefore, the point is once these machines are available with the budget approved; we shall go back to the districts and at the moment, we are very sorry that members have to come from that far. There is nothing you can do at the moment.

MS NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, I lost my ID and went to Kololo personally. All the details, I went through the process in November last year (2017), I was told to go and correct it from central division. Up to now, I have not got it. If a person like me can toil to get a replacement; what about that person from Masaka?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please conclude.

MR OBIGA: What my colleague has said since November – that is of course a regrettable exception; but I have also known not only Members here but other people who have gone to Kololo and they have managed to get a replacement within a month or even in two weeks. So we shall look at it and see what the cause is.

There were IDs which are collected at the border; some of our citizens once they go across the country, their IDs are collected at the borders and they are told to come and verify and collect them in Kololo–(Interjections)- yes, I will not tell you the border where this is particularly happening, but there have been some-

First of all, when we were registering people, we used the LCI to verify the citizenship of the people. Some of these LCI as we read them now because they know X has stayed with them for so long, even if they knew this person was not a citizen of Uganda they filled a form and verified that person as a citizen of Uganda.

Later on, our officers through their own source identified this person through many other ways that in fact this person is not a citizen of Uganda. Therefore, to verify whether that person is truly a citizen of Uganda, they are asked to come back for purposes of verification in Kololo.

If the ID is collected -(Interjection)- let me explain this

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to close.

MR OBIGA: Let me explain this and then you can ask. So he comes to Kololo and is told you can go but your ID will be found in Kololo; you go there. The person comes and undergoes another interview because those people are convinced that in spite of this person having filled that form he is not a citizen. Many have been proved like that to be non-citizens and it is done for the sake of making sure that we get genuine people. Those are the only exceptions. We cannot compromise that honourable members and neither can you.

THE SPEAKER: Can you make your conclusive remarks please?

MR OBIGA: Finally on NIRA, linking finger prints to the IDs for purposes of detecting crime; not only crime but identification. This has been done. The registration which was done was standalone registration; all your details were linked to your card. 

With the approval of this budget - there is money in that budget for purposes of linking that information to the various service users; the stakeholders who will be using it. For example, UCC is already linked to it; next are the banks, security organs, each individual will be able to receive a link and get into that server for the data that they require. However, the protocol has to be developed so that you do not get data which does not fit you. That is on NIRA.

Madam Speaker, I do not know how much time I have.

THE SPEAKER: You have already taken 20 minutes. You have taken more than - please conclude.

MR OBIGA: Now, let me finish this way -(Interjection)- no I have finished. I do not need to submit a written report. Finally, one small issue, the issue of the members of the board - colleagues, there are boards in this country where you need, according to the laws that you made; because all laws are made by Parliament here. Most of the boards are under our departments; the names are submitted to Cabinet and from Cabinet to Parliament which approves them. Regarding the national citizenship and immigration control board, that board according to the law you made, is appointed by the President. 

The President may request names from anybody and anywhere and in this case, the minister can submit names but the final discretion to nominate people is the prerogative of the President as per the law that you made.

The names that come to Parliament through the Speaker from the President were nominated along that line and the approval is entirely in your hands; whether the people are fit, they satisfy the law or not is entirely in your hands not the ministry.

 Thank you very much and I thank the committee for the work.

THE SPEAKER: Does the chairperson have closing remarks?

9.29
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Judith Nabakooba): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. We thank you for your comments and we have taken note of them. I would like to categorically go on record regarding the air cargo because I realised that most of the members were commenting about the committee not giving recommendations. 

Hon. Joshua is lucky to have accessed information, as a committee we had asked them to brief Parliament or the committee but they suggested that in May, they would be in position to bring the detailed report regarding the air cargo. 

It is only on Tuesday that documents were submitted to the clerk and they were telling the clerk of the committee to make recommendations. It was very difficult for us as a committee to sit and make recommendations and yet the report had been uploaded on the intranet already.

I request that you give us time to study the document, call the ministry and be in position to make recommendations regarding air cargo to the House.

Somebody talked about the Shs 2.6 billion that was allocated to the National Identification and Registration Authority and yet they needed Shs 17.4 billion.

During our interaction with the National Identification and Registration Authority they indicated that they needed the District Information Technology Officers and the committee agreed that the Shs 2.6 billion should be left on their budget for that activity. They had requested for Shs 25 billion, but after adding what hon. Mbwatekamwa has presented, we decided to add the Shs 2.6 billion for the District Information Technology Officers who are going to be recruited.

Lastly, I request the House to pronounce itself on the issue of veterans; they are approaching us every now and then over their money. The money has accumulated to Shs 5.09 billion.

The ministry of finance should look for resources so that the veterans can be paid their money. I would like to thank you so much; I may not be in position to answer each and every one. However, on the issue of the National Identification and Registration Authority Board, according to section 9 of the Registration of Persons Act, the board has members including the Permanent Secretary, Minister of Internal Affairs, the Chairperson Electoral Commission, the Executive Director UBOS, the Executive Director NITA and the Executive Director Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control, who are honestly too busy.

If you recall, two weeks ago, we presented a report on the registration of learners and we realised that the ministry of finance had made an audit and discovered mismanagement of the funds.

Some of these things could have been detected if there was a vibrant board that is committed to the work. When you ask for the minutes they are not perused and signed because they do not have time for the board. That is why we are recommending for other people to be considered who will be there to make sure that they steer this young agency to success. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, it is very regrettable that the ministry forgot that they have a parastatal under their charge which is doing work for the Government.

I will have to ask to make a small amendment to say that a vote should be created for the Uganda Air Cargo because nobody knows where it is, this is a new financial year; create a vote and start somewhere.

Honourable members, I put the question that the report be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report be adopted as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you so much for the work done. Again, I thank the Clerk, the Sergeant and the Hansard team. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 9.33 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 17 May 2018 at 2.00 p.m.)
