Wednesday, 17 May 1995

The Council met at 2.39 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Deputy Vice Chairman, Mr Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair,

The Council was called to order.

MR MWANDHA (Bugweri County): Mr Chairman, I wish to move that in accordance with Rule 65 sub-rule of the NRC interim rules of procedure, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Press and Journalist Bill, 1995 as reported by the Select Committee be recommitted to the Committee of the whole Council to enable the Council consider Amendments that have been proposed by some Members of the Council before the Bill receives a Third Reading.

AN HON. MEMBER: Seconded.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, the Motion is seeking recommittal of the whole Bill! But I think it could seek just recommittal for some parts of the Bill which are affected by the proposed Amendment. Could you please, move your Motion in light of that consideration?

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, the Bill we are considering is a very important Bill; very important indeed! Mass media is a vital aspect of our life.  Mr Chairman, you know very well that governments have been overthrown using the mass media and therefore, this House should be very careful so that we actually produced a Bill which will give dignitary to this House so that the future can remember that we, actually, passed a Bill which is going to last a long time and will direct the affairs of the people of this country.  

It is in this respect that in this bill there are many problems with it including basic mistakes, even construction in some of the articles which in my view, if they are permitted to go without being corrected, I do not think that we shall have achieved the objective for which we are here to achieve.  It is in this respect that I think the whole House should go into committee and actually consider the various amendments.

MR OBWANGOR:  It is of great importance to a nation of the people. Why are they there Mr Chairman? They are lawyers for they have a confidence of the government of the country.  Through the Press, we read daily or every minute of what is happening in our country.  Why? Because we read what a President may have been and they are teachers because by their activity, they bring new understanding to a better life of the people of a nation.  So, it is in this respect I thought, since November last year, some of the papers they do not mention as - who are anti-government doing idle things. (Laughter) 

I always say in this House, what are these people in the government doing?  Law must be honest; law must be permanent, law must have a sense of justice in abundance.  So, in the press, to enjoy political freedom, we can only do it - we can get political freedom when we have a maximum of expressing ourselves  - call it journalism by expression.  

Now, it seems to me, this Committee, which the House recently - by about the close of November last year, about six months or so now, they have been sitting most of the time in Kampala here.  Personally, I wrote, this is a copy of my memorandum I wrote to them.  I gave them a gist of various things of history of the press in India, Britain and what not.  But then they said they cannot define, as the hon. Member told us that the cannot define it -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, it is true that when the committee got itself and started its work, she put a Radio announcement that people should either send their written memorandums or come physically and testify before the committee.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that we never had any article, be it a memorandum, from hon. Mzee Obwangor as he is alleging now.  It is unfortunate, if he sent to the clerk, we did not receive it; very sorry about this.

MR OBWANGOR: Mr Chairman, I sent my memorandum on the 8th of November 1994, I have a copy here which I can serve them.  Fortunately, I made it sure I processed it myself in Soroti; and even before I left here on the 23rd of December, 1994, I gave copies of what I intended to move in the committee of the House and my speech to the Clerk.  It is very important, let us not go on emotions; I respect freedom and you also respect freedom, but we can only enjoy that freedom correctly, when we have the means of informing ourselves; e.g. journalism, and get the journalistic group of professions that serves the people.  To me you are just almost through journalism - but we are trying to kill ourselves by either directly or indirectly.  The current Minister of Information may be very good but a law must be permanent and the law must be permanent - always show that he serves the nation and the interest of the nation. 

Now, I have been in a government, I had a Bill that gives power through the Minister. Once you do that you are creating enmity; because they are being dictated by the government directly or indirectly; they are bothering - hon. Dr Tiberondwa, because he talks to the government they go and collect papers from his home; what is all this? (Laughter) 

Now, I do not want to the House too much; but what I am trying to say; I am one of those who believe that when we have a good Press in Uganda we shall have a good election. With the electoral system, we must have the best press that gives all the information to the country. (Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I have got respects for hon. Obwangor, and I would like him to go to the Oxford Dictionary and educate himself on the various definitions of what he has been talking about.  Secondly, generalisations are not very useful at this stage.  I would like the hon. Member for example, to list about three or four items on which he thinks the House can do a good job, where the committee did a bad job; rather than saying let the House do a good job - one which item and specific proposals.

MR OBWANGOR:  I particularly thank you for that information. Clause 19 and 20, to me this is direct or indirect way of killing the press.  So, for me without having consideration whatever the context in conceiving the law - in the context of the NRM system where the national law, public law that governs the press - I am not receiving that because we must regulate - that is the idea of freedom; freedom is not just without control, there must be adequate control but allow the people the maximum possible freedom to express themselves.

MR ELYAU (Kalaki County): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Really as far as mass communication is concerned, without the media either radio or papers, it would have been very difficult to have finished the rebellion in the East and the North.  People take what comes from radio or papers as the truth, and I am very grateful for the committee’s interest in saying that the objective of the press will be compared internationally; that one I can appreciate, and I think that is the aim of the committee.  But at the same time, I am appealing to the committee to make sure that people who are voluntarily more dedicated, who would want to contribute in this thing should also be accommodated.   I say so, because in Ateso, why do you need to have a degree to write this language, tell me! You do not need to do to a university, because an old woman in Soroti can inform you correctly where the rebels have been.  So, information, either be it in education level or - it depends on who gives it; that is why some people are writing false information, the get false material.  

So, I am grateful that the committee has done its best to streamline the wish of the nation that we should have an institute which will give these people freedom of choosing to be a journalist or not to be.  Because now anybody could become a journalist.  So, I think, only what I would request in section 19 and 20 is that some more rooms should be given, and of course, to become a membership; because if membership is so tight, somebody cannot volunteer to become a journalist yet he could give information and he writes about information.  What is so difficult in writing an issue rising from an element which took place?  

So, although the committee has been blamed, but would have had an objective; this is what I have seen when I read this very carefully.  But at the same time should understand that masses, as it is mass communication, masses also want to enjoy freedom - to belong to this very important field so that we collect and inform everybody in this world.  I know, education is very important, people have been talking about education, but there are some elements like information, like talking, like for instance -(Interruption) 

AN. HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, I am losing trend of which way we are going; because there was a Motion moved by hon. Mwandha and it was seconded by hon. Obwangor.  Now I would assume that the contributions would be along these lines so that we reach a decision.  But now it seems the general debate is continuing; which way, Mr Chairman? Can you guide me?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, it appears some of you are impatient. Yesterday I assured you of the procedure and I am still on the same procedure.  What we are doing now is to allow a few Members to contribute towards the Motion moved by hon. Mwandha, then there after I will ask the question whether we now commit the Bill to the Committee Stage and we go to the Committee Stage; what is the hurry all about? Please proceed.

MR ELYAU: You see, some of did not really have a chance to contribute, although he was worried on procedure.  I thank you, Mr Chairman, for that.  Okay, let me be brief that I urge the chairman of the committee and the committee to look seriously on my comment about the wisdom of everybody to contribute to mass communication, and we should do something to allow membership to the a bit loose since we are not developing, we are not very much advanced yet; and people from local papers were worried - this morning I had somebody who was always contributing in Ateso, Etop, he was wondering whether they will not be eligible. Because one wonders how would one be very professional until he does not know much about his language; but then I said, okay, we shall find out.  

I think the Bill does not want to kill the local papers which normally do not even require an important degree to become a member of the communication.  So, I appreciate what the committee has done, although some people did not see it, but the objective is to put our press in Uganda also, nationally and internationally. I thank you.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS

COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, hon. Members, you will recall that yesterday, on or two Members came up here with about 30 Amendments, but I do not see him, hon. John Kazoora; and also we had received Amendments from hon. William Wanendeya; and also we had received Amendments from hon. Mwandha.  So, this is the time to handle these Amendments together, and I would like us to be brief and we should restrict ourselves only to the clauses which are affected by the proposed amendment.  At this moment may I call upon hon. John Kazoora. (Interjection) In fact, I would like to save time, but for convenience of the House, we shall go clause by clause.

MR ETIANG: Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, just for harmony and absolute clarity to the Members, since the Bill I circulated did also have an addendum of amendments that were reported here as having been agreed at the level of the committee.  I want to seek clarification that those Amendments together with the Bill as originally circulated are no longer a subject of inclusion here. I seek your guidance, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, the position is this; when the committee submitted their recommendations, I called upon the chairman to wind up, and when he wound up yesterday, there was no position to the amendments which form part of the day.  In that respect I take it that the recommendation by the committee was not challenged and is part of the Bill.  Now, what we are going to consider are just new Amendments e.g. by hon. John Kazoora, following by hon. William Wanendeya, followed by hon. Mwandha, and we go clause by clause.

MR OMARA ATUBO: With due respect to your ruling, we have this Amendment which was given by the chairman of the committee, hon. Ongora Atwai, and as you put it, he accepted it in his submission.  But I thought it would be better procedure if after calling, like in clause 1 he wants to substitute press and journalists for mass media appearing in that clause; for him to move it formally, because it is an Amendment! You see, this Bill here was published, the Mass Media Bill, 1995 was published as it is, and it is a public document, gazetted and so on; that is the basis.  Even if we accept those Amendments, those Amendments were not gazetted.  So, you still have to move it formally when you call it clause by clause.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I have no objection to that; so, we start again.

Clause 1:

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Mr Chairman, I beg to propose that Clause 1, ‘press and journalist’ be substituted with the words ‘mass media.’ I am saying this, Mr Chairman, because ‘press’ and ‘journalist’ - that is in clause 1; ‘mass media’ is, actually, talking about those two, and this new Amendment, therefore, embraces them all. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2:

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Mr Chairman, as a Bill circulated and explained during the presentation, I now beg to move that in Clause 2, we insert, immediately after the definition of country, the following new definition which was not catered for; this is to say Editor was locked out; we have in editor, which includes a person who is at any given time in charge of programme production at a radio of television stations.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3:

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  In Clause 3 which is part 2 I beg to propose that, we delete the sub-heading ‘Newspaper’ and we replace it with ‘mass media.’  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAZOORA: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose that clause 3(2) be deleted, because it contradicts section 4. The reasons - briefly I read the section and then you see the apparent contradiction. Section 1(3) says, ‘A person may subject to the provisions of this Statute publish a newspaper’ it is general; and then sub-section (2) of the same section says: ‘No person or authority shall on grounds of the content of the publication taken not authorised under this Statute or any other law to present the printing publication or circulation among the publication of the News Papers.  So you see the section gives a broad permission - but if you then qualify that permission by sub-section 11 you are contradicting yourself.  

I, therefore, propose, Mr Chairman, hon. Members let anyone set up a newspaper provided he comprise with the other provisions of the statute but not limit that power to set up a newspaper by sub-section 11. 

MR WAPAKABULO:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  With due respect o my Brother I disagree.  My reading of 1 is that, to recognise that there could be restrictions by saying that - subject to the provision of this statute, so you have freedom to publish because it is saying subject to provisions of this statute and one of these is 11 where they recognise at a law or the statute could actually permit the prevention of publishing, so the two are actually tying together as far as I can see.  Thank you.

MR KANYOMOZI:  I think the second section gives latitude to the people involved in that trade to go on and do it.  If we stuck on clause 1 of the Statute now the authority when the other person could actually prevent you from doing the work you want to do, so I think sub-section 11 should stay as a part of the Bill. (Applause) 

(Question put and negatived..)

(Question put that Clause 3(11) as amended, do stand apart of the Bill and agreed to.)

Clause 4:

MR KAZOORA:  Mr Chairman, hon. Members I suggest or propose that section 4(b) delete the word on appearing in the line 2 between the infringes and privacy of the individual.  So that the Section reads; Section 4, sub-section (b) prohibiting any publication which improperly infringes on -(Interjection)- delete the word ‘on’ that is what I mean so that section reads, prohibiting any publication which improperly infringes the privacy of an individual or which contains false information. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, the proposed amendment as far as language is concerned, but we did take care to consult other authorities and actually we are convinced ourselves that the way the article is written is a proper way.  What hon. Kazoora is proposing is that the verb ‘infringe’ be used as transitive verb. But our intended sense is that it be used as intransitive and therefore, privacy is an indirect object, therefore, I oppose the amendment, Mr Chairman. (Laughter)

(Question put that Clause 4 do stand part of the Bill and agreed to.)

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6:

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, News Paper again appear in this Clause 6, I beg to propose that we substitute ‘Newspaper’ with ‘Mass Media’ organisation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAZOORA: Thank you very much Mr Chairman. Section 6 sub-section (b) I would like to propose, Mr Chairman, and hon. Members that the word ‘and experience’ be added after the word qualification which appear in line two.  So, that section 6 sub-section (b) reads as follows: ‘satisfied copies of relevant testimonials as proof of his qualifications and experience.’

MRS OKIA: Thank you, Mr Chairman, we seem to be getting lost because the amendment which is being put forward by hon. Kazoora is not with us.  We are having his Amendment starting with Clause 10.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Okia Mary, yesterday I guided - in fact yesterday one of the reasons for the adjournment was to give time for hon. Kazoora to go and circulate his amendment which was done last night if last night, if last night you were not around then it is something else, the amendment were circulated. At this stage could one of the Members of the Committee reply to the amendment as proposed by hon. Kazoora order hon Members.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, due to the earlier proposal by the hon. Member on the deletion of the word ‘no’ we find that hon. Kazoora is making a repetition. Because if you look at testimonials with that testimonials you are also in between seeing a person’s experience so I do not know whether that one cannot satisfy us at this time.

MR KAZOORA: According to what was said yesterday and hon. members including hon. Wanendeya who made a - speech if you do not want to see the experience spelt out in this statute and only to be - by reading testimonials that is your choice you can vote against the Amendment.  But if you want to make sure that someone who does not have academic qualifications but have experience on that he is insisted on them you have a wider margin.  

So, I cannot personally say that, by giving testimonials I can ascertain a person’s experience there may have been areas in between where he may have been unemployed or may have worked in another area if that is the experience that can justify one to get a licence of practicing is entirely up to your judgement and decision but I propose this addition and of course I will be happily contented with what the House decide.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.  Hon. Members, this is a very straightforward amendment either you have experience or you do not have.  Now what more time do you want?  	

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7:

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, I propose that we substitute in Clause 7 and bring in the following new Clause, that a proprietor and auditor of a Mass Media Organisation shall (a) ensure that what is published is not contrary to morality or other social values.  (b) to retain a copy of each Newspaper published by the organisation and a copy of each supplement to it for a period of less than ten years. (c) in case of electronic media which we are a bit silent on right now that should retain a record of all that is brought by a Radio or Television Station for a period of not less than 30 days.  The reason that causes this particular inclusion and introduction of a new Clause was discussed and as we are striving to have responsible journalism which is guided by professional code of - whatever we think is going to disturb social values should actually be left out and we also found out that in some cases in some countries where storage facilities are there this sort of documents are kept for every long time. But in our case where we are told by the people who keep these records that it is a bit too bulky, that given more years there will be no storage space and as I did say, this sub-section (c) will have detailed lay out in the other Bill which will come here anytime this is the reason, Sir.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, it is important that when we are putting something in our law it should be quite clear even for interpretation of the court.  I am not very comfortable with 7(a). It talks of morality all other social values.  Morality may be defined - to some extent, but when you are trying to enlarge on that concept of morality and then you all other social values you are going to have journalists publishing photographs like the other day The Monitor came with a photograph of an actor or a dancer in the Sheraton and possibly according to the social values of some people at that time it appeared obscene and because people wrote a number of letters The Monitor apologized and somebody could come to court and raise this issue to the council and raise the point under Clause 7.  So, some point we are putting it in our law and I would rather like it to be very clear, what did the committee have or what did the Minister have when he tried to expand on the issue of morality and said, any other social values.  Thank you.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, what hon. Omara Atubo is talking about social values can also be judged with different dimensions assuming certain tribes in Uganda do not adequately cover the body and the one who is walking naked was photographed would that be offensive against social values. (Laughter)

MR KANYOMOZI: If there was a definition of what the Minister and the Committee men it would have been helpful, but at the moment we do not have those definitions and I can see problems in trying to implement the provisions of the law, I do not have other problems with the other storage facilities and what have you, but this morality and social values to be included in this Bill would cause us a bit of problem of interpretation and enforcement I am sure the committee and the Minister should allow the deletion of that part and then the rest of the Clause should be considered separately because the matter related to definitions of morality and other social values, and since we are a multi-cultural society it would cause us a lot of problems

MR MAYENGO: It seems to me as if hon. Omara Atubo understands what we are talking about but, what he feels to be suggesting is that in the interpretation section we should have included the definition of social values or morality if that is not what he means I would wish to know what exactly he means. 

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would support what the chairman of the committee has put forward to be part of Clause 7; but I would like to say that, instead of 30 days it should be 90 days.  The reason is that I had a personal experience with Radio Uganda when they put forward a programme of my having invaded the newsroom when I had not and when I complained the programme was quickly destroyed.  Therefore, I am saying that it should be 90 days. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member I think let us go step by step, let us dispose off 7(a) then we go to (b) and consequently to (c) where you have an interest.  So, let us deal with 7(a) first.

MR WAPAKABULO:  I also share the concern of hon. Omara Atubo the court should have problems with interpreting. (Interjection)- I feel cheated because I had no place to knock my shoe on; I will do so when I sit down.  I think this part of (a) other social values can cause problems, I mean if an auditor for instance publishes that circumcision of women took place in Sebei.  It may offend some Ugandan or even offend some people from Sebei, in case he writes against it, his writing contracts social values of the Sabiny as much as if you writes and if you write supporting it, it will be offending social values of some other Ugandans who do not value it.  If you take the case of the Bagisu and the Banyankore, the Bagisu are very proud of their circumcision and they like people to take pictures and show other people, but the Banyankore get offended by circumcision. (Laughter)  Now, an editor who praises circumcision may be offending the social values of the Banyankore and if he writes against it he will be offending the social values of the Bagisu.  So, do we really have to keep this, I think the committee should think about it wisely.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I think, the consensus is that  -(Interjection) order, you the Members are of the view that either the committee offers the definition or else they should think of really not provoking sectors of the country.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The committee recognized that Uganda is made up of very many cultural groups and social groups. But at the same time we recognised in all those social groups there were social standards; in fact I am a little bit surprised that the previous Member who had the Floor presides over a forum where these differences are being recognised and taken care of an here he thinks that you cannot take care of these various differences, what the committee has failed to do is to list all the social values that might be offended by the publication. But recently there was something on Uganda Television regarding female circumcision in Sebei, I think even the people from Sebei might have been taken back by this thing appearing on Television, it ought to be done privately.  Therefore, Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

DR CHEBROT: Point of information. Mr Chairman, what Prof. Kagonyera is saying is very crucial, because when you see the word ‘Women Lawyers’ decided to show a film on Uganda Television showing the women being circumcised in Kapchorwa, it actually cause a - effect more women got circumcised that year than the years before, so those people were extremely annoyed about it to see themselves on the T.V.  So, I am just emphasising the point which is being raised by hon. Kagonyera that they should not show it on the Television -(Laughter)

MR BUTIME:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I am seeking information from the hon. Minister of Labour as to how many people in the Sebei and Karamoja who watch Television in order for them to be encouraged -(Laughter)

DR CHEBROT:  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform hon. butime that currently in Kapchorwa we have a number of Televisions and in various community centres as well where people can watch these films and actually to explain further I would like to inform him that that year as I said before there were more women who were circumcised than before, what a Sabiny needs is to be educated about the need to stop circumcision; they do not want to be abused because we value our culture.  Thank you very much.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  So, Mr Chairman, the committee considered this -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, hon. Members.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  But what we recognised was that part of the function of the disciplinary committee and also the Law Court is to attempt to destandardise social values in this country and therefore, time is going to come when even the High Court Judges themselves are going to sit down and scratch their heads what is it that we mean by social values, where should this country be going and they have to come out with these decisions and may be the people of Uganda ought to be ready to respect them.  We agree that there is valuation but at least we must take a position on social values that may be on things that may be acceptable in some places but in general they are not good for general human consumption. I, therefore, support the proposal by the committee which is obvious, that is that the idea of morality and other social values be retained so that it keeps people reminded that there are certain things they ought to not accept.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Now this question concerns the amendment as put by hon. Omara Atubo, that the word ‘morality and social values’ be removed from the amendment of the committee in Clause 7(a).

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, I thank you.  With due respect to the Chair the hon. Omara Atubo when he addressed the House was merely addressing, he never moved the Motion to the House so, therefore, in my view it is not correct to get the House approve the thing it did not correctly understood.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Obwangor by me referring to hon. Omara Atubo, I knew that several speakers had that in mind but he was the first to come with it and I did not really intend to pinpoint him I just want to put a question to this deletion.  Please, could you retain your seat?  I was putting a question which concerns the contribution of several Members including even hon. Kanyomozi he was of the opinion that this word ‘social value’ may bring us problems in the application and so and so forth.  So, I just want to put a question to the removal of that word ‘social value.’

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, well, you could have put the question whether Clause 7(a) should stand part of the Bill or not, and it could either be with or without a formal Motion. But at the same time, I would have thought the House would have been helped greatly since I was seeking clarification, if either the Minister of Information or Rev. Ongora Atwai were to give their opinion in view of my contribution and hon. Wapakabulo; whether in view of our submission, they still would like to have - or what did they have in mind when they talked of morality in other social values?  And do they still intend to have it?  If not, then we could proceed to have a formal Motion.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, that one is perfectly in order.  You know hon. Members, this committee has been broken up into Technical Sub-Committees.  When I pick on hon. Prof. Kagonyera Mondo, he is speaking on behalf of the committee with authority.  So, here you do not need me to think of - or Rev. Ongora Atwai.  Because most of them are well vast in this thing.  And when he was speaking, I am sure he was speaking on behalf of the committee.  So, since he was not of the opinion that, they should leave this one out, I had now to put it to the House.  You know, and we should now decide.

MR KANYOMOZI: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, on Clause 7 subsection (a), that the Clause (a) should be reading to ensure that, what is published is not contrary to morality and other social values be deleted.

MR OBWANGOR: Mr Chairman, although I am not a lawyer, under this Constitution, the revised Constitution of 1968, the word in our Constitution, particularly chapter 3, of our Human Rights; invariably it is recognised constitutionally in Uganda the word, Public morality.  And here, they must have drafted; in other words, it would have been in Clause 7(a), to say, Public morality or ample to the individual.  That is a fullstop, instead of quarrelling with words. (Applause) Our Constitution says, support of the Public morality.  Even those who are lawyers if they are to tell us what they mean -(Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order. In other words, hon. Cuthbert Obwangor is coming with an Amendment; that 7(a) be amended to read; ensure that, what is published is not contrary to public morality.  (Applause)

(Question put that Clause 7(a), as amended and agreed to.)

Clause 7(b):

MR KAZOORA: Hon. Members, I am glad with the hon. Member with his experience as Minister of Justice to clear this issue. Because morality is subjective matter, but if you want public then, you will really cover the point.  My Amendment which I propose, Section (b), more or less foresaw, this problem, because I suggest that, we should add the words ‘factual accurate’ between the word is not; so as to read, factually accurate are not contrary morality.  But now we have said, public morality.  So, sub-sectional would read that, ‘to ensure that, what is published in the newspaper is factually accurate and not contrary to public morality.’

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, the amendment of hon. Kazoora is well intentioned.  Although I may not agree with the full text.  But it is bringing in one thing which is important in journalist - necessary facts.  He has also pre-empted my Amendment to Rule 1, of the first schedule; if you get the proposal amendment of hon. Kazoora and what is contained in Rule 1 of the first Schedule that, no journalist shall dissimulate information or allegations affecting the food standing of the government, an individual or organisation without having thoroughly investigated the details of the allegation as to its truth.  Now of course, the truth is a more difficult thing.  But facts, of course are easier to establish. 

So, I would like Members while they are considering the Motion of hon. Kazoora to bear this point in mind that, this is actually to some extent contained in Rule 1. This truth about truth. Journalists to base their writings on truth; which is a more religious issue rather than really - truth is more religious than anything else.  

So, I am trying to bring this point and possibly at a later stage, we could polish up this amendment to deal with facts rather than the issues which are intended here.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR BUTIME: Mr Chairman, if you are reporting, you can be factually correct.  If you are just reporting.  But if you are publishing a feature which has been written by somebody, or you are publishing a conversation, if you are publishing a commentary, to say that, you will be factually correct makes too impossible.  And therefore, I ask hon. Kazoora just to leave this sub-clause as it is.  Public morality and we stop there.  Otherwise, it will be difficult, almost impossible to write a feature or take a photograph or something and you are factually correct; that is not possible.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KAZOORA: Mr Chairman, I accept the wise advice of the Minister and I withdraw the amendment. (Applause)

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Whilst it is agreeing with the amendment, instead of 30 days, I would like it to be 90 days. The reason is that there was an encounter whereby I had gone to Radio Uganda to get something published and then, somebody wrote in the Vision, different information, of my having gone to the News Room.  Therefore, when they knew that, I was taking up the matter with those in authority, they destroyed the tape.  So, I would like it to be 90 lays instead of 30. 

Secondly, I mean in addition to that, I would like to have an amendment to read as follows: and that would be part (d).  In case of a complaint, arising from a programme, the record shall not be destroyed until the matter is disposed off in a court of law or solved by mutual understanding.  I will read it again.  I did not circulate it because these amendments were brought in not so long ago.  I will read it again Mr Chairman.

In case of a complaint arising from a programme, the record shall not be destroyed until the matter is disposed off in a court of law.  That is the only way; some of these electronic media people or personnel would respect other people’s views without destroying tapes in their possession.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us consider the proposal of 90 days, by hon. William Wanendeya; before we come to this.

MR BUTIME:  Mr Chairman, before I comment on the 90 days or less, may be let me take this opportunity of assuring my Colleague hon. Wanendeya that, to the best of my knowledge, there was no tape which was destroyed following his complaint about a News item printed in the New Vision.  In any case, even the retention of the tape would not have proved one say or the other, about whether or not, he had an intention in the studio.  The intention in the studio is well documented and I had the occasion of showing him the facts as given to me by the editor on duty on that time. With regard to whether it should be 30 days of 90 days; 30 days subject to what the chairman of the committee would say, 30 days are in the experience of UTV and Radio recordings if long enough - is long enough for somebody who is agreed by a recorded broadcast to lounge the complaint.  Because, it is also possible for the same reasons that somebody has not reported or raised a complaint within 30 days. It is possible that, that somebody may not even raise it after 90 days.  So, what?  You go on waiting until somebody is told that, there was a wrong reporting on him, some 270 days later.  And I want to assure you that, any station broadcasting, will have a lot of difficulty in retaining this tape for such a period, and I think 30 days is quite reasonable. Thank you.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: So, it remains 30 days?  Order, it remains 30 days. I now put the question that 7(b) be amended as proposed by hon. William Wanendeya.  

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Hon. Wanendeya, if I heard him correct, he said, until it is corrected by court of law or mutual understanding.  Now, he forgot that, there is the disciplinary committee to which quite often, these have to go.  And therefore, I would rather he amends his amendment to take into account all bodies to which it is possible for remedy to be done about a complaint.  Otherwise, he has deliberately excluded the disciplinary committee in his amendment.

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would with all due respect say that, if my Brother hon. Kagonyera wants it to the disciplinary committee, I will submit to that, as part of the agreement.  I thank you.

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Mr Chairman, while I agree with hon. Kagonyera and Wanendeya I would like to inform the House that, if there is a Court case on this sort of publication, the wisest thing the lawyer can do is to apply to court for an order that, those things should not erased or destroyed.  And that order is obeyed.  So, in a way even if the amendment fails, the court will deal with it, the committee will deal with it, through an ordinary order by court. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  While I entirely agree with hon. Omara Atubo, I think it is simpler to see that such record shall not be destroyed until the matter is disposed off in a court of law or solved by mutual understanding, or by determination of the disciplinary committee or court order. Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR OBWANGOR:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  The Motion by my hon. Friend hon. Wanendeya may be good if he is talking of the small business.  That was how he is directing attention to decide functions of an editor.  Those of us who have worked with the press, as employees in the press, such laws, when we are in a mass production house, turning papers, 30 days in my view would be enough.  Why? A cost of storing -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Obwangor, we have passed that one.  We are on 7(b). 

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would agree to the wisdom of my young Brother Gad Gasatura that, it reads in case of a complaint arising from a programme, the record shall not be destroyed until the matter is disposed off by mutual consent, disciplinary committee or a court of law.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Question put that Clause 7, as amended do stand part of the Bill and agreed to.)

Clause 8:

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, I beg to propose that, Clause 8 carries the sub-title; Mass Organisation - Mass media Organisation.

MR WAPAKABULO: Mr Chairman, I would like to ask the committee to justify the inclusion in these modern days of paragraph (c), if someone is an English charged bankrupt saying that, these days, bankruptcy is not like it used to be in the old days, when small time businessmen suffered.  These days in fact your competitors can put money on your head and made sure that, you go down even when you are a good businessman.  As did happen to Laka Airways when some other airlines put aside a budget to run him down and make sure he gets out of business.  And some other example, can be, if I was farming in Kiboga and I borrowed money, and then there were locusts or a drought and I lost money, and the banks wanted their money, and they wanted me to be declared bankrupt; does that affect my capacity to be a good editor of a newspaper.  In fact the tendency now in many countries is to avoid sending people to bankruptcy.  Because the situation is more complicated than we understand.  And’ therefore, I do not see why it should be necessary to stop someone being an editor say of a News Paper merely because, he has turned out to have been unfortunate at farming.  Maybe, the committee can explain. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, I think hon. Members let us clear hon. Ongora Atwai’s Amendment first; as he proposed it. While he moved the Amendment, instead of News Papers, he is saying, it should be replaced with Mass Media Organisation.  Simple! 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8(b), agreed to.

Clause 8(c):

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Mr Chairman, this is actually found in most of the liable expression as they put them.  But our aim of mentioning it here is that, at times if a person is insolvent or bankrupt, he is likely to be compromised by somebody who can give him whatever and then tell him to write what he should.  And this is why we are saying that, we are not very much on any other area, but the motive is that, we want these journalists just to be free people who are not twisted right or left.  This was it, Sir.

MR BUTIME:  Mr Chairman, the current editors in Uganda whom I know, the way they started to own News Papers; if you went to examine what kind of people they were, the day they started; you will find that, they were insolvent and if you wish bankrupt.  And it is really a matter of begging for News print from one friend, then you beg another one to do the printing there, then you pray that what you have printed and published that day, will be sold so that, you get more money to print the next issue.  

Now, if you are going to subject our aspiring news editors and aspiring owners of News Papers to this kind of out mordent according to hon. Wapakabulo; really out mordent requirement, and if you are going to follow all the books which were written to just bring it and put it here; because it has appeared in many other books. I think we shall not assist our Ugandans who want to become News Papers Editors.  And I think this one should be removed.

MR OPIO:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. Whereas I agree with bankrupt, this word insolvent in a professionally would be very difficult.  Because you can be insolvent when you only lack cash; but you have real assets.  So, it should not be judged that you cannot do the job.  We could rather remove the word ‘insolvent’ and leave bankrupt.

MR KAIJUKA:  Mr Chairman, I listened attentively to hon. Wapakabulo’s submission and hon. Tom Butime’s submission; with respect to someone who is bankrupt and insolvent.  I think we are not blind to assisting small operators - small entrepreneurs.  And I think every Ugandan would like to see small operators who are otherwise clear headed and they are good journalists go into this profession.  But I think, it would be wrong for anybody to hinder progress of such small operators.  Because what is important here is not so much - the bankruptcy in money, but bankruptcy in idea.  -(Laughter)- so that at the end of the day, one would not be bothered with financial bankruptcy. But what perturbs me most is, bankruptcy in ideas that we see in some journalism.  

But to come back to the point, I think the framers of this Bill, and I think, I want to go with the committee, were very well advised to retain this condition.  Because this is a technical condition.  In other words, if you are a starter, you are a beginner - without doubt, you are a beginner nobody can quarrel with you.  So, there is no way you can be described as bankrupt.

This should not confuse the situation.  You become a bankrupt technically as a result of having operated and become a bankrupt and insolvent.  Let me give an example. If you have become an editor and for your bankrupt ideas the court has demanded that you pay before your sins of what you wrote, and you fail to pay, and you declared bankrupt, should you not be disciplined?  So, that is the technical position this Bill is describing. (Applause) 

It is not talking about someone who is -(Interruption)- I really think, the committee is doing a wonderful job and it should continue to do the job.  Thank you.

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, I am looking at the wording of this provision.  I would like to find out whether there is a distinction between an editor as an employee and an editor as a proprietor of Mass Media.  Because there is a difference.  And there is also a provision undischarged, which means really, that somebody who is on probation after being legally being declared bankrupt, has not finished that probation. 

So, I want to find out really what the committee intended.  Do you want to bar somebody who to be named your employment who is technically competent and who does not have shares in the News Paper simply to be a technical editor or writer.  Do you want to stop that one as well?

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr Chairman, I am only responding to hon. Rwakakooko’s contribution. Now, the committee recognised an editor of a newspaper as an extremely important person.  In fact almost more important than the owner of the newspaper.  The value of a paper depends not on the owner, but on the editor.  It’s repetition; the same.  Therefore, we are saying that, if that paper is going to be worth itself, then the most important person in that paper, who is the editor, should be a person of good standing in a society.  And that is why we wanted to maintain this section or sub-clause of clause 8. That this editor is a man or woman of good standing in society. So that even what he audits, he can be relied upon.  You know this problem of money; people think you cannot be trusted with money, you are unable to handle it obviously as someone said, it might be fairly easy.  We do not mean that those who are not bankrupt cannot be corrupted but certainly when a person has been bankrupt or insolvent, he is more susceptible - if we use medical terms - he is more susceptible to being compromised than those who are in good standing.  That is why we think that it is advisable that we maintain this provision.

MR JOHN NASASIRA: Point of clarification. Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I am not really convinced by the explanation from hon. Kagonyera and maybe I would seek clarification whether form him or who. I want to understand one thing.  The way I understand bankruptcy, it happens when business goes sour. In other words, suppose you are a farmer, you went and borrowed money to do farming and for one reason or another, you do not get back and banks are on you, they feel the farm is not enough, they touch on something else, eventually you are declared bankrupt according to the law.  

Does that mean that if you are a good journalist and you can be a good editor, you should not go to a paper where you have no share, where you are not going to do any business except you are going to do some provisional work and you have the qualifications and you apply and you are short-listed - if this law as not fair - and you do an interview and you are the best and then these professors should not employ you because of the bad business of farming that went sour, Mr Chairman, I want a clarification.

CAPT. GAD GASATURA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I just wanted to clarify for hon. Nassasira and the rest of the House that as we said before this editor is to be somebody of good standing not only for his business or in that business but in society and it is not uncommon to have this technical disqualification.  If hon. Members remember, not too long ago, we passed here a law for the CA under which to be elected a Member of the CA and indeed of Parliament, you must not have been undischarged, bankrupt or insolvent.  So, we are putting them at par in that respect of good standing in society.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MAJ. TOM BUTIME (Historical Member): Mr Chairman, an editor is that person who has the qualifications as a newspaper journalist if you wish, who applied for a job because his is good, fixed for an interview, he beats the rest and he is appointed to work as an editor of a group of people.  They maybe, politicians, they may be farmers, they may be bankers, etc, including Nile Bank. (Laughter) That is how all the Ugandan journalists who own newspapers should be started.  They just left other newspapers and went.  They had the know-how and went and started publishing their own newspapers.  That is the history of The Monitor, that is the history of any other newspaper which we know today.  To go and try to find out whether a man who has left The New Vision is not going to start his own newspaper and you find out whether he is not bankrupt or he is bankrupt, I think that is an impossibility as far as I am concerned and that is what we are talking about.  Bankruptcy as far as hon. Nasasira has said is exactly how he explained.  You have a business, you have a firm, you have failed to pay, they have sold part of your property, they have not even recovered all the money and then you are declared bankrupt.  

Now, that kind of thing cannot be subjected to the young Uganda journalist who wants to become an editor.  And me when I came here to talk about that, I was talking about a journalist who is an editor but he also wants to become a proprietor.  That is what I was talking about.  He is young, he is a journalist, he wants to start a newspaper to become a proprietor, at the same time to be its editor.  It is difficult for that one to be declare bankrupt or not.

MR WAPAKABULO:  point of information.  Mine was information to back him that supposing my firm has failed and what is left is my brain and my pen and I want to make a start in life by publishing some newspaper to rehabilitate myself, what do you want me to do?

MR OMARA ATUBO: Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, this question of barring an undischarged, bankrupt and insolvent person, I do not know but there are some professions where these do not happen. I do not know whether a surgeon in Mulago will be barred from practising because his firm has collapsed. I do not know whether a veterinary surgeon will be barred because his cows have died and he has failed to pay the high bank loan, something like that! But for lawyers, I agree with you. For lawyers if you are bankrupt, you are barred but I do not know about the accountants.  We have to be very careful.  I am raising this point because it is a very challenging question. We are trying to build a foundation for a profession to grow.  Really are we ready to bar somebody from using his brain because he has failed in other field and the only thing that has remained is his ability as hon. Wapakabulo has said?

DR LUYOMBYA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Omara Atubo that it is not only in law that if you are bankrupt and insolvent that you will be barred from practising.  However good a doctor may be, however good a surgeon you may be, we require you to have a certificate of good standing. You are a leader and an editor definitely is a leader who should be subjected to scrutiny and he must be somebody of respect and repute in society.

MR KAIJUKA: Point of clarification.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I think professionalism.  Do you want to establish journalism as a profession or not? And it is a question that we should be clear about.  We either want to establish that or we do not.  Once we have established that as a principle, you go on to ask the second question.  For you to attain those high standards, do you want to inquire into the financial standing of that person or not?  We are not saying you should have the trains, you should not be a journalist.  Perform it, you can be a journalist but you are not going to be an editor because it entails that good stand reputation of all.  

So, as far as I am concerned, people are missing issues.  You may want to be an editor of duty free for example -(Interruptions)- I was saying, if I was the owner, of duty free, I would be bothered about who is the editor, the manager in terms of propagating what duty free stands for in terms of advantages and disadvantages and so, as far as I am concerned, if I may say so, let us accept in terms of inculcating profession in journalism that we should have editors who are beyond doubt in terms of their standing. I thank you.

THE VICE PRESIDENT (Mrs Kazibwe): Thank you Mr Chairman. I want to further augment what hon. Kaijuka said because when he got up to stand, when you are talking about profession, here we are widening the career scope for our children.  If you want them to know that to be a journalist, you are somebody of repute, you must study high, go for that degree, get your masters, get your doctorate, then you know that at the end of the day, you are going to be a professional.  And I would like as a surgeon, to equate an editor to a consultant, in my profession so that if I know that somebody is an editor in a newspaper or any journal or something that is to be edited in the journalism profession, then if I am called to stand beside him or her, I know that this person actually answers what this august House wants to do to get more professions in every field.  If you do not want journalism to be a profession, then do not bother to bring it here in the House. But if you want journalism to be a profession, we are not talking about the status quo now because as I talk now, women know they can be Vice-President.  Twenty years ago, it was not an issue.  (Laughter) 

So, I would like to urge the House to know that what is pertaining now is not what we want to do.  Let those who do not have the degree study further and get the degree.  It is very easy now.  Let those who know that they want to be professional journalists, let them not go to grow maize.  Let them plant their maize on paper so that they do not go bankrupt before they go to fulfill their professional ideas.  So, I really think that this business of bankruptcy is irrelevant because if you are bankrupt in the pocket, it means you may also become bankrupt in the mind at one time.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. (Applause)

(Question put that Clause 8(c), do stand part of the bill and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: There was just discussion on 8(c) and I put the question on that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Chairman, mine is a small amendment to do with the word does not.  I propose that word does not be replaced by the words does not.  Mr Chairman, it is not usual that in formal communications you abbreviate some of these words and I think it was an error in construction.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

(Question on the amendment put and agreed to.)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Clarification from the Members of the Committee and possibly from the Minister.  The paragraph reads: ‘A person shall not be appointed an editor.’  I am emphasizing the word editor.  According to the little information I have about journalism, you may find that in one newspaper, the there are many editors but you can use the word chief editor or something of that sort to cover all these other editors.  There is not only one editor in newspaper.  

Secondly, are you going to register all these editors in the newspaper?  And if you look at the definition of editor which has been given to us today, it says, editor includes a person who is at any time in charge of programme production at a radio includes a person who is at any time in charge of programme production at a radio or television station.  Are you going to have a person who is given that type of responsibility at any time to be registered? Is it going to be that easy and is it not going to be laborious and so on?  

So, what is the intention of the Committee? I believe that when you talk of a person shall not be appointed editor, you are really talking about the professional field and boss of the newspaper and therefore, you have to be very clear when you are using the word editor there.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, hon. Atubo’s observation is okay but what we like him to understand here is that we have editor in chief, deputy editor in chief, we have chief sub-editor, we have these other editors apart from having the journalists or reporters or correspondents.  So, in this particular respect, whoever is the editor has some responsibility going with it. And that is why we are dispensing in from the other employees of a corporation or of a particular area and this is why when we are talking about editor we are not narrowing or specifying areas but we are talking about whether will carrying it easy responsibility that type of editor. 

MR OMARA ATUBO: Point of clarification.  Are you going to register all the editors in a newspaper? If there are four or five editors, you are going to register all of them? Chief Editor, Deputy Chief Editor and all this, sub-editors.  I want to be very clear about that.

MR PAUL ETIANG:  Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, as the hon. Member holding the Floor could read very closely the Preamble to this article, a person shall not be appointed an editor of a mass media organisation and this definitely, in the interpretation that follows, the editor is, in relation to this article an overall editor in charge of that mass media organisation of the sub-editors who otherwise would be editors for reports, editors for commercial section.

Clause 8:

MR JOHN KAZOORA: Mr Chairman and hon. Members, I have an addition to section 7 sub-section 8 and the new sub-section I propose reads that - to add a new sub-section to read that: He has been convicted of an offence under this Act or under any other law in force.  I obviously realise by the murmurs this is a draconian kind of provision.  But is more or less on what you want in the qualities of your editors.  If you say that someone can have previous conviction, he should nevertheless after serving his sentence be an editor, it is entirely within your power and prerogative to allow that.  But I think it would admonish the status of the institution we are trying to create. Sometimes, people are convicted of offences shear misfortunes say driving but if it is a serious offence, I think I would invite you to think as to what sort of person you want to be an editor of the Monitor for example, the editor of the New Vision, the editor of the other newspapers.  If you feel that someone who is a previous conviction should be the editor of our national newspapers, so be it.  

But I am trying to invite you Mr Chairman, and hon. Member to realise that here we are creating an institution.  It is a profession and professions must have consent and in any event when you are legislating, you must always know what you exactly want to achieve.  If you say it is okay about this profession, it is glorified you can have people with degrees but it does not matter if a person who is a previous conviction can become an editor.  If that is what you want, you have it.  But if you say, no, no, let us set up this institution.  Let us give it authority, protection because we value it enormously, but let us nevertheless impose standards, norms so that those who aspire to achieve the eminence of being an editor of the newspaper must ad here to.  

I, therefore, propose Mr Chairman, and hon. Members that what we are proposing here, those who have submitted proposals, express your concern and wish to share concern with you.  But obviously if your judgement is in a way that can prevail, it will guide us but nevertheless, one would have said what one wants to say.  So, I propose that this sub-section should be added on this section to enhance is standing.

MR A. ONGOM:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  This is the second time I have been referred to as an engineer.  This is a new qualification I have acquired from the chairman.  Nevertheless, I quite appreciate the concern of the Mover of this amendment but at the same time, I would like to think that people are subject to reform.  

So, really if we think that an editor who is convicted cannot reform after serving his sentence or paying fine or whatever it is, then we might pass it.  But if we think that people can reform, then obviously it will be boo much to condemn somebody in perpetuity that he will no longer be employed because at one time or another, he was convicted and for that reason I do not think I can support it.  I would oppose it, Mr Chairman.

MR JAMES WAPAKABULO:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I have difficulty in supporting the Mover, my Friend John Kazoora. What is the purpose of our penal system.  If you look at it as a punitive system, then correct, you can continue with stigmas ad finitum.  But if the purpose of our penal system is correction, and in fact they should not be called prisons. They should be called correctional institutions.  You should take someone there and you correct them and when they come out, they are new Ugandans. 

Now, if that is the purpose of our penal system, then this amendment is in fact trying to put a stigma on someone who has gone through correctional system and the purpose should correct him or her and give him or her a chance to start again.  Now if you are going to say and of course you are not clarified whether traffic offences and similar small offences like these ones also could count in this.  But someone has corrected and then you say you cannot make a fresh start in the newspaper or management of other - when in fact you are qualified and can do so.  I therefore, mr Chairman, beg the House not to accept this one beaus it is retrogressive.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Would you like to withdraw the amendment?

MR KAZOORA: Thank you Mr Chairman.  I was not persuaded by the last speaker because an editor is an editor of a newspaper, this person who has his sentence can be a farmer, he can go and open a shop.  It is a typical.  What about the bankrupt?  We have agreed that anyone who is declared bankrupt cannot be an editor.  But now we say that someone who has been convicted can be.  So, it is contradictory in terms. So what I can propose is to impose a limit on the number of years after serving a sentence.  Let the person with a previous conviction be appointed an editor after three years, four years, five years.  I see the logic in that.  But someone leaves Luzira today and he becomes an editor of a newspaper the next day.  It will be absolutely outrageous.  I do not think anyone will thank us for having passed that law.  And legally, that is what exactly would happen because if someone leaves Luzira on Sunday and I appoint him an editor on Monday you can stop me.  But what would be then the public concern?  So, I submit Mr Chairman, that we should impose a limitation  -(Interruption)

MRS WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Point of information. Thank you Mr Chairman. I want to thank hon. Kazooora for giving way. I want to say that whereas being a minister is not professional, I know that people have been appointed after being in Luzira for sometime. So, in fact the provision which we have passed says that if somebody is discharged, if you undischarged and you are still bankrupt and insolvent, you should not be an editor.  That caters for the provision that people are giving you time to be of good standing.  

So, as a mother, I would not like we, children to be told you are a thief, you are a thief, even when they did not steal in perpetuity.  If they steal once, let them be given a chance, so that they go and do a good job as an editor and even publish information to help others correct themselves.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now call upon the chairman of the Committee to react.

REV. ANGORA ATWAI: Mr Chairman, I beg to oppose the amendment.  The committee received hon. John Kazoora’s proposal in good time and looked at it and found that not all criminal cases can be qualified - a journalist.  What if a journalist is leaving a room or an editor is leaving and then, somebody in front of him, if he is driving, stops all of a sudden and he knocks this person from behind and the other one whose car is damaged, takes him to court, that is a criminal thing there.  Then, it now follows that it means that this particular person will have to be disqualified from his profession; which is not what we are looking at here.  So, while we know that the criminal should not be the editor, but we should also know what particular crime has he committed; this is why we feel that that one should be taken care of by other laws.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9:

REV. ANGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, in the circulated Amendment, the Committee in agreement with the hon. Minister and concurring with the report that was made here, agree that this particular part be deleted.  That means that Clause 9, 10,11 and 12 are proposed to be deleted.  This is because, for those regularly attend Session, the hon. Minister did say that if in coming with a particular Bill concerning this area; and therefore, there is no reason why we should bring it here so that thereafter it is duplicated.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13:

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I beg to move that Clause 13(d) be amended. The point is that under (d) you have a representative of newspapers editors and publishers.  So, you find that, also when you go to (f), the only word that is added -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I had an Amendment earlier than - the Clause he is talking about -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Where were you?

MR MWNDAH: Mr Chairman, if anybody has an Amendment on Clause 13 (ii) (a), I have one on 2(b).

AN HON. MEMBER: Hon. Wanendeya had jumped to 13, page 10, and now the hon. Mwandha is on 13(ii). Would you like to go  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  After deleting 9,10,11 and 12, now you start numbering the former 13, to read the new 9.  I hope you are there, correct them, the former 13 now reads the new 9. So, we are on the former 13.  Is there any amendment on 13 (i), 13(ii) (a), (b)?

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, mine is on 13(ii).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Clause 2 what? Clause 2 is sub-divided into (a), (b) (c), (d), (e), (f).  Where are you?

MR WANENDEYA: Correct, Mr Chairman.  Mine is 13, sub-clause (2) (f).  But if somebody is moving -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: You will come later on.  

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  Mr Chairman, I am moving an Amendment on 13 (2)(b), to delete clauses 13(2)(b) and 13(2)(c) and instead insert a new clause, Sub-clause (2)(b) reading as follows: 

Two scholars, one distinguished in journalism and another distinguished in mass communication appointed by the Minister and after that, re-number the sub-clauses accordingly.  The reason I am doing this, in the Bill, it is assumed that the Minister will always have to do this in consultation with the School of Mass Communication and also in consultation with the School of Journalism. 

We know very well that as higher Institutions of learning are coming up, the entire item, and who knows, the Minister may wish to appoint an academic from another Institution of high learning other than the one which has been implied in the Bill.  Therefore, I would like to persuade the chairman to accept this Amendment, so that the Minister is given a wider area from where to select scholars who would sit on this body.  I move Mr Chairman.

PROF. WANGUSA: Thank you, Sir.  While supporting the Amendment on the Floor, I had earlier in fact, wanted to seek clarification from the hon. Minister on 13(ii) (b) and (c); where it says, ‘a distinguished scholar appointed by the Minister in consultation with the best School of Mass Communication’, and the next one says, ‘in consultation with somebody with a school of Journalism.’

To the best of my knowledge, I think we do not have a School yet, of Mass Communication.  What we have at the old I.P.A. which is now UMI, I think is a School of Journalism and well, so we do not have Mass Communication, at Makerere we do have a department of literature and Mass Communication together so I was not too sure what the Minister meant there.  But I would also like to connect with the Amendment on the Floor, so that journalism means the same as Mass Communication.  Around the world, some schools of journalism are called schools of Journalism, others are called Schools of Mass Communication; others are just called schools of Communications.  So, Mass Communication and Journalism, for practical purposes are the same things.  So, in fact, whenever in this document, the words ‘mass communication’ and ‘journalism’
occur, I think typographically, should be corrected to Mass Communication/Journalism, because they are really the same.  So, in support of the Amendment, I would say, two scholars from Mass Communication/Journalism - they are really two same things.  

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Thank you Mr Chairman. I fully support the proposed Amendment, basically because there is no such thing like these schools of Mass Communication as yet and secondly, there is no such thing as these schools of Journalism leave alone the fact that they were never written in capital letters.  In any case, with time and changes, we would be having a lot of schools and therefore, there is absolutely no need for us to restrict ourselves in such a way of drafting.  

But as a more fundamental point raised, that in this power of the Minister to appoint the Media Council, he is going to appoint most of the members - in fact, when I counted - since the Minister is going to have power to appoint as many as seven members out of the total, yet nearly for journalism to be a professional as such and to be respectable, it must be independent, and it must be out of or it must be seen to be out of the - be it State and bureaucratic control. 

While I agreed with the concept that there should be an appointing authority, like we shall have in the constitution making - the President will appoint with the approval of President, there must be one person to appoint.  While I agree that the Minister should be the appointing authority, I however, wish to advise, if hon. Mwandha could agree that these appointments, to reduce the State Control and the power of the Minister, he should appoint with the approval of those two institutions, not just with the consultation, but with the consultation, but with the approval of those schools.  This is important to ensure the independence of the media council, which is the heart of this Statute. If you had too much of Ministerial control and you are in the bureaucratic control, you are bound not have a journalism or a profession controlling its staff, that we have in the Legal Profession and other professions.  So, I think that we should have this Amendment with the approval of those schools.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MAJ. BUTIME: Mr Chairman, there are definitely schools of journalism and schools of Mass Media; I have not yet heard of a school of Mass Communication, but the general terminology which includes journalism, radio, television, cinematography and others - the whole of that can be called Mass Communication.  But if we go by what Prof. Wangusa is saying to appoint two distinguished academicians from the school of Mass Media, then there is no such school now in Uganda. If he is talking of distinguished academicians in the spirit of Mass Communication, then that one is good enough, because that one will encompass members from the school of journalism and any other distinguished academicians in that field.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

REV. ANGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, in his submission, when we tabled or presented our report, if I may quote Prof. Kagonyera did say that: In some areas the committee was internationally biased towards making a free press and when you look at these two members to be appointed, at the end of the day they are both going to be journalists.  By having consultations with those institutions, it is targeting at those institutions giving the name which will automatically be the name of journalism and in this case, now that there are no schools as has been indicated that there is a department which is recruiting at the end of each journalist in Makerere, the committee, I think will have no quarrel with having these two scholars - those people with relevant qualifications in the field of journalism; we have no quarrel with that, because all along, in their submission to us, journalists wanted to be more - meaning, because this is their country and this is what we are doing.  So, I think I would rather want a proper wording of Prof. Wangusa’s Amendment so that we buy that one.

MR ETIANG:  Mr Chairman, if members would refer to the original Bill which was presented here, originally it reads that the Minister among others would appoint the Head of the Department of Mass communication and then the head of the School of Journalism.  It was deliberate in the sense that you would associate those responsible for teaching Journalism in one institution or the other with this council for giving it academic competence to be in a position to exercise the functions that are being given to the Council.  When the Committee met, it deliberated and observed that these heads may themselves have been subjects of political appointments - that you have a head of mass communication being politically appointed among a group of those who are initially academically qualified but for political orientation, a head of a department may have been appointed politically.  So, the Committee said, no. Why do we not adjust - commit the Minister’s appointment to those who have qualified to be in these institutions? The fact that there is no Mass Communication school or department as such on the basis of what Prof. Wangusa has explained and that the school of journalism is really an extension of the Ministry of information for purposes of in-house training, the Committee also recognised that we - as somebody has said here before, we are looking for the future; I think it was Her Excellency the Vice President, who said that we are not just legislating for tomorrow, but we are legislating for the future. May be now what is a department at Makerere of Mass Communication and what is also essentially a department in - a school of institute of Public Administration may actually form its school, but I admit that there is a possibility given this trend that in future, there will be more departments and more schools and more institutions, now that we are proposing to have the Institute of Journalism in the country.  I thought of giving this explanation to give the background as to whether the Members would now modify this in respect of which I do not have - leaves one way or the other as long as generally, the candidates to be considered to appointment on this Council have a journalistic background.  Thank you.

MR OBWANGOR: Mr Chairman, under our Standing Order Statute, I would like to move a Motion; because all of the House are for the smooth running of this august House and since the time is now about 5.00 p.m. I beg to move that the House resumes and the committee reports there too on the progress on the work of the House on the Bill and the matter of the House. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Cuthbert Obwangor, you are perfectly in order, but I would seek your indulgence that we finish this Clause then we move to that late on; if you do not mind.  Let us just finish this one.

MR KALULE SSENGO: Mr Chairman, putting this provision was very deliberate as having been a member of the committee. First of all, we wanted to lump in the fashion of my former Prof. Professor in the University, the way he is putting it, the journalists we consulted felt that it would not be proper balanced to this particular committee; because it would allow the Minister to choose from anywhere else so long as the people had those qualifications.  But then the argument was, that  -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Point of order. Mr Chairman, hon. Obwangor moved a Motion.  It was duly seconded by hon. Israel Mayengo.  Is it in order hon. Kalule Ssengo -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  I had made a ruling, sit down, please. (Laughter) 

MR KALULE SSENGO: Thank you Mr Chairman. I was pointing out -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order hon. Members.

MR KALULE SSENGO: Mr Chairman, you had already rule and you gave me the Floor.

THE CHAIRMAN: Proceed.

MR KALULE SSENGO: Mr Chairman, our argument was that these schools were just coming up and there was a need to recognise the presence or their existence by selecting people particularly from those two institutions, one for journalism and the other one for Mass Communication in the University. So, this question of saying that the Minister should pick from any body else, I see problems by doing that, then you deny these two institutions the opportunity of participating directly in this Media Council. 

Secondly, you are also standing a risk of losing a balance that you tried to attain by being particular about selecting these people from those two institutions.  So, while I do appreciate what my former professor is proposing, I am of the view, to maintain that balance we want to attain and to harmonise what we agree upon with the journalists that we consulted, I will suggest that we leave it as it is and we drop his Amendment.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order. Is it in order Mr Chairman, for the hon. Member who has been holding the Floor, to waste our time, or the precious time of Members -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: You are the one wasting time. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Because Mr Chairman, why I am raising this point of order -(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: We have finished.

AN HON. MEMBER:  I am raising an order Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: You are out of order. I now put the question that Clause 13(b) be amended as proposed by hon. Mwandha and further amended by hon. Prof. Wangusa.  Just a moment, there was an Amendment proposed by hon. Mwandha then later was supported by Prof. Timothy Wangusa in form of a slight amendment. Then later on also, annotated by hon. Omara Atubo; but the principle is the same, except the wording.  Could now the original Mover, hon. Mwandha come with the final wording? to this Amendment before, then I put the question?

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Chairman, the original wording on the Amendment which I circulated in two scholars, one distinguished in journalism and another distinguished in Mass Communication appointed by the Minister.  Now, we have been advised that journalism and mass communication actually mean the same.  Therefore, it means that the Minister shall appoint two scholars; distinguished in mass communication/journalism or journalism.

MRS KAZIBWE WANDIRA:  Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, I would not like this House to appear to be really not knowing the trend of things; because journalism means mass communication, but journalism is a sub-set of mass communication, we should not include journalism, as if we do not know that journalism is already implied by saying Mass Communication.  So, I would like the Mover of the Amendment to put it in the words that it should be.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: She was actually clarifying that mass communication is universal set and whereas journalism is sub-set and for those who are interested in mathematics, you can now put together and make it more parliamentary language by now coming with proposals.

MR MWANDHA:  Tow scholar distinguished in mass communication, appointed by the Minister. Mr Chairman, I know that some hon. Members are concerned about the numbers of people that are appointed by the Minister, but we are all aware, that when creating many of these parastatals, we have been giving Ministers authority to appoint Directors of Boards and I think they have been using these powers discretionally and also sharing information with their Colleagues in Cabinet and taking decisions collectively.  Therefore, I would not like to buy the idea of saying this will be with anybody else.  I would like the Minister to appoint these scholars from wherever he can find them.

MR OMARA ATUBO: I know you were of the view that the Minister should not just consult, but should seek the permission I think from the school of mass communication, this one, was your own view, if I could recall.  But here he is making another Amendment for the appointment of the two.  I think you will have to come with another Amendment your self if you do not want the Minister to be given powers to appoint those scholars, but let us deal with the appointment of the scholars first, then the nature of appointment will come next.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OBWANGOR: Thank you. Over the House that the House do resume and the Committee of the House report thereto.  All these should put into consideration of the Media Bill for 1995; these are the orders of the House which enabled the House to be orderly and in a large composure so that we make a good law. So, therefore, I beg to move.

MR ETIANG: Mr Chairman, definitely, some Members of the House are very itching to rise on that basis. Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Council shall be resumed and the committee of the House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER FOR INFORMATION (Mr Etiang): Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the committee has considered nine clauses entitled the Press and Journalist Bill, 1995 and passed those articles with some amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE

THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION (Mr Etiang): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House adopts the report of the committee on the 9th Article of the Mass Media Bill entitled -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, proceed.

MR ETIANG: Mr Chairman, according to my counting, they are nine Articles and we resume to consider them at the next station.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The Council rose at 5.05 p.m. and adjourned until 2.30 p.m. on Thursday, 18 May, 1995)


